IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
ANN M. VENEMAN, SECRETARY OF :
AGRICULTURE, ET AL., :
Petitioners, :
v. : No. 03-1164
LIVESTOCK MARKETING ASSOCIATION, :
ET AL., :
Respondents; :
AND :
NEBRASKA CATTLEMEN, INC., ET AL., :
Petitioners, :
v. : No. 03-1165
LIVESTOCK MARKETING ASSOCIATION :
ET AL., :
Respondents. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, December 8, 2004
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
:06 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf of the Petitioners, Ann M. Veneman, et al.,
in 03-1164.
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ., Bethesda, Maryland; on behalf
of the Petitioners, Livestock Marketing, et al.,
in 03-1165.
LAURENCE H. TRIBE, ESQ., Cambridge, Massachusetts; on
behalf of the Respondents, Livestock Marketing
Association, et al.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners
In 03-1164
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners
In 03-1165 20
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
LAURENCE H. TRIBE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 30
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners
In 03-1164 61
P R O C E E D I N G S
[10:06 a.m.]
JUSTICE STEVENS: We will now hear argument in
Veneman against the Livestock Marketing Association.
Mr. Kneedler.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF EDWIN S. KNEEDLER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS IN 03-1164
MR. KNEEDLER: Justice Stevens, and may it
please the Court:
Congress enacted the Beef Promotion and Research
Act in 1985 in the midst of a serious depression in the
beef industry. The beef industry found itself unable to
respond to that situation through the promotion of its
products. Congress responded to that situation by
establishing a government program of promotion, research,
and consumer information. In the Beef Act, Congress
prescribed the central message for advertising under the
Act, Congress established a government body, the Beef
Board, to administer and implement the program, and it
placed the program under the control of a Cabinet officer,
the Secretary of Agriculture.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Mr. Kneedler, will you tell
us how this case differs, if it does, from what was before
the Court in United Foods? What meaningful distinctions
do you find?
--
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, the important distinction
is that the two grounds that -- on which we are defending
the statute here were not addressed in United Foods. In
particular, the government speech argument, that what I've
just said goes to, that the Court specifically did not
address because it had not --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: We've never addressed that in
MR. KNEEDLER: In none of these cases, and --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- in these cases --
MR. KNEEDLER: Right.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- have we?
MR. KNEEDLER: The Court has not. And we think
that that is -- the critical point about this -- about
this case and these programs, these are government --
these are programs of government speech. As I said,
Congress, itself, prescribed the central message.
Congress established the government board, all of whose
members are appointed by the Secretary, to administer it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does it remain government
speech even if you don't say, "This is your government
speaking"?
MR. KNEEDLER: It --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If you say, you know,
"America's cattlemen are speaking," is it government
--
speech?
MR. KNEEDLER: It does -- for purposes of this
Court's government speech doctrine, it does. And I think
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that? I mean --
MR. KNEEDLER: And the Court -- the Court's
decision in Rust, I think, is the best illustration of
that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but Rust did not -- Rust
was not a case in which the doctor was saying, "This is my
personal opinion, not the government's." And here, as
Justice Scalia pointed out, there is an affirmative effort
to say, "This is -- this is paid for by" whatever it's
called, the cattlemen's group or the beef group, which
affirmatively indicates that it's not government speech.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, it -- all those statements
say -- and there are advertisements in the record that say
that the advertising is funded by America's beef
producers, which is, of course, accurate, because they --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it's accurate --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- they pay for it.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- but it also contains the
implication that who -- he who pays is the person whose
speech is being broadcasted.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, but, again, in Rust, the
doctor who spoke -- I think the patient who went to see
the doctor for counseling would have -- would have assumed
or believed that the doctor was -- in the immediate
encounter, that the doctor was speaking, and yet the
Court, in its subsequent cases, has regarded Rust as a
situation of government speech.
But the important point about what you've just
asked is that any concerns about the tag line in the
advertising does not go to the constitutionality of the
statute or the beef order. Neither the Act nor the order
requires that in the advertising. And if the Court was to
perceive that as a problem, the right remedy would not be
to invalidate the Act, but to, instead, provide that there
should be some different identification --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but some people --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- on the advertising, itself.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- may be more resistant to an
-- to an ad that says, "Your government wants to eat --
wants you to eat more meat," than they are to an ad which
say, "The meat producers would like you to eat more meat."
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, I -- and I think in Rust,
some people would have been resistant to the idea that
your government wants you to engage in family planning,
but what the -- what the Court said about Rust was that
the government had established a program with a central
message about counseling. That was then carried out by
private individuals. Here, this case is much stronger
than Rust.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but if you -- if you say
the Act can be -- say, because this is just an as-applied
challenge, you're asking us to assume that we can put on a
label that's not true, "This message is brought to you by
your friendly Department of Agriculture." That isn't
accurate.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, it would be accurate --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And you're having us save the
statute by just putting a label on it that isn't accurate.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, they're -- I'm sure that a
label could be devised that would -- that would be
accurate. The -- first of all, they are approved --
specifically approved by the Department of Agriculture.
The -- certainly, the Act and regulations provide that the
Secretary must approve every contract, every project for
advertising. And, beyond that, the USDA approves all
advertising, all copy --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But, Mr. Kneedler --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- that is actually to be used,
so there is specific approval by the Secretary.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there is -- there's
another tape put out by the government, on meat, and that
-- what is the government speech? Usually, the government
has a position, and is presenting it. Here, we have
America beef producers has a label on -- "Eat meat." But
if you went to the Surgeon General, probably that message
would be "Eat meat moderately." So what is the government
speech? I don't know another case involving a claim of
government speech where the message that you are saying is
the government's is not the message that the government is
putting out when it's dealing with its concern for public
health.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, the government, in the
concern -- in situations where it may be concerned about
public health, doesn't say, "Don't eat meat." It -- there
may be nutritional standards. And USDA does have
nutritional standards that it advises people to adhere to.
But what the government is doing here is facilitating a
situation, facilitating promotion of a commodity.
There is a structural defect in a market like --
a market for a fungible commodity, and I think it's
important to understand what Congress was responding to
here. When you have a fungible commodity, when you have a
lot of small producers, no one of those producers has an
incentive to advertise --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Kneedler, is meat
fungible? Or -- I think there are some steak houses that
might disagree with that.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, there are -- there are --
there are, to be sure, different cuts of meat, but the --
but the basic --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I mean, even quality of meat
within the -- some is tougher than others.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's not like milk or wheat.
MR. KNEEDLER: But Congress could reasonably
determine, under this statute, that there are -- that
there are -- that beef has many things in common, that it
is a generic problem -- or generic food or generic
commodity, and the industry --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: At some level, it certainly
is, I suppose. But, just as in wheat or corn, there are
different brands and different qualities. But I suppose
it's still fungible, in a broad sense.
MR. KNEEDLER: It is fungible in --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: May I ask you whether, in
deciding the government's speech doctrine, is it the
Secretary's formal right to control, as set out in the
statute, that we look to, or do we look to the Secretary's
actual record of oversight and participation?
MR. KNEEDLER: We think the -- we think the
formal legal control is sufficient. And it -- the
Secretary has the responsibility to approve -- under the
statute -- to approve budgets, to approve contracts, and
to approve projects. And USDA does, in fact, go beyond
that and determine whether particular advertisements will
be -- will be issued. But we think it's only necessary to
look what the statute requires. But the testimony in this
case shows that, in any event, USDA is extensively
involved in the development of the advertising under this
statute, by extensive consultations with the Operating
Committee and the Beef Board in the development of the
project. So there -- this is an integrated effort within
the Department of Agriculture.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it at all possible to do
here what has been done in the union cases, where -- I
mean, it's pretty hard for me to believe that there aren't
-- that meat -- that cattle growers don't, by and large,
like beef. I mean, maybe they have a ideological
objection to people eating beef, but I doubt it. They
probably object to some content. So can you segregate
that? I mean, in the union cases, the bar cases, they try
to segregate where there really is an ideological
objection from the cases where really all that the
objector wants is not to pay the money. And so they work
out a system. You know, you pay so much for your dues
anyway, you just don't pay that pro rata amount, where you
really have an ideological objection.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, I think that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it possible to work that
out?
MR. KNEEDLER: What has -- what has been
proposed by the -- by the Respondents in this case, of
course, is to make it voluntary, so that people --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but, I mean, if you make
it --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- can opt out.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- totally voluntary, what
you're going to discover is, all of a sudden, the beef
people, rather than write a check, will say, "Oh, you
know, I make -- I raise cattle, but I don't think people
should eat beef."
MR. KNEEDLER: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: That saves them the money.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, and I --
JUSTICE BREYER: And I tend to doubt that that's
their view.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Some may view -- object to
certain content. So I'm asking if it's feasible to work
out --
MR. KNEEDLER: I think it -- I think it would
not be feasible. It would -- it would enmesh the
Department in difficult judgments and time-consuming --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It would be -- in the union
cases, it's hard enough. It's a -- the good-of-the-order
exception is the way it works in the union. And in the
bar thing, I think it would be hard to --
MR. KNEEDLER: Absolutely. And the Court made a
similar point in Southworth, where it specifically
declined to impose, on the university, a requirement to
make judgments that would enable people to opt out in
particular cases. And we think that the problem here
would be even greater. But they would be particularly
great under Respondents' proposal that individuals who
don't want to pay, without even having to express an
objection, because the whole system would collapse. This
is a classic collective-action, free-rider problem.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Kneedler --
MR. KNEEDLER: What the numbers --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- can I come back to Rust
versus Sullivan? You say that that was a government
speech case? I had not recollected it as a government
speech case.
MR. KNEEDLER: This Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is government subsidizing
speech by private organizations, and it chose to subsidize
one type of speech, but not another.
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did we say, in the opinion,
that this was --
MR. KNEEDLER: Not in Rust, but in the Court's
subsequent cases, Rosenberger, Southworth -- in
particular, in Velazquez -- this Court said that Rust has
come to be understood by the Court as a government speech
case, because the government prescribed the message, and
it's government speech whether or not the government
speaks for itself or enlists others to transmit the
message.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, for the precise purpose
at issue here, I think it makes a lot of difference. You
can fund private people for some things, and not fund them
for others, and it doesn't make whatever they say
government speech. I think that's a --
MR. KNEEDLER: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- I think that's a really --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- but there's really no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- strong proposition, that
whenever you're subsidizing any private enterprise, the
speech of that private enterprise becomes public speech.
MR. KNEEDLER: There's really no need to get to
that point here, because the Beef Board, which is the
entity that does the speaking, is, I think, unquestionably
a government body. It's established by special statute
under the Lebron test. All of its members are appointed
by the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's fine. But what you were
using Rust for was to establish the proposition that in
order to be government speech, it -- you don't have to --
you don't have to say, "This is the government speaking."
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And Rust doesn't stand for
that.
MR. KNEEDLER: -- Right -- I think, as this Court
has come to explain Rust, as being a species of government
speech -- but, as I say, there is no need -- there is no
need for the Court to get to that situation. And the fact
that the government is the one in control of the speech
here critically distinguished -- distinguishes this case
from cases like Keller and Abood.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: This is a question perhaps
more for the Respondent than for you, but I would like
your comment on it. Suppose the statute were changed and
there was a dollar-a-head assessment on beef, and it just
went into the general funds of the United States Treasury,
and then they used part of that money -- they had more
money for beef advertising, and the government did the
advertising. What would the Respondents say about that?
MR. KNEEDLER: I think -- I think they would say
that that -- that there's something different about
general taxes and excise taxes or focus taxes. But I
don't think there's any basis in this --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But why can't --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- in history or --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- why can't you just do that?
Or is your answer to me, "Well, then, it's just formalism,
and you might as well rule for me now?"
MR. KNEEDLER: I'm sorry, do -- maybe I
misunderstood your question.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why can't the government --
MR. KNEEDLER: Were you asking why focus --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- why can't the government
adopt my solution?
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, I -- and maybe I
misunderstood. Was it -- was it paying for it out of
general taxes or taking this money and putting into the
focus --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's put into the general fund
of the -- of the Treasury.
MR. KNEEDLER: I -- they may say that that's the
same thing, but I -- they were drawing a distinction
between paying for it out of general funds -- income tax
--
or something -- that we all would pay for. They say
that's the solution, rather than having the industry, that
benefits from the advertising, pay for it. Not only does
the industry benefit --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But then you'd come within the
protections of Frothingham versus Mellon, and
Massachusetts versus Mellon, if you did it that way.
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes, there would be standing
objection -- objections at that point, but we think, in
terms of the merits of the argument, the notion that a
person would have a First Amendment objection to paying an
excise tax because of the uses to which the excise taxes
are being put is really extraordinary and finds no basis
in cases like Abood and Keller, which have to do with
private association -- an association with private speech
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But then you could --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- no government speech.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- simply restructure this
Act to get to the result you want.
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes. If that -- but the funds
that are raised are public monies. They don't go in --
they're not deposited in the Treasury. But in the Joint
Appendix, there is a reproduced -- an AMS, Agricultural
Marketing Service, circular that explains how these public
monies -- and calls them "public monies" -- are to be
disposed of. And it describes the Beef Board, this
governmental body that receives the money, as being the
custodian for the Agricultural Marketing Service and
handling these monies. And Congress and the Secretary
have imposed strict limitations on how those funds can be
deposited. So whether they go into the general Treasury
or whether they're handled in this way is really a matter
of fiscal and revenue and internal governmental policy
that I don't think that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Kneedler, this theory is
one that wasn't brought up at all in Wileman, if I
remember correctly. And in United Foods, it was brought
up too late, so the government -- so the Court didn't
entertain it. The argument that you're making today, I
take it, would necessarily displace United Foods as
having any kind of a continuing --
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes, because the government did
not reach the government speech -- or the Court did not
reach the government speech argument in United Foods.
And, in fact, United Foods is back, on remand. That was a
reversal of summary judgment for the government. It's
back, on remand, and is being stayed, pending the outcome
of this case on government speech. So there would not be
an inconsistent result in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You wouldn't want to treat beef
and mushrooms inconsistently.
[Laughter.]
MR. KNEEDLER: Well --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there is --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the public perception of
these ads -- it says, "Eat meat" -- it's quite different
from saying, "Your government wants you to buy meat." And
the United States isn't saying that. So --
MR. KNEEDLER: But what the -- what the United
States is doing is responding to this classic collective-
action problem by establishing a government program to
meet the situation where the industry, itself, will -- is
unable to conduct the advertising because of -- because
of, what I said, the fungibility of the product --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- and all.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- isn't it more realistic to
describe this as the government facilitating the private
speech of the many people in this industry who don't have
a big budget to advertise on --
MR. KNEEDLER: I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- on their own?
MR. KNEEDLER: -- doctrinally, it is government
speech. It has the -- it has the benefit of enabling the
promotion that would have happened in the industry, but
for the collective-action problem to occur. But it is
government speech under this Court's decision.
If I may --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you want to save your time?
MR. KNEEDLER: Please.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Garre.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY G. GARRE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS IN 03-1165
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may
it please the Court:
The First Amendment does not prevent the
government from speaking out in order to revive and expand
the market for the nation's most important agricultural
product.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If we can just continue on
government speech, because that's where --
MR. GARRE: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- where we left off. It
seems to me there is something offensive about making a
particular portion of the public pay for something that
the government says.
MR. GARRE: Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It ought to be out of the
general fund.
MR. GARRE: Justice Kennedy, the assessments in
this case are imposed on a class of people who sell
particular commodity -- cattle. In that respect, they're
no different than the types of assessments the Federal
Government has been imposing for centuries on the same of
commodities, from the first tax the Federal Government
imposed on whiskey to the excise taxes on gasoline
producers today. And Respondents concede you could do
this out of general tax revenues. They concede that you
could have a government speech program funded by excises
on certain commodities, like cigarettes or alcohol. There
is no basis under the First Amendment to carve out a
different rule in the case of beef.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What I'm saying, it seems to
me that the government speech doesn't seem to me to
advance your argument very much, because it has problems
of its own.
MR. GARRE: Well, we agree with the government
speech doctrine, although we also think that the Court can
uphold the statute under the intermediate-scrutiny
analysis. It makes perfect sense for the government to be
speaking out in order to correct the market problem that
Congress identified in the midst of a two-decades-long
depression in the beef industry.
Take the BSE incident last year. BSE imposes a
potentially catastrophic and overnight impact on the beef
industry. In response to that threat, because of the beef
checkoff program, the government was able to respond
immediately with the funds necessary to respond on a
national scale, not only through promotion -- and this is
an important part in which this case is different from
United Food -- only about half of every checkoff dollar
goes to promoting beef through commercial advertising,
like the "Beef, it's what's for dinner" campaign. The
rest of that dollar goes to things like producing
information to consumers about the safety of U.S. meat,
the -- addressing the health concerns imposed by BSE and
other potential diseases, like E. coli; going to open up
foreign markets so that we can export beef -- beef exports
have risen dramatically under this program -- and going
for things like research in order to identify an early-
detection system for BSE. In United Foods, this Court
emphasized, at least three times throughout its opinion,
that the only aspect of the program that was -- the dollar
was being collected for was commercial advertising. And,
Justice Stevens, I think you emphasized that in your
concurrence, as well. And this program is much more
holistic --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but, I mean, that -- the
part that's good can't save the whole thing, any more than
in the -- in the union case, the fact that some -- the
union dues could be used for some permissible purposes,
saved the dues that were being used for impermissible
purposes. You --
MR. GARRE: Well, the union --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't want to just save
half of this program, do you?
MR. GARRE: Well, certainly saving half is
better than scuttling the whole --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, all right.
MR. GARRE: -- thing, Justice Scalia. But the
union case is -- the speech that was -- that this Court
held could not be funded -- and, after all, in those
cases, the message was controlled by a non-government
entity, the union or the state bar. But there, you're
talking about political and ideological speech. Here,
we're talking about beef production -- producing --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what's the objection to,
whenever you have an ad, you put a little thing in the
corner, and it says, "This advertisement is paid for by
the beef industry under a regulation, X-23, of the
Department of Agriculture"?
MR. GARRE: Justice Breyer, the program would do
that if this Court held it was necessary --
JUSTICE BREYER: And it wouldn't --
MR. GARRE: -- under the First Amendment.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- tough, would it?
MR. GARRE: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: All you'd have to do is have a
little thing -- and it would just say, "USDA requires
this, under the program," and then the whole problem goes
away.
MR. GARRE: That's correct. But let me make a
few additional --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MR. GARRE: -- points. First, as Mr. Kneedler
emphasized, nothing in the statute, the regulation,
requires the ad to say that they're funded by America's
beef --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I -- we realize that. I
mean, we're getting into it because there's at least a
potential constitutional problem here.
MR. GARRE: And let me make another --
JUSTICE SOUTER: As you respond to Justice
Breyer's question, would you go the step further and say,
Why isn't one possible solution to this difficulty we're
having about government speech a requirement that if you
want to justify it as government speech, you put in the
advertisement, "This is the government's position, paid
for by the beef producers"?
MR. GARRE: The government isn't hiding from --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No --
MR. GARRE: -- the messages in its pro-beef ads.
It -- Justice Souter, the government could do that, but
it's not hiding from this message. We think that if the
Court --
JUSTICE SOUTER: It seems to be. In fact, there
was an indication in the brief that the government had taken
the position that if the government came out front and said,
"Hey, we're urging you to eat more meat," that, in fact,
it would be very unsuccessful in doing it. It seems to
want to hide the ball here.
MR. GARRE: Well, the government does do that,
Justice Souter. Last year, during the height of BSE
crisis, the President, from his ranch in Texas, urged
Americans to eat more beef and told Americans that beef
was safe. That's the same message that went out,
supervised by the United States Department of Agriculture,
through the Beef Board, to communicate --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Did he --
MR. GARRE: -- message.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And who paid for that? Did
these people pay for that?
MR. GARRE: The President's message was paid
through general tax dollars. The message under this
program is paid through the assessment. It's the same
message. The message under the Beef Board is carefully
controlled and supervised by the United States Department
of Agriculture.
If I could make a point --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, let's be honest about it.
Let's be totally accurate. It's not going to say, "The
government believes this." The government may not believe
it. What it says is, "This message is brought to you by
the Beef Association under the -- under a program
requiring contributions to advertising of the Department
of Agriculture."
MR. GARRE: And --
JUSTICE BREYER: Nobody will even know what that
means, but it has the --
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it has --
MR. GARRE: Well, that's good.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it has the virtue of being
totally accurate.
MR. GARRE: That's right. Every single ad that
we're aware of, has the beef check, which is the sign that
the beef -- or the reasonable observer would know that
this is a statute passed by Congress containing a message
that Americans should eat more beef, that beef is
nutritious, that's disseminated under a program that's
carefully supervised and controlled by the Secretary of
Agriculture.
JUSTICE BREYER: The important thing is, you
have no objection to doing that.
MR. GARRE: We would not, but we also think --
and if the Court made that clear in this case, it wouldn't
be a basis for invalidating the statute; it might be a
basis for sending it back or an as-applied challenge.
Importantly, we --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But what it -- what it would --
what it would be a basis for, at least within the confines
of this argument, would be a basis for your government
speech claim in the sense that you wouldn't be basing a
government speech claim on what is really a
misrepresentation.
MR. GARRE: It -- we don't think it's a
misrepresentation. The speech is funded by America's beef
producers. The Respondents in this case, the centerpiece
of their First Amendment argument --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, including those who don't
want to fund it and who don't agree with the message. I
mean, the problem here is that by making that
representation, you indicate that this is the message of
the people who are paying for it. And some of the people
who are paying for it do not wish to convey that message.
MR. GARRE: We --
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's the misrepresentation.
MR. GARRE: With respect, we would disagree.
There's no reason to believe that a reasonable observer
would think that just because an ad says it's funded by
the nation's beef producers, every single one of the
0,000 individual cattle producers in this country agrees
with every single statement --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But what they would --
MR. GARRE: -- of the message.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- what they would, I think,
assume is that, in the name, the beef producers do, in
fact, agree with this, and this is their message. What
they would not assume from it is that it is what you and
Mr. Kneedler are claiming, the speech of the Government of
the United States. They certainly wouldn't infer that.
MR. GARRE: We think it's fair to assume, as the
Court would under the establishment clause, that they're
familiar with the act of Congress that makes it its message
as well as a program.
A critical point on this attribution argument is
that it's not supported by any single piece of evidence
that Respondents, themselves, have put into the record in
this case. Their First Amendment objection is to the
content of the ads. There's not a single piece of evidence
in the record purporting to make this attribution argument
that the public would attribute to the ads to them. It's
not in the complaint in this case, it's not in their own
affidavits, it's not in the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, maybe --
MR. GARRE: -- in the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- maybe it's not because they
didn't know you were going to be defending on the basis of
government speech. That's what's getting us into this.
MR. GARRE: Well, I highly doubt that, Justice
Souter, because the First Amendment claim was added in
response to the United Foods case, and this case was
developed, from the outset, on a government speech theory.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Which wasn't a government
speech case.
MR. GARRE: But it -- the case was tried under
the First Amendment, under a government speech argument.
But -- so the fact that Respondents didn't put --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This case, not United Foods.
Because United Foods, the Court said it -- it was not
legitimately before us.
MR. GARRE: That's correct. But my point is
that the First Amendment case proceeded after United
Foods. The government's central argument in the trial was
government speech. The one time attribution came up --
and this is at pages 46 and 47 of the trial record --
Respondents' own witness testified that the public was not
likely to attribute the message of the pro-beef ad to its
organization of beef producers. So if the Court finds
that attribution is a constitutional concern, it's no
basis to bring down the act of Congress on the record in
this case.
The -- I want to emphasize, if I could, that the
program in this case has been effective. The record
establishes that the beef checkoff has had a statistically
significant impact on increasing consumer demand for beef
and an increase in prices. That's contained in the expert
testimony of Professor Ward, at pages 100 and 173. The
record also shows that for every checkoff dollar spent on
the program, there's more than a 5.67 rate of return back
to the beef producers in the form of increased prices for
cattle. The Beef Board's 2003 report suggests -- finds
that the price of a fed steer increased by more than $200
in the past few years. This program has worked.
Thank you very much.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you.
Mr. Tribe.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LAURENCE H. TRIBE
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MR. TRIBE: Justice Stevens, and may it please
the Court:
As I was listening to some of the questions
about whether it would solve the problem to be more candid
and say, "This is your government speaking," I thought I
would begin with that question, rather than with an
overview of government speech.
You'll recall Wooley v. Maynard, of course, in
which the State of New Hampshire, without sensing the
irony of its position, said, "We'll put you in jail if you
do not say, 'Live Free or Die' on" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that was --
MR. TRIBE: -- "your license plates."
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that was an individual
attribution. You, yourself, had --
MR. TRIBE: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- had to carry this message.
Now, here you want us to think of some cowboy --
MR. TRIBE: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- going into the bar, and he
gets jeered by all his friends because he likes beef.
MR. TRIBE: Well, Justice Kennedy, my --
[Laughter.]
MR. TRIBE: -- my point -- my point was going to
be that a footnote on the license plate saying, "This is
New Hampshire speaking," would not have helped. But one
of the central holdings, as I understood it, of United
Foods, independent of government speech, was that although
there is a difference between having to say something
yourself, having to put it on your car, and having to pay
for it, that difference does not go to the existence of a
First Amendment speech objection -- not an association
objection, but a speech objection.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's first address the
question you said -- you said you were going to address,
whether in order to be government speech, within the
meaning of our cases, it has to be identified as such. Is
that really true? I mean, you know, in World War II, Bob
Hope would appear in movie theaters and say, you know,
"Buy war bonds?"
MR. TRIBE: Yes, I don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: "This is Bob Hope. You people
ought to go out now" --
MR. TRIBE: Justice Scalia, I think, although
it's an interesting digression about whether the
government is being candid, the objection here has nothing
to do with that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay, so it is --
MR. TRIBE: But being the government --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- it is not essential --
MR. TRIBE: It may be.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that government might -- in
order to be government speech, the government does not
have to identify itself as the speaker.
MR. TRIBE: I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes or no? Yes or no?
MR. TRIBE: I think the answer is yes, it must
identify itself, but it doesn't help, because --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it doesn't --
MR. TRIBE: -- the government --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- we understand that you have
a First Amendment claim, which you're going to have even
if we say, "This is not government speech." I think the
whole point here is to decide whether this is even --
MR. TRIBE: No, no, Justice --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- an issue that should be
disposed of on any grounds other than candor.
MR. TRIBE: Justice Souter, I think that we're
getting off track by assuming that it helps for it to be
government speech. My point is that a central theme of
this --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, just indulge us. I mean,
some of us think it makes --
MR. TRIBE: Let me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- a difference --
MR. TRIBE: Well, but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- and I would --
MR. TRIBE: -- but let me ask you whether --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- I would like to know whether
it is essential to its character as government speech that
the government's say, "This your government speaking."
MR. TRIBE: It depends on the purpose for which
you are acting whether it's government speech. In Rust v.
Sullivan, even though I think you're certainly right,
Justice Scalia, that in that opinion it wasn't called
government speech, in order to rationalize it, in
Rosenberger and Velazquez, it was so described. But the
question there wasn't, "Can people be made to support it?"
The question, rather, was, "Can the government insist on
staying within the terms of its grants and saying you
can't talk about abortion?" When the question is, "Can
the government force you to support it," the "it," if it's
government speech, doesn't help. The First Amendment
makes it a harder case for them, not easier.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It does it all the time in
general taxes. Every --
MR. TRIBE: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- time we pay general taxes,
we're supporting government speech --
--
MR. TRIBE: Of course.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- we may not agree with.
MR. TRIBE: But the Court has said there is a
fundamental difference between being singled out, as in
Wooley, to have a license plate, as in Pruneyard, to have
someone on your premises. In Pruneyard, the Court said
that one of the reasons it's okay to require someone to
allow a private speaker onto the premises is that he was
not required to support a government slogan. When it is
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes, but there it --
MR. TRIBE: -- government speech --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- there it is your car, your
property. That's not this. This is a generic ad on
behalf of beef.
MR. TRIBE: That was true of --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: I think there is --
MR. TRIBE: -- that was true of United Foods.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- there's a world of
difference between this and having something put on your
license plate or in your --
MR. TRIBE: Justice O'Connor, I would be much
more offended by having to put it in my license plate.
But if I were raising cattle, and I were told, as they
were told in this case, "cattle equals beef; that's all
--
it's worth, and that's why we won't let you, in these ads
-- we won't let the ads, that you have to pay for,
increase the demands for cattle; only beef" --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, I don't even understand
your argument. Would you still be if the --
MR. TRIBE: I haven't made it.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, you're trying.
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Would you still be here if
there were distinctions made on behalf of free-range beef
or, you know, "Our cattle" --
MR. TRIBE: Oh, yes.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- "never had a" --
MR. TRIBE: The most important distinction --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- "medicine" or something
like that? Would you still be here if those distinctions
MR. TRIBE: Well, if it --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- had been made?
MR. TRIBE: -- wasn't generic -- there's no way
for them to have an ad for every imaginable different kind
of cattle in one set of advertisements. I just think --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, I'm just --
MR. TRIBE: -- it's a --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- asking you if,
theoretically, some attention had been paid to the
different kinds of producers --
MR. TRIBE: Right.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- would you still be
objecting?
MR. TRIBE: We would object, fundamentally, if
they did not emphasize American beef. That was our first
objection. They said that they don't want to emphasize
American beef, because, in cross-examination, the officer
of the Beef Board said, "Consumers might actually have a
preference for American beef. That would be irrational.
We don't want that." And so all of those cattle ranchers
can say that, "We're proud of it being American." They
can't get that in there.
And the other principal thing is that they don't
think of themselves as selling sides of beef. Some of
them are selling dairy cattle, some of them are selling --
even if it's going to, in the end, be in the
slaughterhouse -- we all die someday -- their fundamental
belief is that these are animals, and they're to be cared
for. And the reason that that makes a difference -- the
reason that it makes a difference that they can't even
advertise -- try to make live cattle more attractive to
buy -- is that the collective-action problem, if that were
relevant here -- I think that was really resolved by
United Foods -- but the collective-action problem is
really created, not solved, by what they're doing.
Because the structure of the market is that there are a
few concentrated meat-packers. Something like four
slaughter 80 percent of the -- of the cattle in the United
States. They have the bargaining power. And in the
record, their support for the findings of the District
Court, that when the demand for beef goes up through these
generic ads saying, "Eat beef" -- although they certainly
don't say, "Your government says you should eat beef,
beef, beef" -- but when the demand for beef goes up, the
profit is pocketed by the meat processor, the meat packer,
the restaurant, the supermarket. And these guys still end
up taking their cattle to market, and often having to pay
a dollar checkoff, even though they can't even get the
price of the -- of the cattle back. So --
JUSTICE BREYER: But would it --
MR. TRIBE: -- the free rides are now taken by
the people who don't pay --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- seems to --
MR. TRIBE: -- the processors don't pay anything.
JUSTICE BREYER: I understand that a person
could have an ideological objection to the content of the
ad. But the ad, itself, is an effort by government, in
this area, to regulate a commercial matter, not a license
plate that says, "Free Speech, or Die," or "Freedom" --
MR. TRIBE: But it regulates speech, Justice
Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, I know. Right now I'm
asking --
MR. TRIBE: They don't --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, my question is, does it
make a difference for the point of distinguishing, or not
distinguishing, "Live Free, or Die," and similar
ideological matters -- does it make a difference that the
fundamental aim of the program, and 99 percent of the way
it's carried out, has to do with simple advertising,
commercial advertising, the regulation of a commercial
matter, commerce --
MR. TRIBE: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- does that make a difference?
MR. TRIBE: I think it makes an emotional
difference.
JUSTICE BREYER: But no legal difference.
MR. TRIBE: Not in the context of forcing people
to pay.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, in other words --
MR. TRIBE: It makes a difference --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in other words, a program
that is a regulatory program regulating commerce, we
should no longer think of that, though we tend to think of
it as quite different in the way we approach the First
Amendment -- we no longer, in your view, should?
MR. TRIBE: No, no. I think, certainly if we
are regulating economic transactions and only dealing with
speech in a purely ancillary way -- that is, we're
regulating sale, transactions --
JUSTICE BREYER: We regulate advertising. We
regulate commercial advertising.
MR. TRIBE: Right, but the --
JUSTICE BREYER: The Federal Trade Commission --
MR. TRIBE: -- network --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. TRIBE: -- didn't you say that just the fact
that you call it commercial speech only means that when
you are regulating problems of a transactional kind --
deception, overbearing -- then the fact that it's
commercial speech makes a big difference. But you can't
just generically say that because something doesn't fit
your idea of what's ideological -- I mean, to these
ranchers, the ideology --
JUSTICE BREYER: I didn't say --
MR. TRIBE: -- is different --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- I didn't say they had a --
MR. TRIBE: But whose --
--
JUSTICE BREYER: -- commercial objection.
MR. TRIBE: -- whose line -- whose line between
ideology and commerce will --
JUSTICE BREYER: I am asking. In analyzing the
program, there are some things for it, and there are some
things against it. And in trying to make that weighing, I
do think it's different, because the basis of the program
is commercial regulation. And so I want to be certain, in
your view, that's either correct or incorrect.
MR. TRIBE: I think it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: If it's incorrect, I want to
know why.
MR. TRIBE: Well, I think it's -- if one were
just weighing and didn't have a structured set of
principles on the balance in favor of it, I think, you're
right, we can't -- they're not trying to induce
ideological conformity. This is not a case where they're
trying to enforce what Justice Jackson calls "the
unanimity of the graveyard." It is a case where the
spirit of the government is in the right place. The
government is trying to facilitate collective speech when
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if it makes a difference,
then the lens that I look at this through is called our --
whatever the second-tier commercial speech lends.
MR. TRIBE: I don't think --
JUSTICE BREYER: Have you looked at --
MR. TRIBE: That doesn't follow. I don't think
that follows. It follows that if you were -- if you were
writing on a clean slate and were trying to create a
wholly new doctrine, one of the things you would look at,
I suppose, is that this is not a program designed to
create ideological conformity in America. At least the
spirit of the program is not that. But the road to hell
is often paved with good intentions, and the means, in
this case, that was chosen, was not to have the government
spend some more money telling people, "Beef isn't all as
bad for you as you think." The remedy that they are
choosing is to pick a group of ranchers and say to them,
"You are the ones who are going to pay, and you are going
to pay for" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Tribe, would --
MR. TRIBE: -- "ads that are in your name."
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- would you comment on the
argument that -- what will this do to compelling cigarette
manufacturers to finance the advertisements against
smoking?
MR. TRIBE: Well, by "advertisements against
smoking," Justice Stevens, if you mean, "Here are the
things that will kill you in cigarettes," the kind of
--
thing that's on the package now, it seems to me that it is
constitutional, under even cases like Zauderer, to say
that whoever sells a product or a service --
JUSTICE STEVENS: They have to give warning.
But why is the -- why is the cigarette analogy different
from this case? What is your answer to that?
MR. TRIBE: Well, it seems to me that no one
suggests that the cigarette companies are supporting the
ads in California. California is doing exactly what the
Surgeon General does.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's odd that you can be
compelled to --
MR. TRIBE: Say negative things --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- engage in speech that you
don't agree with. Now you're saying that the more --
MR. TRIBE: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- disagreeable it is to you
MR. TRIBE: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- the more legitimate it is.
That's --
MR. TRIBE: I think if you're --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- a very strange argument.
MR. TRIBE: Well, it may be strange, but I think
that there have been stranger things. The reason that
--
it's true is that if you go around doing things that might
endanger people, it's entirely justifiable for the state,
as part of its non-speech effort to protect people --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, do you --
MR. TRIBE: -- from harm, to make you give
warnings --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- do you accept the fact
that the government can charge taxes on the sale of
cigarettes and compel -- and use that money to tell people
that they're dangerous?
MR. TRIBE: Well, I think that's a much harder
case than this, to be honest with you. I think --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: We do, however.
MR. TRIBE: Well, California does that.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Is that part of what's going
MR. TRIBE: In California, it does.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: So what you're arguing here
MR. TRIBE: Yes.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- is going to have rather a
drastic effect on --
MR. TRIBE: Well, I think the --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- what's going on.
MR. TRIBE: -- drastic effect would be the other
way, wouldn't it? If this Court were to hold, despite
United Foods, that it is permissible to force people to
support speech they don't agree with, as long as that
speech doesn't fit our sense of what's ideological, that
cuts to roll back Keller and Lehnert and Abood. It's not
a small part of the constitutional landscape that would be
unearthed. Whereas, think about what is the marginal
effect of saying --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait, I don't -- I had not
understood you to be arguing, Professor Tribe, that this
would be unlawful, even if the money were raised in the
fashion that it is, just from the -- just from the
cattlemen. And the government's own program used that
money to say, "Your government thinks it's -- wants you to
know that beef is thoroughly safe. We've done studies.
Beef is good for you. You should eat more beef." I
thought you --
MR. TRIBE: No, I do think that would be
permissible.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That would be permissible?
MR. TRIBE: Because, I mean, technically, it
would solve only the association problem. They're not
associated with the message. They're still forced to
support it, but not in any sense different from general
taxpayers. And because that's the case, and because it
would be an odd formalism to say that it makes a
difference whether we segregate that money or not,
seems to me it would follow that if the government is
willing to pay the political cost of having the speech be
perhaps less persuasive because of -- people's discount for
what the government says and of having to get an appropriation
from the taxpayers -- I mean, taxpayers are smart enough
to know --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: No, not that. The same
program, but you just have a little tag on the ad.
MR. TRIBE: Like the lockbox? I mean, every --
I think the taxpayers know that money is fungible. Well,
in this case, you mean if you had the program, not from
general revenue, but you simply said, on the ad, "This is
actually part of a government program"? I don't think
that solves any problem, other than deception.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's the --
MR. TRIBE: Deception is the -- my
constitutional argument.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- what's the difference
between the checkoff and the excise tax?
MR. TRIBE: Well, the checkoff in this case is
money that goes to a group, which, though it is
organized by the government, purports to represent --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So the answer is --
MR. TRIBE: -- the way it structured --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- where --
MR. TRIBE: -- these people.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- where the money goes and who
pays out the money for the ad, that's the difference.
MR. TRIBE: Well, the difference is the whole
structure. Keep in mind --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, isn't that the -- isn't
that the essential difference between the structure in
this case and the structure in the case in which the
government comes out, saying, "This is your government,
saying, 'Don't smoke.'"
MR. TRIBE: Yes, one -- the difference is that
in one case, we've got Congress, we've got the executive,
we have one --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right.
MR. TRIBE: -- person, one vote. Here, we have
a million --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, but take all that out
of it -- take all that out of it, and what is your answer
to Justice Stevens and Justice Souter? That is, look,
like this, you have an organization, the Federal Trade
Commission, say, or that the FDA says, on the one hand,
(a) broccoli industry, "Fruits and vegetables are good for
you; crib death device, "Buy anti-crib-death devices; "Buy
--
car seats for your children"; or, "Don't smoke"; or --
MR. TRIBE: Well, I mean --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- "Don't buy a crib without a
crib-death device" --
MR. TRIBE: -- I mean, I think it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- "or a car without a car
seat."
MR. TRIBE: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: See? One's negative and one's
positive. And everything else is the same. Then how do
you --
MR. TRIBE: Whether it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- what's the difference?
MR. TRIBE: -- negative --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. TRIBE: -- or positive, it's the government
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, maybe it doesn't matter.
MR. TRIBE: Well, no, it matters, in this sense.
When the government puts out a message and puts its
credibility behind the message, likely to have to balance
-- it's going to say, "A little broccoli, but a little
steak." "Don't risk crib death" --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm not interested -- I got
that point.
MR. TRIBE: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not dismissing it. I
understand it.
MR. TRIBE: All right.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm not sure --
MR. TRIBE: So I'm not understanding what your
question is.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, my question is, is it
implied in what you're argued that it would be equally
unconstitutional, in the same way, to tell the cigarette
industry to advertise, "Don't smoke," or to tell the
automobile industry to advertise, "Buy car seats for your
children," or to tell the crib industry to advertise, "Be
sure you have an anti-crib-death device"?
MR. TRIBE: I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: And all that, assuming the
financing is the same as here, everything else the same,
is it implicit in your argument that they're all equally
unlawful?
MR. TRIBE: No. My argument is that you can
require the seller of any commodity to include warnings.
It does not necessarily follow that you can say to an
industry, "You're bad guys. We want you to put on an
advertising campaign, and the campaign has to have these
characteristics." Forcing them to advocate that people
--
not buy their products, I think, is not the same thing --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Tribe --
MR. TRIBE: -- as forcing them to say --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- I thought --
MR. TRIBE: -- that it will be addictive or that
it will cause cancer.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you're saying --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- I thought --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I want to be sure I -- that I
understood your answer. You can compel them to make
warnings. Can you compel them to pay for warnings that
are just industry-specific, in saying, "This is dangerous"
MR. TRIBE: I think so, because I can't see any
difference between saying that -- you put on the package,
"The Surgeon General has determined that smoking will
cause cancer," and saying, "We're going to put on
television" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it seems --
MR. TRIBE: -- "the Surgeon General" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- almost ironic, to me, to
say that you have a greater power to tell the whole
industry to publish something they don't want to publish
than you do to let them --
MR. TRIBE: But that -- Justice Stevens, what --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- pay for what --
MR. TRIBE: -- what is --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- 90 percent of them want to
say.
MR. TRIBE: -- what is the difference between
telling them that -- I mean, there may be a critical
difference between the point of sale and a generic ad --
that is, the power to regulate the transaction to make
sure it's safe, includes the power to include on the
package certain warnings. The moment you step back from
that and say that, "Because you're in a dangerous
business, you have to publish general warnings to the
public," maybe that's where the line has to be drawn,
because I agree that it would be rather bizarre --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are you limiting your point to
putting information on the package, or are you saying they
could -- could California compel a cigarette -- companies
to contribute to a large fund which is just used to by
newspaper advertising describing the dangers of smoking?
Could they do that?
MR. TRIBE: Well, I think that the rationale for
that would be far stronger than this. The state's power
to protect people, in terms of life and health, includes
the power to compel --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but supposing there are
disagreements. We were -- you were talking about
cigarettes. But supposing there's a legitimate
disagreement between the industry position and the
government position --
MR. TRIBE: Okay.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- could the government,
nevertheless, insist on the industry financing advertising
advocating the government's position?
MR. TRIBE: Well, not advocating; reporting what
the government position is. I mean, the -- when the
cigarette company says on the package, "The Surgeon
General has found this stuff is deadly," they're not quite
saying, "We agree with the Surgeon General." They've --
making them fund or support statements that do not reflect
their own beliefs, as though it were --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, in this case --
MR. TRIBE: -- is impermissible.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- I take it, it would be okay
if the beef producers had to use a dollar a head to put,
"Eating too much beef is dangerous to your health."
MR. TRIBE: Well, if they had -- well, they're
not beef producers. I mean, I am troubled by -- they're
-- these are cattle.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right, cattle, then --
MR. TRIBE: All right? And then -- and then
they're trying, ultimately, to brand us as though we are
slicing these things up and selling them.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But what's the answer to my
question?
MR. TRIBE: If the question is, can retail
grocers be required to put on the beef packages they sell,
"The government has determined that the cholesterol
content is dangerous if you have more than X," I see no
reason why that would be harder --
JUSTICE BREYER: In other words --
MR. TRIBE: -- to defend than the cigarette
package.
JUSTICE BREYER: I think the question, or at
least the version I have of it --
MR. TRIBE: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is, we have this case,
exactly, and the only difference is, instead of getting
these people to eat -- say, "Eat beef," what they say do
is, they get people together and say, "Don't eat too much
beef." I put --
MR. TRIBE: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- "too much," because that --
MR. TRIBE: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- makes it more realistic.
All right, now, does it suddenly become constitutional?
MR. TRIBE: The program is facially
unconstitutional. It is the structure that says to all
these people, "You've got to put money into this elaborate
structure, which purports to represent you" -- that is,
the -- they have all this stuff saying that the Beef Board
is related to the industry as board of directors, the
shareholders -- "These people, who purport to represent
you, will, under the aegis of the government, put out
statements at various times." That's facially
unconstitutional.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. Consider this
theory. The Congress passes an excise tax. It happens to
be a dollar head, on the cattle, just like this so-called
"checkoff." And the government uses the excise tax
revenue to finance advertising, saying -- maybe saying,
"Eat more beef," maybe advertising, saying, "Don't eat
quite so much."
MR. TRIBE: Or maybe --
JUSTICE SOUTER: First Amendment problem --
MR. TRIBE: -- talking about the war in Iraq.
No, I think that once your taxes enter the general fund,
a pretense that it's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Including excise?
MR. TRIBE: Well, I don't think excise taxes are
segregated in any way that makes -- that makes it harder
--
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I just want to know what --
MR. TRIBE: -- than Social Security.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- your position is. I just
want to know what your position is.
MR. TRIBE: My position is that once the revenue
is part of the government's general fund, the government's
subject to doctrines that I don't think are First
Amendment doctrines about government propaganda -- there
may be limits on the government's ability --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay, then --
MR. TRIBE: -- to defend it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: He's just going back to --
MR. TRIBE: Subject to that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay, then it does not have --
MR. TRIBE: -- it's not a First Amendment
problem.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- it's not a First Amendment
problem. It does not have the objection that you're
raising.
MR. TRIBE: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that -- is that an answer
to the question that Justice Kennedy urged in the opening
argument? That is, it's the same dollar a head, except
you call it an excise tax instead of a -- whatever this is
called. The same thing, but to say it's a tax. And
you're not -- this is not general revenues that you
collect from everybody and spend --
MR. TRIBE: If the structure is they take the
money from you and put it in this elaborate machinery
which comes out with statements you're forced to support,
the statements that don't have behind them the
accountability checks of the Federal Government, which has
to answer to taxpayers and answer to the public for the
stuff it puts out -- that is -- if that's what it is, it
doesn't matter what you call it, it remains
unconstitutional. It remains unconstitutional because
these individuals are forced in a way that taxpayers are
not -- forced to be part of a system in which, even if you
have footnotes saying, "This is pursuant to the
government," a system in which they will be generally
understood in just the way Justice Breyer said, "Well, you
know, we assume" --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But suppose --
MR. TRIBE: -- that these people --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- we don't have that? I
mean, could then -- could the government fix this problem
this way, saying, "We're going to get the same bucks, but
we are going -- and we're going to have the same kinds of
ads, but they're going to be labeled, 'U.S. Department of
Agriculture."
MR. TRIBE: And we're going to eliminate the
cattlemen's Beef Board and all of these things --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. TRIBE: -- that are supposed to represent
you --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we are -- but where this
money is coming from to pay this is --
MR. TRIBE: I would be happy to represent the
cattlemen in that circumstance, saying, "You still have
not an associational right, but a right not to be singled
out to support government speech." But it would be a
different and more difficult claim. One.
Two, this Court doesn't have before it the
possibility of rewriting all of this.
Three, there was a severability provision in an
earlier version of the law suggesting that maybe if you
could lop something off, it would be okay. But that was
eliminated in the current law.
And, finally, any attempts to analogize this to
the cases like Lehnert and Keller, in terms of remedy,
that maybe we can create some scheme where only the
objectionable part is returned, is fundamentally
incoherent, because what is objectionable here is
homogenizing all of these people into some one message,
and putting it out through this elaborate structure that
purports to represent them.
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I go back to one of your
reasons, which was that they are being singled out to pay
for this? They're being singled out to pay for it in the
excise tax situation. Do you come to different answers,
depending whether it's excise tax or singled out without
excise tax, based, essentially, on the ground that there
is a point beyond which we simply cannot look behind the
expenditure of tax revenue? Is that it?
MR. TRIBE: I think that there's a point beyond
which, for institutional reasons, it would be very
problematic for a courts to say that you could trace the
dollars into the treasury and those institutional reasons
would be, I think, an instance of under-enforcement of a
constitutional norm, because the underlying constitutional
principle that you ought not to be able, by some gimmick,
to get some people to support speech they don't believe
in, that would be there. But the difficulty of having
this Court enforce that principle, I think, would be very
real. But no such difficulty, I think, is presented in a
case like this one, because if this case came out their
way because of government speech, of course, United Foods
would be obliterated, but a good deal more would be
--
obliterated, because the theory would have to be that
because it's not on your license plate, because you don't
have to carry it, you're only supporting it, then that's
all the difference in the world. Because, otherwise, its
being government speech would make it worse. But if it's
all the difference in the world whether you have to carry
or utter it, or merely support it, then all of the
decisions of this Court carefully protecting the rights of
dissenters in every imaginable kind of organization, from
the powerful overriding theory that collective-action
problems mean that we've really got to get more speech
over here than you are willing, yourselves, to engage in
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but on the other hand --
MR. TRIBE: -- you'd be --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- you're running into the
problem that the taxpayer can be compelled to pay taxes to
support activities that he doesn't support at all. That's
the other --
MR. TRIBE: Well, we do that all the time.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- the other extreme. I know
we --
MR. TRIBE: We do that all --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- do it all the time.
MR. TRIBE: -- the time.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And when are we crossing --
MR. TRIBE: That's the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- the line?
MR. TRIBE: -- that's why we have elections, in
part.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Pardon me?
MR. TRIBE: Right? We have elections, in part,
because the only way -- there's no way to protect every
individual's right to have the government's collective
policy suit his or her fancy. I mean, that way --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it is --
MR. TRIBE: -- would allow complete chaos.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- inconsistent with the basic
principle on which you rely, that the individual should
not be compelled to support speech --
MR. TRIBE: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- with which he disagrees.
MR. TRIBE: -- to support -- supporting speech
is somewhat different from supporting activities that you
don't agree with. I mean, the First Amendment makes a
fundamental difference in that respect.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But isn't --
MR. TRIBE: If there were --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- isn't that --
MR. TRIBE: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Don't you go back to the answer
you gave me? Sure, when taxes are involved, there may be
an under-inclusive enforcement of certain individual
rights, but they have to be under-enforced, because,
otherwise, you simply cannot administer a tax structure.
MR. TRIBE: Or any structure. I mean, Bowen v.
Roy -- I mean, there's a sympathetic case of the man who
did not want Little Bird of the Snow to be given a Social
Security number. But we could, when we, interactive with
the government, say to him, "You -- we can't make you give
the number to get the food for your little daughter," but
if one person says, "I don't want numbers in your
computers," and the other says, "I don't want letters, I
want only numbers," the fact that every individual who has
a potential claim on a collective choice could pull in a
different direction means we can't run a system that way.
But no such problem is presented in cases like this.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Tribe.
MR. TRIBE: Thank you.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I think we understand your
position. Thank you.
Mr. Kneedler, you have about three -- three or
four minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF EDWIN S. KNEEDLER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS IN 03-1164
MR. KNEEDLER: Thank you, Justice Stevens.
Mr. Tribe has conceded that if this program were
financed by a system of excise taxes that went into the
general Treasury, and Congress then paid -- provided the
exact same amount of money to produce the exact same ads,
that there would be no constitutional problem. And, in
our view, the First Amendment simply does not regulate the
details of government fundraising, the details of
government accounting, and the details of government
bookkeeping in that manner. The First Amendment is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that goes back to
Frothingham and Mellon, and Massachusetts versus Mellon,
and United States versus Butler, where we could trace the
amount.
MR. KNEEDLER: Right, and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's old stuff.
MR. KNEEDLER: Right, and the Court -- the Court
superceded those decisions in cases like Carmichael Coal
and Storaasli Company and cases like that, where the Court
said excise taxes can be imposed. As long as there is a
public welfare justification, they can be spent. And it
would be an odd result to have the First Amendment drive
the way the government arranges a system like this. After
all -- and Professor Tribe said it would be different if
the cattlemen's Beef Board were gotten rid of. It
actually -- the principal point here is the Secretary
controls the speech. Whatever the cattlemen's Beef Board
does -- and that is a government entity -- the Secretary
controls the speech. So that -- this is not some jury-
rigged system; this is a system of governmental control.
Congress has prescribed the message, and the Secretary
carries it out.
It's important to recall that many federal
excise taxes go into dedicated trust funds -- for
highways, for other functions like that. And out of that
dedicated trust fund, there may be money expended on
highway safety. So the fact that it's dedicated really
should not matter.
And this case is completely different from cases
like Keller. In Keller, the state bar was not appointed
by the -- by the government, there was no governmental
supervision of what it did, and the government certainly
did not approve the messages in favor of nuclear freezes,
et cetera. This is different in all the critical ways
that make this a program of government speech.
And, as Justice O'Connor pointed out, to strike
down this program would have drastic consequences. There
are many, many agricultural promotion programs like this.
There are 13 at the national level. This program has been
in existence since 1988. One billion dollars has been
collected, and promotions have been conducted under it.
These promotional programs go back to the '50s, and even
-- and even earlier. And there are many programs on the
state levels, as the amicus brief filed by the states in
this case shows. This Court would be striking down a lot
to hold that this commonsense way of approaching things is
unconstitutional.
It's also important to recognize that the
ultimate beneficiary of the advertising is the consumer.
Yes, it affects the industry, but it's the consumer. And
the very first finding that Congress made in the Beef Act
is, beef and beef products are basic foods that are a
valuable part of the human diet. When the -- when the --
because of the collective-action problem in this industry,
that it cannot organize to advertise, that basic message
is not getting to consumers. So this -- the
justifications for this, to the extent one thinks of it in
terms of the commercial speech, it is squarely within the
ultimate purposes of the commerce speech doctrine, which
is to correctly market failure with respect to advertising
in order to get information to consumers.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Kneedler. The
case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:06 a.m., the case in the
