IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
FRANCIS A. ORFF, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 03-1566
UNITED STATES, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, February 23, 2005
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
10:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
WILLIAM M. SMILAND, ESQ., Los Angeles, California; on
behalf of the Petitioners.
JEFFREY P. MINEAR, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Respondent United States.
STUART L. SOMACH, ESQ., Sacramento, California; on behalf
of Respondent Westlands Water District.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
WILLIAM M. SMILAND, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
JEFFREY P. MINEAR, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondent United States 18
STUART L. SOMACH, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondent Westlands Water District 33
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
WILLIAM M. SMILAND, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 41
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:04 a.m.)
JUSTICE STEVENS: We will now hear argument in
Orff against the United States.
Mr. Smiland.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM M. SMILAND
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SMILAND: Justice Stevens, and may it please
the Court:
The relevant language of the 1963 contract, as
illuminated in the surrounding circumstances, was
confirmed in the express terms of the 1986 stipulated
judgment which commanded the district and the United
States to perform the contract.
In particular, the first sentence of paragraph
4.2, which is at joint appendix page 111, states -- and I
quote -- the district acknowledges that it entered into
the 1963 contract for the benefit of Areas 1A and 1B.
That's the premerger --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Mr. Smiland, do you mind
telling us why the petitioners never filed suit in the
Court of Federal Claims?
MR. SMILAND: Yes, Your Honor. There's a long
history of litigation here. It began with the first suit
in 1979. We were in the district court there. There were
administrative and constitutional and equitable issues as
well, and we were able in that initial case to combine all
those forms of relief in the district court. And then, of
course, we got this judgment that I began to read from.
And from then on, we had four or five other cases all in
the district court.
We do acknowledge that on the breach of
contract, there is concurrent jurisdiction under the
Tucker Act.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it concurrent? I mean, the
-- the statute I'm reading, the one you brought is consent
is given to join the United States as a necessary party
defendant. Is that what happened here? They were joined
as a necessary party defendant?
MR. SMILAND: Well, we think so, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: They were? I -- I think that's
-- isn't that -- what rule of -- I thought there's a -- a
Rule of Federal Procedure. I can't remember what --
what's the --
MR. SMILAND: Rule 19(s)?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Is that what they were
joined under?
MR. SMILAND: That -- that procedure was not
invoked here.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. Well, all right. Were
they -- there's technical phrase well known in the law to
be joined as a necessary party defendant. Given the
normal meaning in the law of that technical phrase, is
that what happened here?
MR. SMILAND: No. What happened -- what
happened --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, okay. If it did not
happen, then how could you possibly sue in that court
rather than the Court of Claims where the statute says you
can sue on any implied, as well as express, contract?
MR. SMILAND: Because the waiver of sovereign
immunity statute says in any suit.
JUSTICE BREYER: It doesn't mean in any suit in
sentence 2 of the kind referred to in sentence 1? Does it
mean any suit in the universe? Any suit in the world?
Any tort suit? I would have thought that sentence 2
refers to sentence 1.
MR. SMILAND: Well, it -- it does and that case
was litigated against the United States by my clients and
-- and we won in the Peck case. And we think that should
have ended the matter.
JUSTICE BREYER: But don't -- how can we, if we
have -- if -- if I read this -- this as meaning
technically what it says and it's a jurisdictional matter,
how could I do anything other than say, go to the Court of
Claims, you're in the wrong court?
MR. SMILAND: Any suit is also in the first
sentence, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. It says --
MR. SMILAND: And -- and --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in any suit you can join the
United States as a necessary party.
MR. SMILAND: The -- the -- in the sue and be
sued cases, this Court construes that very broadly, and
this is the same root word and --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, but we don't give broad
construction to waivers of sovereign immunity.
MR. SMILAND: I --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Quite the reverse. And it
says to join the U.S. as a necessary party defendant in a
suit to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree the
contractual rights of a contracting entity in the United
States regarding any contract executed pursuant.
Now, I guess the farmers were not technically
the contracting entity.
MR. SMILAND: They were not the signing --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: No.
MR. SMILAND: -- party.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: So you've got more problems.
MR. SMILAND: Our -- our argument -- and again,
this has been resolved in the lower courts against the
Government. But our -- our view is that by the nature of
the intended beneficiary doctrine, the duty is owed to the
third party, as well as to the promisee, and it's
enforceable by the third party, as well as the promisee.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If you -- if the lower courts
were of this view, why did the district court in this case
give you three opportunities to have your contract claim
transferred to the Claims Court?
MR. SMILAND: Once the determination was made
that we were not intended third party beneficiaries, that
was the law of the case, and had it been transferred to
the Claims Court, we -- we would have been bound by that
determination. We felt we had to bring to a final
resolution the -- the intended beneficiary issue before we
could proceed in the Claims Court either.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it does suggest that the
district court had at least some concern whether the case
-- your claim had been lodged in the right court.
MR. SMILAND: Yes, although again that -- that
court had been hearing these matters for many years in --
in numerous cases without this issue ever having come up.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, but it's a -- see, I want
to know what I'm supposed to do. As I read the language,
you're out. As I understand the purpose of the statute,
it makes sense to me if you're out, and it doesn't make
sense to me if you're in. And maybe there's some lower
court precedent to the contrary, which I'd certainly read,
but is there any Supreme Court precedent to the contrary
that supports you?
MR. SMILAND: Just the -- the language of in any
suit definitely is --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no. But that isn't the
limiting part. The limiting part is in any suit of a
certain kind.
MR. SMILAND: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: What they give consent to is
joinder as a necessary party. And that is not what
happened here.
MR. SMILAND: Only the -- the general principle
that language should be read in its ordinary meaning --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's ordinary meaning, you're
out because the ordinary meaning of joinder as a necessary
party is you weren't joined as a --
MR. SMILAND: There -- there at least is no
evidence that Congress had rule 19 in mind when it enacted
either the '52 statute or the '82 statute that we -- we
stand on.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's something that I
hadn't concentrated on before now, but your position that,
well, if you're transferred to the Court -- to the Court
of Claims, that you bring with you all of the previous
rulings of the United States district court in California
and that those are somehow binding because of the law of
the case -- what is the authority for that? The -- the
court that's transferred has to accept all the rulings
that have been made previous to the transfer?
MR. SMILAND: I -- our understanding is if,
obviously --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, what's the authority
for that?
MR. SMILAND: I can't cite you authority, Your
Honor, but I -- we were very concerned about that. If
there was no waiver of sovereign immunity in the first
instance, then the lower court's ruling on intended third
party beneficiary I would think should be vacated.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could I -- I -- I guess I'm not
following this. I don't know why, Mr. Smiland, you -- you
have not referred to the last sentence of -- of what you
assert was the waiver of sovereign immunity, which says
any suit pursuant to this section may be brought in any
United States district court in the State in which the
land involved is situated. Why isn't that what you're
relying on?
MR. SMILAND: It is and -- and when I was
talking about in any suit --
JUSTICE BREYER: How does that help you?
Because it says any suit pursuant to this section, and of
course, this section starts off by talking about addition
of a person as a necessary party. So how does the last
sentence help you?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I --
MR. SMILAND: Well, it -- it -- if the words,
join necessary, limit any suit and the language that
Justice Scalia referred to, then -- then maybe we're in
trouble. But otherwise --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I take that to mean that
when you sue one defendant and you also sue the United
States as a necessary party defendant, that suit -- any --
that would be a suit pursuant to this section. I -- I
don't know what other meaning that -- that sentence could
have. When you sue two parties, one of whom is the United
States, by reason of the fact that it's a necessary party
defendant, that suit is a suit pursuant this section and
it can be brought in any United States district court in
the State in which the land involved is situated. I -- I
don't know what -- what other suit that -- that sentence
could refer to.
JUSTICE BREYER: You -- you agree with that. I
-- you're caught in between us here, and I understand.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: And I guess we have to figure
out what is the right meaning of that initial phrase.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Perhaps you can explain.
This was not your suit originally. You intervened.
Right? This was started out by the water district.
MR. SMILAND: The district sued the United
States. We intervened.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then after some, I think,
2 years --
MR. SMILAND: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the water district bows
out. It has settled its case. It's a mystery what it
settled for. At least, I didn't see it in any of the
briefs. Why did the water district, having brought this
case, then say, we're satisfied, we're out?
MR. SMILAND: The record is very sparse, Your
Honor. There is the district's motion which says pretty
much what it said in its brief, that there was a -- a
thing called the principles between it and the United
States and various parties. And as a result of those
principles, which are not in the record, although they are
a matter of public record, the -- the district in its
discretion elected to dismiss the case. We opposed that.
We would have hoped the district would have kept going.
We lost that opposition. The district was dismissed, and
we were allowed to proceed on our own.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Smiland, can I ask this
question? If Justice Breyer is -- the thrust of his
question is right, I -- I think the district itself could
not have brought the suit under his reading of the
sovereign immunity. And I'm just wondering, has the
United States ever taken the position that the district
could not have initiated this litigation?
MR. SMILAND: Not to my knowledge, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could -- could we hear your
argument on -- on the sovereign immunity point as opposed
to the venue point? What -- on what ground do you say the
United States has waived its -- its immunity from suit in
this case?
MR. SMILAND: There are two statutes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May -- may we just back up to
the question -- your answer to Justice Stevens? I thought
that this wasn't a suit initially on the part of the water
district for money damages. I thought they were seeking
declaratory relief against the United States.
MR. SMILAND: They pled both, Your Honor.
Although at that time the water still was available for
delivery, it hadn't flowed to the ocean. And the money
had not yet been collected and spent. So the focus
initially was on equitable relief to stop --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because one could -- one
could read the words, suit to adjudicate, confirm,
validate, or decree the contractual rights, as a suit for
declaratory relief but not encompassing damages.
MR. SMILAND: Both statutes we cite say that
judgments can be entered in the same manner, to the same
extent as a private individual under like circumstances,
language I believe from the Federal Tort Claims Act.
Again, both in the 491 F.Supp. decision under the McCarran
Act and in the Peck case, the district court held that
money damages were encompassed by that. So both statute
-- statutes on which we rely have language in it taken
from other sources of law, with which this Court is very
familiar and has opined on several times.
The -- the only unique parts of -- of either of
the two statutes that we stand on are -- are the rights.
One refers to administering a previously adjudicated right
to the use of water, and the other is the contract
language we've discussed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can you turn to sovereign
immunity now?
MR. SMILAND: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And -- and let me make -- make
it easy for you. Do you know of any case, other than
cases decided by this friendly district judge, in which a
suit has been allowed against the United States based on
nothing more than the status as a third party beneficiary
of a contract to which the United States has -- on which
the United States has agreed to be sued? Is -- is there
any such case?
MR. SMILAND: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And -- and you think it's clear
that -- as our sovereign immunity law requires, that such
a third party beneficiary can sue the United States?
MR. SMILAND: For example, in the U.S. v.
District Court case decided by this Court in 1971, under
the McCarran Act, that fact situation was not before you,
but the Court did say that the rights to which the statute
referred were all inclusive. It read it broadly.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I don't understand that.
The rights were all inclusive.
As -- as I understand the law of third party
beneficiaries, it -- it used to be -- and -- and perhaps
at the time this statute was enacted still was -- quite --
quite restrictive. It's only in more recent -- I don't
agree with the Government's argument that -- that you have
to, in an ordinary contract, explicitly refer to the third
party beneficiary's rights. But when sovereign immunity
is at issue, it's -- it's a different question, it seems
to me.
MR. SMILAND: Well, we have explicit rights here
and -- and it would seem to me that if -- if -- and this
was certainly the legislative history behind section 221,
not -- not behind McCarran. But if -- if the same duty is
owed by the promisor to the third party that it owes to
the promisee, and if the third party has the same rights
of enforcement as it does under 304 of the Restatement
that the promisee would have, why should it be any
different? Why would Congress have intended to exclude
that? And it used the word contract.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Because -- because we have a
rule that says when Congress wants the United States to be
sued, it -- it must say so clearly.
MR. SMILAND: You also have the rule that the
word contract means the law of contract and not parts of
it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But yes, isn't it arguable,
though, that in this case the Government probably thought
that it would be efficient to have the district represent
all the farmers for whatever their -- to the extent their
interests were shared with one another, rather than having
every individual have the same right to bring -- bring a
lawsuit?
MR. SMILAND: Efficient in -- in collecting land
assessments and water charges, but there's no evidence in
the -- either the language of the statute, I submit, or
the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Except for the fact that the
district is the party to the contract, though.
MR. SMILAND: Nothing was said about litigation,
let alone intended third party beneficiary --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but the -- the whole
point of the district -- correct if I'm wrong. This is
your area. The whole point of the district was to make it
easier for the United States to know with whom it was
dealing to have an efficient system, and if you say, well,
that doesn't include lawsuits for damages, it seems to me
that destroys much of the purpose of the formation of the
district.
MR. SMILAND: There's a lot of legislative
history there, and it talks a great deal, as you say, Your
Honor, about efficiency and -- and the convenience. But
it's not talking at all about litigation, about remedies,
about rights once there's a breach.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you haven't really achieved
very much efficiency if you simply get the United States
out of the business of collecting the payments and of
keeping track of the payments but leave the United States
subject to suit when the person who has authority to do --
do these things goofs. I mean, what -- what trouble has
the United States saved itself? It would still have to
ride herd over -- over the person with -- with whom it's
dealing.
MR. SMILAND: Well, it -- this is a transaction
between a water seller and many water buyers. Yes, in
1926 districts were put in the middle, but it's also true
in 1939 in -- in the section 9(e), Congress authorized the
particular type of contracts we have here, so-called water
service contracts, and it doesn't mention district. And
as a matter of fact, the Ninth Circuit has held that the
bureau had the discretion administratively to deal with
individuals.
So throughout the history of the reclamation
program, you -- you have the -- the core transaction is --
is a water sale from the Government to -- to farmers. And
that's was the case on day one in 1902 and it still is.
And I'd just like to remind the Court that
paragraph 3 of the stipulated judgment at page 110 of the
joint appendix is in our view dispositive here. This was
a -- an agreement by the United States and the district,
approved by a court after formal settlement notice was
dispatched to two formal classes, and it says, any
appropriate relief may be obtained against the Federal
parties by the filing of a new action for violation of any
contract arising independently of this judgment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the -- the Justice
Department has no authority to -- to consent to suit which
-- which Congress has not consented to. I don't see how
this strengthens your case.
MR. SMILAND: Again, if -- if this Court should
hold that neither of the two statutes on -- on which we
stand waive sovereign immunity, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And this alone wouldn't --
wouldn't remedy the --
MR. SMILAND: Then -- then --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the absence --
MR. SMILAND: -- the decision that we're not
intended beneficiaries should be vacated and we should
have a chance to go to the court -- Claims Court.
I'd like to reserve, Your Honor, 3 minutes, if I
may.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You may, indeed, Mr. Smiland.
Mr. Minear, I think you're up next.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEFFREY P. MINEAR
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT UNITED STATES
MR. MINEAR: Justice Stevens, and may it please
the Court:
Petitioners cannot maintain this suit for breach
of the Westlands contract because the Westlands contract
is itself subject to the rules of sovereign immunity. And
section 390uu authorizes only a limited waiver of
sovereign immunity. It does not authorize suits by
incidental beneficiaries for money damages.
For many of the points that have already been
raised by Justice Breyer, Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Minear, do you think it
does waive sovereign immunity for suits brought by the
district?
MR. MINEAR: In one circumstance, Your Honor.
This suit allows a district that has been sued by
individual water users to join the United States in the
ongoing suit and, in fact, remove the case to Federal
court if necessary, so there can be a determination of all
the rights in those --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Did this suit begin as a suit
by a water user against the district and then you were
joined later? Is that --
MR. MINEAR: No, it did not, but that did occur
in the Barcellos & Wolfsen litigation that ran between
1978 and 1980.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, in this suit, did not
the district bring it against the United States?
MR. MINEAR: That's correct.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And was that a -- was that
jurisdiction proper at that time?
MR. MINEAR: That suit was brought under the
APA, and the district brought the suit on that basis.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But was it properly brought is
what I'm asking you.
MR. MINEAR: That suit was properly brought.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Okay.
MR. MINEAR: But it was not brought under 390uu.
Instead, there was an allegation that the United States
had acted unlawfully and the Westlands relied on the
Administrative Procedure Act.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And no money damages.
MR. MINEAR: And no money damages as well, and
that's what distinguishes this case.
JUSTICE BREYER: So that -- so your view -- I
mean, what -- what makes sense to me is that the section
means what it says, that consent is given to join the
United States. That means join them in an ongoing suit.
And it makes sense because what the United States wants is
anyone who sues them for money damages goes to the Court
of Claims. But of course, where you have an ongoing suit
between two other people, we'll make an exception because
there it's already in another district and we'll let you
bring the United States in as a necessary party. The
other exception is when you don't sue for money damages.
That's in section 702 of the APA.
Now, that to me makes a lot of sense and it's
consistent with the language. Is that your view or do you
have a different view?
MR. MINEAR: Yes, that is our view, and let me
supplement your comments in this regard. Section --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: May I -- may I -- has that
always been your view throughout?
(Laughter.)
MR. MINEAR: It has been our view under 390uu
when section 390uu has been -- has been raised.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But throughout the litigation?
MR. MINEAR: Throughout this litigation? I
can't -- I can't be sure that we've maintained a
consistent position, but ultimately this is a question of
sovereign immunity. So the importance is that we get the
issue right here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There has to be an ongoing
suit. You think this section does -- does not permit
somebody to initiate suit against one party and at the
same time against the United States as a necessary party.
MR. MINEAR: Your Honor, let me explain why
that's the case, and there was an answer --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why what is the case?
MR. MINEAR: Why there's a necessity for an
ongoing suit.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- that is to say, there's
a suit between only two individuals and then the United
States is brought in.
MR. MINEAR: Your Honor, this -- this provision
was enacted in response to a specific problem that's
illustrated by the Barcellos & Wolfsen litigation.
Individual farmers sued an irrigation district. The
irrigation district was concerned that it might be subject
to inconsistent liability to the farmers on the one hand
and the Federal Government on the other, and it sought to
join the United States. There was no mechanism in 1978
for that type of suit. Congress acted --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand that. That's one
situation that this provision could cover, but there are
other situations that this provision could -- could cover.
Let's say a farmer wants to bring suit against the
district, but it doesn't really know whether the fault is
with the district or whether the district was -- was
compelled to do what it did by the United States. So it
sues the district and just in case the United States was
-- was responsible, it joins the United States. Why
doesn't the language entirely permit that kind of a suit?
MR. MINEAR: The language could be construed to
allow that, but -- but waivers of sovereign immunity are
construed narrowly, and the language I think is more
properly construed, as Justice Breyer has suggested, to
allow joinder as a necessary party. And in fact, it was
enacted in specific reaction to that problem in the
Barcellos & Wolfsen litigation where we did have ongoing
litigation and there was a sense by the irrigation
district they needed to join the United States so they
would not be subject to inconsistent suits.
So although I think that the language can bear
the -- the interpretation that you're suggesting, Justice
Scalia, nevertheless, I think the better interpretation is
the more narrow one that is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then -- then how do you explain
the last -- the last sentence of that provision, which is
any suit pursuant to this section? The only suit that the
section refers to is a suit in which the United States is
joined as a necessary party defendant. That's the subject
of the section.
MR. MINEAR: Yes, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And -- and the last sentence
says, any suit pursuant to this section may be brought in
any United States district court. And I read that to mean
if you want to sue the United States as a necessary party
initiating a suit, you can bring it in -- in any district
court in which the land involved is.
MR. MINEAR: Your Honor, we read that as
allowing removal in those circumstances when the United
States is joined later.
In any event, I have to say that with regard to
-- to this disagreement, it does -- it's not dispositive
or even affect the case here. The fact is that this
waiver of sovereign immunity under no circumstances would
allow this suit to go forward. Apart from the money
damages aspect, which itself is -- is -- would preclude
this type of suit, these parties are not intended
beneficiaries, and without being intended beneficiaries,
there's -- in no circumstances could they ever evoke these
provisions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Minear, when you say --
when you say not money damages, do you read the words that
I read to Mr. Smiland restrictively or do you think they
accommodate money damages, that is, suit to adjudicate,
confirm, validate, or decree the contractual rights of a
contracting entity?
MR. MINEAR: We think that under your cases,
such as Pena v. Lane, there needs to be a specific
reference to money damages. This simply is referencing
declaratory relief, and so we do not believe it would
allow an award of money damages. Rather, the party must
go to the Claims Court if they're seeking money damages.
And in fact, the waiver of sovereign immunity
there is somewhat broader. It does, as mentioned before,
allow implied or express contracts. So this suit is
simply in the wrong court.
But I would like to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So money damages -- waiver
always used the word money damages. When it says
adjudicate the rights under the contract, that doesn't
include money damages?
MR. MINEAR: No, I do not think in this context
it would. I think there needs to be something more
specific. We're really talking about declaring rights
here and not providing a specific remedy. And this Court
has always taken the view that the Claims Court
jurisdiction is the appropriate forum for deciding money
damages.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about the second sentence?
The United States, when a party, shall be deemed to have
waived any right to plead that it is not amenable thereto
by reason of its sovereignty and shall be subject to
judgments, orders, and decrees of the court having
jurisdiction and may obtain review thereof in the same
manner and to the same extent? It's subject to the
judgments, orders, and decrees of the court to the same
extent as a private individual under like circumstances.
Why isn't that enough to -- to say that the court can --
can award damages?
MR. MINEAR: Your Honor, I think that simply
refers back to the previous sentence, which refers to
adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree. Now, if you
interpret that to include money damages, then the second
sentence would follow, but I -- I think the two have to be
construed together. And in our view simply allowing a
party to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree in these
circumstances would not allow award of money damages.
Certainly I think Congress would be much clearer.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but if contractual rights
include a right to be paid for something, why wouldn't you
get a money judgment in a case like that? That first
sentence certainly covers the possibility of a contractual
right to be paid something.
MR. MINEAR: Your Honor, again, waivers of
sovereign immunity are construed narrowly. Now, let's --
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's pretty clear language.
MR. MINEAR: -- I have to say that the language
-- you're saying that the language -- yes, could it
conceivably be -- be interpreted in -- on -- that broadly.
But that's not --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Certainly if it were not a --
a United States and were a private individual, it would
include money damages.
MR. MINEAR: That might well be, but this is --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And -- and the next sentence,
as Justice Scalia points out, says the United States shall
be treated just like a private party.
MR. MINEAR: Yes. But Your Honor, ultimately I
think that we have to focus on that this is a waiver of
sovereign immunity. And -- and so far we have not touched
on the question of whether these parties --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I think you've got a
very strong argument when you talk about an incidental
third party beneficiary not being a contracting party, but
now you're asking for a much broader holding than really
necessary to dispose of this case, it seems to me.
MR. MINEAR: Your Honor, I think I started with
that point, that an incidental beneficiary cannot invoke
this -- this provision. And I'd like to -- to continue
with that point because the party here is merely an
incidental beneficiary and not an intended beneficiary.
Under any of the -- the tests that have been applied for
third party beneficiaries, the party here would not
qualify as an intended beneficiary.
Most importantly, the contracting parties here,
the United States and Westlands, expressed no intent to
give this party enforcement rights.
What's more, the contract does not provide that
performance would be rendered to -- to the petitioners in
this case. The contract is quite clear that performance
is rendered to Westlands. This is a contract in which the
United States furnishes a specified amount of water to
Westlands and Westlands pays money for it. Westlands then
has a separate obligation with regard to the farmers.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Separate from -- where does
that -- that obligation come from?
MR. MINEAR: That arises from the regulations
that the Westlands Water District has enacted that
provides for the delivery of water from Westlands to the
individual farmers. The United States' obligation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a State -- a State-
created obligation?
MR. MINEAR: That's right. That is -- and
Westlands has the -- has the option of either engaging in
contracts with the individual farmers or distributing the
water through regulation, and it has opted for
regulations.
Now, Westlands itself is a governmental unit.
It is comprised of the -- of the very farmers here, among
others, who have brought this suit. And it has the
authority to act in a representative capacity on behalf of
all its members. And that is why the United States enters
into contracts with irrigation districts precisely because
it allows them to reach accord and agreement and to
resolve their disputes. Now, the fact is that the United
States and Westlands agree on a great many things.
Sometimes they disagree, but when we disagree, we're able
to -- to speak to one another as two governments
representing constituencies and hammer out our
differences. And that would be impossible if these types
of third party beneficiary suits were allowed.
And I think that goes to the crux of what the
United States' real concern here is. When there are
contracts between one government and another, just as in
the context of treaties or compacts among the States, it's
vital that the two governmental units be able to deal with
one another as governments and to be assured that if they
can reach accord on behalf of their representatives -- on
behalf of the parties they represent, that that will
resolve the issue. If it were otherwise, this type of
distribution of water --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, you don't take the
position, do you, that Westlands could have agreed with
the United States that it wouldn't enforce its new laws
that deprived the farmers of water? You don't take that
position.
MR. MINEAR: But let's look at what would
happen, Your Honor, if that did happen. The individual
farmers would sue Westlands, claiming that Westlands was
not living up to its contract obligations. Westlands
would invoke 390uu and join the United States in that
suit. And the question of the legal rights would be
determined on that basis. So the mechanism that -- that
we've specified and the way that we interpret it deals
precisely with the problem that you've -- you've
addressed.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes, but you can't -- the --
presumably the Federal Government can't negotiate away the
Endangered Species Act or something. The fact is that new
laws were passed after these contracts were entered into
with Westlands. Isn't that right?
MR. MINEAR: That's correct. And again, I think
it's instructive to see what happened in this case. When
those laws were enacted, the United States reacted to
those. Westlands brought a suit under the APA challenging
the interpretation of the statutes. Westlands was
entitled to do that under the APA. The United States and
Westlands reached an accord, together with the
environmental intervenors in this group, that was
satisfactory to those parties. And it simply would be
very disruptive of the system if a minority of farmers in
the Westlands District could then bring a suit and upset
that agreement and that accord that had been reached.
Finally, I'd like to make a brief --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can the district get damages
from the Government?
MR. MINEAR: Technically yes, but their damages
are limited by the terms of the contract. Westlands could
sue the United States in Claims Court for a breach of the
contract, but the contract itself says that any damages
that are -- that the sole liability of the United States
in these circumstances would be an adjustment of the
account. In other words, there are not consequential
damages. Rather, if we do not provide Westlands with the
water that Westlands believes it's entitled to, then we
stand liable for an adjustment in the payments that
Westlands would make to us.
The suit that is being brought here is asking
for consequential damages, and we believe that the
contract here does not allow consequential damages. That,
of course, is a merits question that there's no need for
the Court to reach, but that is the way it would be
resolved in Claims Court in -- in our view.
I'd like to also raise the question of property
rights since that has -- has come up, that one of the
arguments that has been made by Westlands is that they're
entitled to status of a third party beneficiary because
they claim they have water rights in these circumstances.
The fact is that the United States, the State of
California, and Westlands, as well as the California Water
Resources Board and the first tier of California courts,
have all concluded they do not have the -- the water
rights that they claim. But in any event, our view is
that that issue is irrelevant to the inquiry here.
Rather, the question of third party beneficiary
status turns on the intent of the contracting parties.
Did they or did they not intend to give enforceable rights
to the third party? Here there's not a shred of evidence
that that was an intent -- there was an intent to create
enforceable rights in that third party.
Quite to the contrary. The only reference of
third parties, the farmers, in the contract here is
directed to limitations on what the district can do once
it receives its water. It doesn't create rights in them
-- the individual farmers. Quite to the contrary. What
it does it restricts the ability of the district in order
to protect the United States' interests, to make sure the
United States will be paid for the water that it
ultimately provides to the district.
The central point that I would like to leave you
with, though, here at the end is the importance of
protecting the relationship between the United States and
Westlands. But although we disagree on some matters, we
are able to reach accommodation and agreement, and when
we're able to do that, it's to the good of all concerned.
The contracts and the laws here are structured to allow
those types of agreements to be reached, and we think that
allowing third party beneficiary suits would be very
disruptive of that -- that operation.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Minear.
Mr. Somach, will you tell us what the district's
views on this whole matter are?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STUART L. SOMACH
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT WESTLANDS WATER DISTRICT
MR. SOMACH: Yes, Your Honor.
Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court:
Westlands Water District has argued in its brief
that petitioners are not intended third party
beneficiaries with enforceable rights under the 1963
contract. I want to make two points from the perspective
of the district why this must be so.
First, allowing a direct right of action by
petitioners is not practical or consistent with the
district's need and ability to function as a governmental
entity and to allocate all of the water that it receives
under contract to all of the landowners within the -- the
district. This is a scarce and valuable resource, and
these types of third party lawsuits jeopardize the
district's ability to be able to provide water pursuant to
California Water Code provisions to all of the landowners
within the district.
Second, the laws of the State of California and
reclamation law, working in harmony one with the other --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. Could you expand on
the first point a little bit? I mean, you say you don't
want to be bothered with lawsuits. Is -- is that -- is
that all that it amounts to?
MR. SOMACH: No. I -- I think quite on the
contrary. You know, and unfortunately, the -- the history
of this contract and these -- these issues has been
anything other than the district avoiding litigation.
The -- the whole concept of a water district is
not to individualize or incrementalize the water and
interests in water in any one group of landowners or any
one landowner. The idea is that the rights of all of the
landowners to all of the water under the contract are to
be treated as a whole and allow the district to provide
protection to all of the landowners within the district as
a whole, the point there being that the water doesn't
belong to any one landowner or a group of landowners. It
belongs to the whole.
And in fact, the way the district operates, the
way it has to operate is in the context of the whole.
Bonds are issued. Encumbrances on lands are -- are
incurred, all based upon not individual rights to water
but rather broad rights of water throughout the district.
To allow a small group of landowners to decide how to
administer the contract, how to enforce the contract in
any one given situation leaves decisions that are critical
to all of the landowners solely in the hands of an
unaccountable small group of -- of landowners.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can't -- can't such a suit be
brought in State court? I can't believe that this
district can do whatever it wants with the water.
MR. SOMACH: Oh, absolutely not. Yes, it --
yes, it can.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Really?
MR. SOMACH: No. What I meant to say was yes,
you are right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. SOMACH: And absolutely not. It can't do
just anything it wants to do. It is subject, as a
governmental entity, to all the strict requirements of
California water law and governmental law, for that
matter. If, for example, these petitioners decide for
whatever reason they don't like a decision of the -- of
the board -- and in fact, that is an example that exists
emanating out of the facts of this case. When the
district decided that it was better to settle the
litigation, these landowners first petitioned the -- the
governing of the -- of the district and sought to -- to
have them not proceed in that manner, the way any other
group of citizens or constituents with any other
governmental entity would have proceeded. The district
decided, however, that it was in the best interests of all
of the landowners within the district to settle the
litigation.
Now, at that point in time certainly, these
petitioners had the normal and ordinary rights that any --
any constituent within the district has to be able to
challenge a decision that has been made by the district.
That includes, for example, writ proceedings, to argue
that the decision of the board was arbitrary, capricious,
otherwise unlawful, and that it should -- should be
mandated to -- to proceed in some other fashion.
If the issue were damages, this district is
subject, like any other governmental entity within the
State of California, to the government Tort Claims Act if
-- if they're tortious type damages. And if we have
arguable impairment of property rights, this district is
subject to the California constitution, the United States
Constitution, and the government code provisions that
provide for litigation with respect to those broader types
of -- of damages.
And quite frankly, this is a governmental body
and it is very susceptible to the political process. It
is not an easy thing for -- for the district to be
standing up here and telling you that its landowners
aren't entitled to receive what they want. That's a very
difficult for the district to -- to do. But in dealing
with the rights of the entire district, it's an absolute
essential thing to do. If these landowners had exercised
their prerogatives under California law, they could have,
assuming they were the majority, controlled the decisions
of the board of directors in the way that any majority
constituency controls the director -- the -- the direction
and the decisions of a -- of a governing board.
You know, this -- this lawsuit is instructive in
-- in a number of ways in terms of these practical
concerns that we have in terms of how in the world are we
going to be able to administer a contract like this one.
How are we going to do all of the things that the Water
Code has told us that we have to do if, at any given time,
a landowner, a small group of landowners is able to go
into Federal district court and independently decide that
it wants to administer the contract that the district has
with the United States or to enforce terms of the contract
that it has with the United States in a manner that's
inconsistent or different than the way --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I don't really understand why
that's any greater burden than the fact they can sue you
in State court anyway. They -- they can always bring
litigation.
MR. SOMACH: Well, it -- it really requires the
district to, in a sense, race to the courthouse with the
-- with the petitioners in order to be there first in
order to have its views of the contract --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, the suit in State court,
I assume, would -- would only be -- the claim would be
that you were acting arbitrarily, and so long as your
interpretation of the contract was a reasonable one, the
suit would fail.
MR. SOMACH: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whereas, this suit here -- it
doesn't matter how reasonable it is. If it's wrong, it's
wrong. I mean, it's quite a different --
MR. SOMACH: No. I think it is a different
situation, and I agree with what you -- what you have
said, Your Honor.
I do, however, want to -- to not avoid the
concern that may be expressed here, and -- and that is,
that -- that what it does is it -- it forces the district
into a situation of chasing its landowners, in essence,
around from one litigation forum to another in order to
ensure that its means of controlling and -- and
administering the contract is not jeopardized. The fact
that the landowners -- if the landowners can move forward
independently with litigation with respect to the
contract, what it really does is create in a sense a --
the contract becomes this very interesting moving target
where the district has its views about what the contract
is and how it should be administered, how it should be
enforced, and then it proceeds in one direction as, for
example, it did with the settlement in this litigation,
deciding that that was the best way to protect the
interests of the district.
Had these petitioners on the merits in a
hypothetical situation prevailed with a totally different
result, that would have substantially affected and
impacted the district's ability to be able to maintain the
obligations and the commitments that it made to the other
settling parties. That destabilizes the ability of the
district to actually act in other governmental forums, in
forums with the United States, with the State of
California, with other districts in the context of
attempting to say we control the contract, we enforce its
terms, and we can make commitments. And when we make
those commitments, we can abide by and we can live up to
those commitments in a way that -- that governments ought
to be able to do when they're -- when they're making those
types of commitments.
Having the landowners being able to come or --
and here, I want to make certain. When I use the word
landowners, I'm not saying that the landowners are not
beneficiaries of the contract. They certainly are.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What about the provision in
the judgment at page 110 that was -- that was cited to us,
that -- that the parties may obtain other appropriate
relief by the filing of a new action?
MR. SOMACH: Yes. I -- I think that that --
that phrase is actually begun as a proviso, and I view it
as not limiting the ability of the area I landowners in
the Barcellos & Wolfsen judgment that you're -- that
you're quoting from from being able to act in any other
way. It was a non-limiting provision. The -- the first
part of the -- the part that you read deals with what
their rights to enforce were. The second part was a
proviso that simply said notwithstanding this, whatever
else you're able to do, you may do.
Thank you for your time.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Somach.
Mr. Smiland, you have 9 minutes remaining, but
you do not have to use it all.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM M. SMILAND
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SMILAND: Thank you, Your Honor.
What happened here is that the United States
sold half the water it was obligated to sell under the
contract. It doubled the price it was permitted to charge
on the other half. It was a massive harm to the farmers.
I'm sure you understand.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you say under the
contract. I thought there was a provision in the contract
that said that the United States will not be responsible
for under-deliveries, and I think it listed the drought
and the last thing was any other cause.
MR. SMILAND: Well, that's what we were about to
go to trial on, Your Honor. That's a merits issue. The
Ninth Circuit has abstained on whether there was a
mandatory statutory duty to cut off this water, and I urge
the Court not to -- to dive into that pool.
We're trying to get in the courthouse doors.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you were saying there's
-- there's a right under this contract to recover from the
United States for an under-delivery.
MR. SMILAND: We have massive cross summary
judgment motions on that issue and we were entitled to go
to trial on that -- on our claim of liability.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, please.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. I've asked a lot of
questions. Go on.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What do you make -- excuse me.
What do you make of the argument for reasonable
construction of the contract that in fact you just simply
cannot have a system that would promise the chaos that --
that you are promising?
MR. SMILAND: I -- I don't make much of it. The
parties here and -- and the parties in the West fully
understood for 20 years, after Allen Orchards, that the
farmers were intended third party beneficiaries. That's
-- we settled in 1986 with that understanding, and this
parade of horribles just has not come to pass.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is -- is it correct, as Justice
Scalia suggested earlier, that so far as State litigation
is concerned, it would be limited simply to arbitrary,
unreasonable behavior?
MR. SMILAND: That's true. And even more
fundamentally, the United States breached the contract.
The district didn't do anything wrong. Why would we sue
the district when the United States cut off the water and
doubled the charge?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I think it's arbitrary
not to -- not to -- for an agency, of which you're --
you're in some sense at least the beneficiary, not to
insist upon its contract rights, just as a shareholder can
insist that the -- that a corporation enforce its
contracts.
MR. SMILAND: We had a little mini-trial on that
in front of the -- in front of the district court, and --
and I made that argument, Your Honor, and the district
court rejected it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, he was wrong. That was --
(Laughter.)
MR. SMILAND: I agree.
JUSTICE BREYER: I guess the reason that you
would sue the district would be if you didn't have any
enforceable promise from the United States that they
didn't -- wouldn't do it.
MR. SMILAND: Well, we -- we --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, you think you do. That's
the issue in the case.
MR. SMILAND: We had a stipulated judgment.
JUSTICE BREYER: And so therefore -- therefore,
I'm looking for where that promise is. And you started
out by citing a page, which wasn't a page of the contract.
It was a page of some kind of settlement, and that page
said that the district agrees that they entered into the
contract with helping the farmers in mind. I'm sure they
did. So what. I mean, I might buy a house with the idea
of helping of my child. I'm going to give it to him.
That doesn't mean he can enforce the contract.
MR. SMILAND: German Alliance, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: You mean my child can enforce a
contract I enter into with another -- I buy a house and I
say I intend to give it to my daughter.
MR. SMILAND: If the contract --
JUSTICE BREYER: And then she can enforce the
contract?
MR. SMILAND: If the contract says --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. If the contract says.
Now, that's why I was interested that you didn't cite
language in the contract.
MR. SMILAND: Oh, yes, we did, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: You -- well, I mean, you
started out by referring me to page 110 or 111 --
MR. SMILAND: That's true.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which doesn't. Now, what is
the language in the contract --
MR. SMILAND: Articles --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that helps you the most?
MR. SMILAND: -- 15 and 29(b) of the '63
contract and also the 1965 contract explicitly refers to
benefit, and probably most dramatically, the recordable
contracts that were signed actually with my clients and
the United States said that they were made in
consideration of the direct and indirect benefits that
those farmers would gain from the 1963 contract. Now,
paragraph 4.2 in the judgment, which came some years
later, reconfirmed that.
What was new and different about the judgment is
that for the first time it made explicit -- we think it
was implied earlier, but explicit that there was
enforceable rights in the farmers, and we've argued it
under your German Alliance test that's not required, but
if it was required, we bargained for, we got it. The --
the court approved that and the Congress approved that.
And I -- I -- personally I've looked at all of these cases
in recent months. It's very rare for an intended
beneficiary to have language like that.
In any case, as I was saying, my clients have
suffered massive losses. They've been litigating these
claims for 25 years. Everyone has assumed there was
waiver of sovereign landowner. Everyone assumed they're
intended beneficiaries. And we think we should have a
forum and a remedy and a right to our day in court.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Smiland.
The case is taken under advisement.
(Whereupon, at 10:57 a.m., the case in the
