IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
GERALD DEVENPECK, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 03-710
JEROME ANTHONY ALFORD. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 8, 2004
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MAUREEN A. HART, ESQ., Senior Assistant Attorney General,
Olympia, Washington; on behalf of the Petitioners.
JAMES B. COMEY, ESQ., Deputy Attorney General, Office of
Deputy Attorney General, Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
the Petitioners.
R. STUART PHILLIPS, ESQ., Poulsbo, Washington; on behalf
of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MAUREEN A. HART, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
JAMES B. COMEY, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States,
as amicus curiae, supporting the Petitioners 16
R. STUART PHILLIPS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MAUREEN A. HART, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:01 a.m.)
JUSTICE STEVENS: We'll hear argument in No. 03-
710, Devenpeck against Alford.
Ms. Hart.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MAUREEN A. HART
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MS. HART: Justice Stevens, and may it please
the Court:
The Ninth Circuit invalidated Mr. Alford's
arrest and held the arresting officers in this case
personally liable for damages based on the closely related
offense doctrine. The doctrine is contrary to fundamental
Fourth Amendment principles that probable cause is an
objective inquiry based on all of the facts and
circumstances known to the officer at arrest.
In contrast, the closely related offense
doctrine is a subject of inquiry that limits probable
cause only to those facts and circumstances closely
related to the offense that the arresting officer
announces at arrest. Under the doctrine, then if two
officers observe precisely the same facts and
circumstances and arrest the suspect, the arrest in one
case can be valid and in the other invalid based only on
the officer's subjective legal evaluation --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Ms. Hart, is there any
requirement in Washington or generally that an officer
state the grounds for the arrest to the person being
arrested at the time?
MS. HART: Justice O'Connor, there's no
constitutional requirement and there is no requirement in
-- in Washington that that be done. A number of States do
require that it be done statutorily and many of those
States also --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: We're dealing here with a
case from the State of Washington, and you assert there is
no such requirement in Washington.
MS. HART: There is not.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But in this case when the
respondent was arrested, he was informed by the officer
that the arrest was for making a tape recording of the
conversation?
MS. HART: That is correct.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And it turns out -- do you
concede that that was, in fact, not a lawful grounds for
arrest?
MS. HART: That -- at this point, the question
of the --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Do you concede that --
MS. HART: Your Honor --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- that in the State of
Washington, that it is perfectly lawful to record the
conversation with the police?
MS. HART: This -- the facts of this particular
case have not been before a -- a court in Washington, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But I'm asking you. What is
your view? Is it lawful or not for an individual to
record, tape record, the conversation with a policeman on
the occasion of a stop?
MS. HART: Your Honor, I believe in this case
there would be probable cause for an officer to believe it
was and therefore effect an arrest. I don't believe that
the -- the question has been answered in Washington, and I
believe there are good grounds to argue that it would be
permissible and that, indeed, unlike the decision in State
v. Flora, there were distinguishing circumstances here,
including the absence of passers-by on the scene.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, do we decide this case
on the understanding that it was lawful to make the
recording? Is that the basis in which we decide this
case?
MS. HART: No, Your Honor. We have not raised
the Privacy Act as an issue before this Court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, for argument --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Now, Washington also has an
anti-stacking policy, does it?
MS. HART: The State Patrol does, Your Honor,
yes.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Is -- is that just a rule of
the patrolmen in the State?
MS. HART: It --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: They won't arrest someone for
several charges?
MS. HART: It's an agency policy and troopers
with the Washington State Patrol are trained to it.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, is it an agency policy
that the State endorses, and if so, why -- why do you
endorse or adopt the policy?
MS. HART: Well, Your Honor, I believe that --
that stacking charges really is -- there are good reasons
to endorse the policy. One is that it's not a
particular --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not -- not stacking charges you
mean.
MS. HART: I'm sorry. Not stacking charges,
Your Honor, is -- is an -- a sound policy for a number of
reasons. First, it's not a particularly effective or
efficient use of law enforcement resources, but perhaps
more importantly, it can have significant negative
consequences for people who are subject to arrest in terms
of their ability -- the amount of bail, their ability to
post bail, and to secure a pre-trial release.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, is that -- I mean, is
that the -- the real basis for the policy, that we -- that
Washington does not want to make it difficult for -- for
arrestees to raise bail?
MS. HART: Your Honor, I can't tell you
precisely what the Washington State Patrol's thinking is
on it. My impression is that, in part, they believe that
-- that the appropriate law enforcement response is -- is
to determine whether there's probable cause and to arrest
and leave the sorting out of the charges to be pressed
actually by the State to the prosecuting attorney.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What do you make of the
argument that unless the cause of the arrest is, number
one, stated and, number two, a -- a cause that a defendant
can rely on, that in any case like this in which the
stated grounds of the arrest turn out to be -- we will
assume, turn out to be inadequate, the police will always,
particularly in traffic cases, be able to come up with
something later on to justify the arrest? What -- what do
you make of that argument?
MS. HART: Well, I -- I think what I would make
of it, Justice Souter, is that provided that there's
probable cause for arrest, that the fact that there may be
a basis to -- to stop a number of -- of motorists is not
-- is not relevant. And in part, I believe that, for
example, this Court's decision in Whren indicates that so
long as there is probable cause for arrest, the reason for
the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that was for an -- an
arrest in which, so far as we can tell, the -- the stated
grounds for the arrest were those for which there was
probable cause.
And I think one of the concerns underlying the
argument that I asked you to comment on is that if the --
if the police, in effect, have -- have discretion ad lib
afterwards to come up with new grounds for the arrest,
there's -- there's going to be a kind of a basic corrosion
in the integrity of the arrest process and in the
confidence of people to believe that the police are really
acting in good faith when they make an arrest.
MS. HART: Well, Your Honor, the -- if there is
probable cause for arrest, that is the concern of the
Fourth Amendment, and I -- I don't believe that the -- the
concern -- I don't know that there's any empirical
evidence that the concern that you are expressing has been
borne out.
JUSTICE SOUTER: That -- that may be -- that may
be the -- the best response. And I take it, so far as you
know, there -- there are no studies that have gone into
this on an empirical basis. Is that correct, so far as
you know?
MS. HART: Not as -- as far as I know, Your
Honor. But I would also suggest to you that the notion
that an officer would effect an arrest without any basis
for the arrest on a hope that a prosecuting attorney can
come up with a basis for the arrest --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. The -- the argument is
that he thinks he does have a ground. It turns out that
he's wrong. Unless he is very unimaginative, he'll find
another one. It's not that he arrests saying I have no
basis to arrest this person, but I'll think of something
later. It's -- it's the -- the problem is, I think -- or
the argument, I think, is directed to a case like this.
MS. HART: Well, and -- and Your Honor, I -- I
do believe that the concern of the Fourth Amendment, which
is the only constitutional provision at issue in this
case, is that there in fact be a reasonable basis for
arrest and that subsequently or promptly subsequently or
prior to arrest be tested by a neutral magistrate. And
that's the only concern.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ms. Hart, I'm -- I'm not sure
what you mean by -- that there has to be probable cause
for arrest. Do you mean objectively, or do you mean on
the basis of the facts known to the arresting officer? I
mean, let's -- let's assume an officer stops a car for a
broken taillight, and it turns out the car doesn't have a
broken taillight. All right? So that basis is wrong.
However, the car also has an expired inspection sticker,
which the officer didn't know about. Was there a probable
cause for arrest, as you're using the term here?
MS. HART: If there was probable cause based on
the -- if there was reason based on the objective facts
and circumstances --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it doesn't matter whether
he knew those facts and circumstances.
MS. HART: -- that -- known to the officer at
arrest.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, so it has to be known.
MS. HART: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So in my example, the arrest
would be invalid because at the time of the arrest, he
didn't know about the sticker.
MS. HART: Absent the circumstances at arrest
giving rise to a reasonable basis to believe that a crime
had been committed, there would not be probable cause.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're saying it's the facts
known to the officer --
MS. HART: Precisely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that have to establish the
probable --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Once -- once you establish that
limitation, are you willing to accept the horrible that --
that Justice Souter proposed to you? Is it -- is it,
indeed, so easy to -- to gin up some other cause for
arrest when you used a mistaken cause? I don't know that
it's all that easy.
MS. HART: It is not and -- and -- it is not.
And that was the -- the reason why I indicated in response
to Justice Souter's question that I do believe that it is
not all that easy. And I -- I believe that one of the
foremost commentators in this area has termed that notion
fanciful for the reason that it is -- it is stopping on a
hope and a prayer that something will provide
justification for that later --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That was LaFave. You cited
LaFave in your brief for that proposition.
MS. HART: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You -- you made the point, in
answer to Justice O'Connor, that a police officer in
Washington is not required to divulge on the spot the
reason for the arrest. What is the point at which the
arrestee under Washington law is entitled to know the
cause of the arrest?
MS. HART: At charging, Your Honor, there --
there -- the -- the individual who has been arrested, as a
matter of the Sixth Amendment, would be entitled to know
the charges against him or her, and the officer is
required, in a warrantless arrest, to appear before a
neutral magistrate and have the probable cause for the
arrest tested --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is it -- is it at the
arraignment or the -- at the earlier booking in the police
station?
MS. HART: I'm sorry. I'm not following your
question.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is it -- is it -- is the time
when the arrestee must told you are being arrested for X
reason, is that when the arrestee appears before the
magistrate or is it earlier when he's brought into the
police station and he's booked? The arrest is booked. At
which point?
MS. HART: Neither, Justice Ginsburg. The
arrestee would be entitled constitutionally to know the
charge against him or her when criminal -- a criminal
prosecution is commenced by charging. For the most part,
that is done in Washington by an information or a charge
filed by a prosecuting attorney.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You mean he could be held
until a charge is filed without being told why he's being
held?
MS. HART: Justice Stevens --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So that could be a week or 2.
MS. HART: But it would be -- he would be held
in that case following a determination by a neutral
magistrate that there are grounds to hold him. And at
that point --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would the magistrate keep those
grounds secret?
MS. HART: They would not be secret, Your Honor,
no.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, wouldn't the magistrate
tell him why he's being held?
MS. HART: The magistrate would tell the -- the
arrestee why he's being held, provided the arrestee is
present for that particular procedure.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And how soon is he entitled to
appear before the magistrate?
MS. HART: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE STEVENS: How soon after his physical
arrest does he have a right to appear before the
magistrate?
MS. HART: My -- my recollection under
Washington's law would be -- 72 hours is the time for the
charge.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So for 72 hours, he could be
held incommunicado without knowing why he was arrested.
MS. HART: But -- but for that period, the
arresting officer would have had to -- during the 48-hour
period at the outset, that this Court discussed in
Riverside, the probable cause for the arrest would be
tested by a neutral magistrate.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You also said that you
thought this case is distinguishable on the legitimacy of
taping the conversation with the police officer on the
highway. Why -- why do you think this is distinguishable
from the Washington Intermediate Appellate Court decision
that the -- that the -- that Alford wanted to show to the
police officer?
MS. HART: Well, first of all, again, Justice
Ginsburg, the Privacy Act issue is not one that we have
raised before this Court. But -- but the reason that I
would suggest it is distinguishable is that in a
subsequent case considered by the Washington State Supreme
Court called State v. Clark, the court look at Flora, the
Intermediate Appellate Court case, and -- and termed it as
a case that said you do not have a private conversation
when it is open to passers-by. And in Flora, there was
another individual present at the scene and who was, in
fact, subsequently arrested for interfering with the
arrest in the Flora case. So there is, all I'm
suggesting, at least some grounds for distinguishing the
Flora case for that reason.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you know if there's been
any instruction in the State of Washington to police
following that Flora decision about taping -- about
arresting people for taping conversations with police
officers?
MS. HART: I do believe there has, Your Honor.
It's not a matter of record, however, in the -- against
arresting for that reason.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The flashing headlights which
was -- there was a citation. There was an arrest for the
tape recording and a citation for the flashing headlights.
Could there have been a -- an arrest for the flashing
headlights, or is that a lesser category of offense that's
not an arrestable offense?
MS. HART: Under Washington law, the flashing
headlights, the wig-wag lights, in and of themselves would
not be an arrestable offense. It would be a citable
offense. The impersonating offense involved in this case
would be arrestable, and the wig-wag headlights would play
a part in that, however.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But he was never -- never
charged with the impersonating an officer, only with the
flashing headlights. Is that right?
MS. HART: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: The -- the case, as far as I'm
thinking of it at the moment, comes down to everybody is
agreeing -- well, no. It's -- you go ahead because you
want to reserve that probably.
MS. HART: Thank you, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Comey.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES B. COMEY
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING THE PETITIONERS
MR. COMEY: Justice Stevens, and may it please
the Court:
The validity of a police action under the Fourth
Amendment turns upon an objective assessment of the facts
viewed through the prism --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Do the facts, on your view,
have to be known to the officer?
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is -- is there -- and correct
me if I'm wrong. In -- in cases in which we're inquiring
into probable cause for a warrantless search, we give the
government credit for any fact known to any officer, don't
we?
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why wouldn't we have the same
rule? Why shouldn't we have the same rule with respect to
facts known to any officer when one officer makes an
arrest?
MR. COMEY: I suspect, Your Honor, that the
Government would urge such a rule if it were at issue in
case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But it's not urging it here.
MR. COMEY: Well, I don't see it at -- at issue
in this case, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't think it is. I just
want to know where we're going.
MR. COMEY: That's -- that's correct, Your
Honor.
The -- the Government's position, as with the
State of Washington's position, is that the -- the
analysis is simply did the facts known to the officer,
viewed through the prism of an objectively reasonable
officer, establish probable cause. And that to make an
evaluation of the arrest turn upon the officer's
subjective assessment of those facts -- in other words,
the working of his brain, the crunching of those facts
that results in the spitting out of a legal conclusion --
is contrary to this Court's precedent and guts the
objective reasonable test, and would make, instead, the
validity of a Fourth Amendment action turn upon whether
the officer is particularly smart, whether he's new,
whether he's nervous, whether he says nothing at all or
whether he decides to say, you're under arrest for
everything listed in the Washington code book. Under
those circumstances, the results would be different.
The -- the concern that Your Honor raised about
police officers engaging in a post hoc rationalization I
respectfully suggest is not a concern that is rooted in
reality because the facts continue to drive the analysis.
Whether or not a police officer is right at the arrest
scene in invoking a particular statute, if that turns out
to be incorrect, it is still the facts that were known to
him that must support probable cause for some other
offense.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So far as you know, there --
there are no empirical studies looking into this
particular horrible?
MR. COMEY: No, I'm not aware of any, Your
Honor.
I also suggest that if this were the concern
that the Ninth Circuit were looking to address by the
closely related offense doctrine, the remedy sweeps far
too broadly in both directions. It punishes officers who
at the scene engage in remarkable good faith conduct. I
mean, these two police officers I think are what the
public would hope these police officers were, looking at a
code book at the roadside, calling a prosecutor late at
night, trying to get it right. They are punished under
this doctrine.
Those that are rewarded are those who are smart
enough, perhaps a veteran, perhaps someone who has read
the Ninth Circuit's cases, to stay completely silent, to
say nothing at all, knowing that he's going to be fine.
He needs to engage in no --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Mr. Comey, I think you rely,
in part at least, on this Court's case in Whren --
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- for the result for which
you argue. But in Whren, the stated reason for the stop,
traffic enforcement, was lawful, and we didn't have to
look any further. In this case, the stated reason I think
we assume, at least according to the trial judge's
instruction to the jury, was unlawful. Does that impair
the reliance on Whren?
MR. COMEY: I don't believe it does, Your Honor.
I believe that what Whren teaches is that the subjective
working of the police officer's mind, his motives, his
intentions, his legal assessments, as in other cases, his
legal assessment with respect to the extent of a consent
to search, or the reason he's boarding a boat, is
irrelevant, that that's for courts to do. What matters is
what came into an officer's brain, not what came out as a
result of his working on it. Because, as I said, that
would make law enforcement far from unevenhanded. It
would make it depend upon who the officer was at the
roadside on any given night. And those similarly situated
would be treated very, very differently, depending upon
what an officer chose to say. And as I said, silence in a
-- in a jurisdiction that's governed by the closely
related offense doctrine is the best course.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if -- if we had gone the
other way in Whren, we would still have the problem that
we have in this case, wouldn't we? Regardless of -- of
how an arrest would be justified, the issue here is are
the grounds of justification limited to the reason and in
most cases the stated reason for the arrest. So we'd have
this problem even if Whren had -- had come out otherwise,
wouldn't we?
MR. COMEY: I think we would still be discussing
whether the subjective functioning of an officer's mind is
relevant for Fourth Amendment purposes, which turns upon
whether the action was reasonable in the case of an
arrest --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the question here is the
scope of the Fourth Amendment inquiry. Can it take in
probable cause for reasons other than the reason for the
arrest or the stated reason for the arrest? Can it
consider other offenses, and we'd have that regardless of
-- of Whren, wouldn't we?
MR. COMEY: I think we would, Your Honor, to the
extent that Whren is about motives and this case is about
something very closely related, still the inner working of
an officer's mind, what legal conclusion he draws from
facts.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why is it subjective? I
mean, in -- in Whren, the question was finding a hidden
motive as distinguished from the motive that was written
out. Here, there's nothing subjective about what the
officer charged this person with on the spot. He told
him. There wasn't anything hidden in his mind. He said,
I'm arresting you for X reason, for tape recording. And
then they had a whole colloquy. So what the -- what the
arrest was for is as objective as it can be.
MR. COMEY: I would suggest, Your Honor, that
his speaking, his invocation of a particular code section
is an objective manifestation of an essentially subjective
process. And that's illustrated by imagining three stops
on that road that night, three Mr. Alfords, exact same
facts. In one, the officer is engaged in the process that
he engaged in here. In the other two, the officer chooses
in the first to say nothing, and in the third, to say --
hold up the code book and say what you did is in here.
Everything in here applies to you, wise guy. Now get in
the car.
In those two other circumstances, complete
silence and the table of contents approach, we wouldn't be
here. These officers would not have been in litigation
for 4 years. That to me demonstrates that it is
essentially subjective because it is driven not by the
facts, what the defendant did, but by the nature of the
police officer. Is he clever? Has he gone to law school
at night?
JUSTICE STEVENS: But, of course, even in those
examples, there could be a difference in what the police
officer had actually observed. He might not have seen the
safety sticker or the taillight or whatever it is. So you
do have some inquiry into the mental processes of the
officer in every case.
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor. And -- and if --
perhaps my distinction is -- is too homely, but I would
say that's about what comes into his mind, into the brain,
his senses. Did he see this taillight? Did he see the
sticker? Not what comes out of his mouth as a result of
the functioning of that brain, his legal brain. The legal
work is for the courts looking at an arrest that's been
challenged through the prism of an objectively reasonable
officer. It does not depend, else Fourth Amendment
seizures would be not reasonable, but would vary depending
upon the skills of an individual officer from roadside to
roadside. And that is utterly inconsistent with this
Court's precedent and would, in fact, gut the objective
reasonableness test.
The Ninth Circuit's rule would lead to
dramatically uneven law enforcement. It would, indeed,
lead to either stacking or silence, and there's plenty of
good reason why an officer or a Federal agent, who are not
required to say anything at arrest, might want to inform a
defendant of a basis for his arrest and might want to
uphold other bases for an arrest, to protect a witness,
for example. To drive police officers to the extremes is
not in the public interest.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You -- you predicted that
this would be in practice very bad. There are some
jurisdictions that have the closely related test, are
there not?
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor. The Ninth Circuit.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the -- outside the Ninth
Circuit.
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor. I believe the
Seventh Circuit as well and the First Circuit.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do we know whether these
horribles have occurred there, that the police are booking
for everything?
MR. COMEY: I do not, Your Honor. I -- I know
with Federal agents, Federal agents say nothing. They're
required to say nothing. They simply bring a defendant in
on a warrantless arrest, cuff him, leave him in the
cellblock, and then the assistant U.S. attorneys take the
matter before a magistrate.
So there is -- and that's one of the things that
demonstrates the unworkability of this test because there
are plenty of jurisdictions, thousands of Federal agents,
who are under no obligation to say anything. And so it's
hard to see how this test, even to the extent there were a
concern about the evil or perceived evil of post hoc
rationalization, which I suggest there isn't, this -- how
this test would be applied --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In -- in the Federal system,
is the arrest based on what the officer knew and -- and
see -- and saw at the time?
MR. COMEY: Yes, Your Honor. His perceptions,
the -- the facts known to the arresting officers.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose he had asked for a gun
permit and he sees the gun permit, and he said, well, it's
-- that's okay. You've got the permit, but I'm going to
arrest you for reckless driving. Then he finds out the
driving charge is no good. It can't stand. But then they
look at his wallet more carefully and they see the permit
is expired. What -- what rule then? At the police
station, they -- they see the permit is expired. In other
words, they find out a fact after -- after they arrested
him.
MR. COMEY: Well, I -- I would suspect that any
statements made or seizures made pursuant to the arrest,
which was made on facts known to the officers, that did
not include what was in his wallet would be in jeopardy.
That -- you still might be able to prosecute him, but
you'd have to work awful hard to save anything you got as
a result of that arrest.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you would confine the rule
to what the officer has seen at the time of the arrest.
MR. COMEY: Facts known to the officers,
including facts known to officers with whom he or she is
working.
Thank you, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Comey.
Mr. Phillips.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF R. STUART PHILLIPS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. PHILLIPS: Justice Stevens, may it please
the Court:
In essence, the closely related offense doctrine
enforces the reasonableness clause by precluding officers
from arresting someone for non-criminal conduct. At its
core, that's what this is about. Mr. Alford was arrested
for conduct that was not --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, I thought at its core
it was about this rule that the Ninth Circuit adopted
about closely related offenses. I thought at its core
that's what we were concerned with.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, the closely
related offense doctrine itself is -- it's in five
circuits -- six depending on how you count the cases. But
it's designed to -- to look at two things: number one,
whether the arrest itself is reasonable; and number two,
from a qualified immunity standpoint, whether --
essentially it's a no harm/no foul rule. If the conduct
for which the person was arrested is criminal, but the
officer merely has a mistake in terminology -- he calls it
driving while license suspended instead of reckless
driving -- then it actually salvages the arrest for law
enforcement.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, what if the arresting
officer just doesn't give a reason for the arrest, just
makes the arrest, and it turns out, at the end of the day,
that indeed there were objective facts that would have
justified an arrest. It wasn't what the officer had in
mind but he didn't say anything. What result then?
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor, that -- that
implicates several other rights. Number one, it is --
while an officer could, in some jurisdictions, effectuate
a warrantless arrest without stating a basis therefor --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, could -- could an
arrest made under the circumstances I described be valid?
MR. PHILLIPS: I hate to say this, Your Honor,
but it depends because at some point, for example, when
the person is brought before the magistrate for the
probable cause determination, they're not operating in a
vacuum. There will have to be --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: No. At that time, there
does. But we're talking about at the time of arrest. And
it -- it just -- if the closely related offense doctrine
has the effect of punishing an officer for explaining to
the suspect a reason for the arrest, why is that a good
doctrine? I mean, if the officer could say nothing and
could end up, at the end of the day, having a valid
arrest, I just think the closely related doctrine doesn't
serve a very good purpose.
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor, the -- in this case,
of course, that's -- that's not the -- that's not this
case because the officer was very clear. He said exactly
what it was for, and then he -- when he booked him,
Officer Haner even booked him for illegal recording. So
in this case, we're -- we're not presented with a vacuum.
But even in an instance where the officer did
not state at the instant of the arrest why he was
arresting the person, one of the benefits of this doctrine
is that it would allow for an objective review of the
facts in order to determine --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, if the objective review
shows that there were, indeed, facts that would have
justified an arrest, then what's wrong with allowing that
to proceed?
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor, the -- the danger of
that is that allowing this, as -- as I termed it, a
general right of arrest with -- with no articulated basis
at any point up until charging runs contrary to some of
the basic principles --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Okay. What's -- what's
happening here is in order to avoid the down side of your
test -- as Justice O'Connor puts it, her point is that if
we adopt your rule, there's going to be an incentive not
to state the reason. Now, in order to avoid that -- you
haven't really squarely confronted it -- I think you're
suggesting that there has to be an additional rule that
the police officer must say why he's arrested, and -- and
the authorities just don't establish that. Now, if you
want us to go on and make up that rule, I suppose we could
make up that rule.
MR. PHILLIPS: I'll be very happy if you --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I'm -- I'm sure you'd be
delighted. But that's not the case we're confronted with.
And if the choice is between making up a new rule to make
your test work or rejecting your test, it seems to me that
the -- that the latter might be the preferred course.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, to sort of
piggyback on what Justice Souter and what Justice Ginsburg
had commented on, there's no empirical evidence to suggest
that there is or would be a movement by police officers
towards silence. There is simply nothing out there that
says that police officers have in the past in the six
jurisdictions, the six circuits that use this. There's no
evidence that they have remained silent in an effort to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Must -- must be very stupid
police officers. I mean, it's -- it's just obvious what
-- what you have to do to make a valid arrest. If you say
nothing, any -- any basis that you could have had for the
arrest will -- will be used. Whereas, if you -- if you
mention something, you better be able to substantiate that
particular cause or a closely related crime. Police
officers aren't any dumber than the rest of us. I can't
believe that -- that that wouldn't be the -- the
consequence of -- of the rule you're asking us to adopt.
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: To put it this way, it seems to
me the burden should be on you to -- to tell us why a
police -- police officers are so stupid that they -- that
they go around and -- and continue to give reasons when
that's -- when that's going to make it more difficult for
them to sustain the arrest and subject them to -- to
personal liability.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, for the most part, Justice
Scalia, it does not come back to haunt the officers
because the vast majority of arrests are lawful. The vast
majority of officers have probable cause for the thing
that they arrest the person for, and they arrest him for
criminal conduct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if they're told in this
case that they're subject to 1983 liability out of their
own pockets if they get it wrong, then it seems to me they
would pursue the safe course and say nothing.
I mean, you did say at one point in your brief
that when a warrantless arrest is effected, the officer
must inform the arrestee of the officer's authority and
cause of arrest. But that's not true on the spot as a
matter of Washington law or constitutional law, is it?
MR. PHILLIPS: The issue of -- of the
constitutionality of that has never been ruled on by this
Court. There are --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you're not urging that
the Constitution requires the officer on the spot to state
the cause of the arrest, or are you?
MR. PHILLIPS: Personally, Your Honor, I think
that that would -- that would certainly comport more with
the common law that was extant at the time the
Constitution was --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, regardless if it --
whether it comports with the common law, I don't see why
the rule that you are urging, closely related, is going to
make a dime's worth of difference unless ultimately we
hold that there is an obligation to state the cause at the
time of the arrest.
MR. PHILLIPS: Because, Your Honor, even if the
-- even if the cause of the arrest is not stated at the
time of the arrest, the person must be booked for
something. There's a -- a report that's generated. In
this instance --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. The booking occurs after
arrest, and I thought what we were concerned with in this
case was the validity of the arrest, not the booking.
MR. PHILLIPS: Correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. Now, if -- if the -- if
the -- if it is the validity of arrest, which -- which is
in issue, I don't see why your rule is going to make any
difference in the long run unless we go the further step
and say, in order to make this work, i.e., enforce Fourth
Amendment values, at the time of the arrest the cause has
got to be stated. Am -- am I missing something?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, I would
analogize it to the -- the arrest rule. Whether someone
is or is not under arrest from a Fourth Amendment
standpoint is based on an objective test, and it is viewed
after the fact.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, based on an objective
test, we'll get absolutely nowhere. The person who is
arrested is not in a position to be making objective or
subjective assessments, by and large. He probably knows
what he's being arrested for because it's obvious, but
then we have cases like this, which are the only ones that
are going to be litigated, and he may not know.
The -- the fact still, it seems to me, is
obvious. If we go your way, we're going to have to go the
further step of requiring the cause to be stated. Isn't
that, as a matter of common sense, true?
MR. PHILLIPS: It would certainly make it
easier, but it's not necessary.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. I'll be candid with
you. I think it is necessary.
But the -- I guess the -- what I'm getting at in
all of this is you're asking us to take steps to solve a
problem, and I don't think you've demonstrated what the
problem is. We keep coming back, as we have several
times, to the lack of empirical studies. Have we got
something to worry about in -- in enforcing Fourth
Amendment values that we can only guard against if we go
your way?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, I would say
that the fact that there are six circuits that have
adopted this policy shows that this is -- that this is a
problem that occurs nationwide.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then what is the -- yes, but
what's the justification for doing it? What is the
practical problem that we are concerned with?
MR. PHILLIPS: The practical problem is that
people are being arrested for conduct that is, at its
base, not criminal.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But they should have been
arrested. I mean, so long as they should have been
arrested, who cares? In this case, I mean, it'll -- it'll
be ultimately be tried by a jury I -- I guess, but your --
your client pulls up behind another car with wig-wag
lights flashing, like a police car. Right? He has a
police scanner on the seat next to him. He has handcuffs.
He has tinted glass in front of the license plate -- of
his license plate, so it can't be -- can't be read. It
seems to me there was obvious probable cause to -- to
arrest this fellow for impersonating a police officer.
And I would have hoped he would have been arrested so he
wouldn't go around and -- and pull up behind another car.
What is the problem?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me he should have
been arrested, and the -- and the mere fact that the
police officer gave the wrong reason for arresting him
doesn't make me feel very bad about the arrest at all.
I'm glad he was arrested.
MR. PHILLIPS: I'm going to disagree on two
points. First, at the trial court, the State did not
argue that he could have been arrested for other crimes.
The jury was never instructed on the elements of these
supposed other crimes. And we pointed that out in the
appeal in the reply brief.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but did you object to the
instructions in the trial court?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Your Honor, because the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: One of the problems I have
with the case, very frankly, is that the jury has already
ruled against your client on the qualified immunity issue
carrying out instructions given by the judge that were not
objected to by your client.
MR. PHILLIPS: That's correct, Your Honor, but
the only instructions that were given regarding --
regarding what they needed to find to find a violation
were the Privacy Act instructions.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But whose fault is that?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, I think if the
State wanted them to -- qualified immunity is an
affirmative defense. If they wanted the State to find --
if they wanted the jury to find there was impersonation,
they should have requested an instruction on that because
impersonation in Washington requires more than simply
taking an action that creates an impression that you're an
officer. It also -- under first degree, there has to be
specific intent to defraud someone, and here the only
thing he did, he gave them a flashlight and helped them
jack up their car.
On the issue of the wig-wag headlights, the
transcript shows that the officer spent a minute or 2, by
his own estimation, on the scene behind Mr. Alford's car,
saw no wig-wag headlights.
And as for the scanner, the -- the transcript,
page 246 -- he admitted at trial it was actually a ham
radio, not a portable police scanner.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought that the reason
that the police went after your client after he left the
vehicle that was disabled was because the officers at that
point suspected that he might be impersonating a police
officer. That's what the people in the -- the disabled
vehicle told the officer. They said he had flashing
headlights. We thought he was a police officer. And --
and wasn't the original following of your client triggered
by the suspicion that he might be impersonating a police
officer?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, Your Honor, and that -- that
-- we have not argued that there was not suspicion
sufficient to -- to have a stop to do investigation.
However, under the Washington statute, there was not
evidence sufficient to show probable cause that there was
an actual crime --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Under Washington law, is it
lawful for your client to have headlights -- wig-wag
lights?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Your Honor. It is a traffic
violation. That is a non-arrestable offense, and that was
admitted at court and also here today.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Was your client ever found
guilty of any offense at all?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Your Honor. Even the traffic
infraction was dismissed by the judge.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it's unlawful to have wig-
wag lights, and I take it it's an arrestable offense to
impersonate a police officer.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, Your Honor, but that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So that would -- that would
certainly be probable cause to arrest just based on the
wig-wag, plus the fact he lied to the police in -- in
instructing them the button to push or didn't tell them
what button to push to make them go.
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Your Honor. The obstruction
charge also under Washington law -- under the case law
interpreting the statute, there has to not only be the --
the hindrance or obstruction. There has to be specific
intent, and there has to be obstruction in fact. And in
this case, both of the officers testified that they --
that he pushed every button they asked him to. He opened
the hood for them. He let them look at the -- the flasher
unit. He showed them the manual. They both say that they
saw this button that after the arrest they pushed -- one
of them pushed. However, there's obviously no obstruction
in fact if -- one of them actually said at trial that he
didn't ask him to push the button because he wanted to see
whether he would push it or not. So there's no -- again,
there's no facts to support a finding of probable cause
even on the obstruction because the officers were
essentially just letting him hang himself.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that -- that isn't the
issue before us here. I -- I assume that for purposes of
the question on which we granted certiorari, we have to
assume, or else the whole thing doesn't make any sense and
it's all -- it's all arguing about nothing -- we have to
assume that there was probable cause on some other ground
than the ground which he stated or anything closely
related to the ground which -- which the officer stated.
Isn't that -- isn't that the -- the manner in which this
case gets to us?
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor, we raised the issue
at the Ninth Circuit that there had been no evidence put
forward on the other crimes. And we pointed out that even
the deputy prosecuting attorney -- and in fact, even in
closing argument, when they addressed the -- the wig-wag
headlights, et cetera, they stated specifically that that
information went to what they called his intent to
unlawfully record.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But -- but that's not the
ground on which the Ninth Circuit decided it. The Ninth
Circuit never had to reach the question of whether there
was probable cause on these other grounds --
MR. PHILLIPS: Correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- because it found, even if
there was these other grounds, they're not closely related
to the illegal taping.
So I suppose you're telling us that if we find
that we do not like the closely related rule, that it's
not part of -- of United States constitutional law, what
we should do is remand to the Ninth Circuit so that they
could determine whether there was probable cause on the
other grounds.
MR. PHILLIPS: That's exactly right, Your Honor.
And in -- in looking at this -- this probable
cause determination and the reasonableness requirement of
the Fourth Amendment, the qualified immunity, of course,
was a doctrine that was advanced by the Court to address
specific problems. None of those problems are impacted in
any way by the closely related offense, this subset of
qualified immunity cases.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask one other question
about the proceedings in the trial court?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Was there a motion for summary
judgment by the defendants claiming, as a matter of law,
they should be entitled to qualified --
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And that was overruled.
MR. PHILLIPS: That was denied, yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And then there was a jury
trial and the jury disagreed with it and, in effect, said
there -- there was basis for qualified immunity.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. Yes, Justice Stevens. And
the -- in reviewing the transcript and in reviewing the --
the instructions and the ruling on the summary judgment
motion, the reason that Senior Judge Bryan did not rule on
the qualified immunity was twofold.
One, at the time of the summary judgment motion,
one of the officers was -- well, was lying about having
contacted the prosecutor prior to making the arrest, and
he noted in his order that there was a factual dispute.
So summary judgment wasn't appropriate.
And second, Judge Bryan indicated that
essentially there was a problem created by the Saucier
opinion because he felt that it was somehow possible that
there could have been an arrest effectuated without
probable cause, but that there was a reasonable mistake on
the part of the officers. So this did not proceed to the
jury on the -- on this closely related offense doctrine.
It didn't proceed on there were these other crimes for
which probable cause existed, but on this broad standard
of good faith and reasonable mistake.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What is your understanding of
the reason for the jury's verdict on this issue?
MR. PHILLIPS: I almost hate to say it, Your
Honor, but I believe it was a lack of sympathy. That --
that is my -- much like with Justice Scalia, I believe
they -- they looked at the -- the circumstances and even
though there was not probable cause to have arrested him,
they came to the conclusion we don't like Mr. Alford.
We're not going to find for him.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask one other question
then too?
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not my reason. I don't
even know the man. I'm just --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE STEVENS: In -- in your view is the
closely related doctrine a -- a matter of closely related
as a matter of law between two different offenses or is it
a matter of -- are the facts relevant? For example, could
one argue that these offenses were factually related
pretty closely because they grew out of the same central
group of facts?
MR. PHILLIPS: In our brief, Your Honor, I often
used the phrase same conduct test because in amalgamating
the six different circuits, that appeared to be the most
consistent test and the one that's most consistent with
the objective standard and with the reasonableness
standard, that if -- and I, again, go to the no harm/no
foul. If you're engaging in conduct that would have and
should have led to your arrest, if it's the same conduct
for which you were arrested and it's simply misnamed, then
there essentially is no harm of constitutional magnitude.
But otherwise --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, then you have a very
narrow view of closely related. It comes down to misnomer
cases. It's one thing to say -- what the officers told
the DA, although after they arrested him -- didn't they
describe the whole episode from when they saw Alford pull
up behind the disabled vehicle? They described that and
they mentioned the flashing lights. They described the
whole episode up till the point where they -- the officers
apprehended him and saw the equipment and then noticed --
they told the DA everything, and he said, yes, you have
probable cause.
MR. PHILLIPS: They did describe the entire
episode to him, Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So why couldn't it be related
in time and space rather than legally related?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, I'm not urging something as
narrow as -- as a semi-Blockburger test. But here you
have essentially two discrete conducts that were being
examined by the officers: number one, the actions
surrounding the headlights; and number two, the actions
surrounding the taping. And the trial -- I mean, it was
very clear that the two were treated as discrete incidents
by the police. At the moment Devenpeck saw the tape
recorder -- and he testified at trial. When I saw the
recorder in the record mode and saw that it was moving,
that's what he stated to him constituted probable cause
for the arrest. The moment he saw that tape recorder and
saw the play and record buttons were pushed, he informed
Mr. Alford, you're under arrest for making an illegal tape
recording.
So when looking at whether something is -- is
sufficiently related or not, obviously there's going to
have to be more than a modicum of logic that's used, but
objectively this separates rather nicely into two discrete
incidents for the analysis.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why -- why is it exactly that a
policeman who comes on a difficult scene, gun in one
pocket, the guy has a knife in another, and he throws a
punch? Now, the policeman might make a mistake about
that. He -- he thought he threw a punch, but he made a
mistake. Now -- now, why is a policeman less likely to
make that kind of a mistake than make a mistake about what
crime to label it?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, we're not
concerned so much -- this doctrine is not concerned so
much with what to label the crime.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no. You said -- you -- you
say everybody agrees in this case that if the policeman
had reasonable cause objectively to arrest the person for
A, but he arrested him for B instead, there are some
circumstances in which that's okay. And on their view,
it's -- as long as -- it was always okay, really, as long
as objectively there was reasonable cause. On your view,
you're going to add a little thing. You're going to add,
and by the way, it's not okay unless that conduct that he
looked at was in fact illegal. So you say -- because
policemen could make mistakes about labels, but they're
not likely to make mistakes about throwing a punch. So I
just wondered why not. I mean, they got the wrong guy for
throwing the punch. You know, so -- so what? Why is that
so -- that -- that supposedly in your view is some
terrible constitutional harm, but if he just mislabels it,
it's not a terrible constitutional harm. And I'm just
puzzled as to where that distinction comes from and why.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, the distinction
in -- in this particular case and the distinctions in the
-- in the cases that run the gamut around the circuits
generally show one thing that we --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that the circuits all agree
with you. Now, my only problem is it's hard for me to see
why they all agree with you.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: And -- and that's where I'm
sort of stuck.
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor, if we start with
first principles, and the first principle that underlies
this case is there is, from the framing area -- era, a
general mistrust of warrantless arrests. From that, we
step to the reasonableness clause. From the
reasonableness clause, we then step to this judicially
created qualified immunity, which subsumed the good faith
analysis. So what we find is we're stepping further and
further away from the original principle.
And the -- on the original principles, he was
arrested without a warrant. Wrong. Under the
Constitution we have reasonableness. Okay. He's
arrested. Was it a reasonable arrest? The court has said
we generally say that if an arrest has probable cause,
then it's reasonable unless there are these exigent
circumstances, excessive force, et cetera. Then under
qualified immunity, it's even a step more attenuated, that
even though there might not have been probable cause, if
there was arguable probable cause, then there would be a
violation, but no one is going to be liable for it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but Mr. Phillips, let me
go back first principles. You are complaining about an
arrest which you admit was valid. Do you not -- do -- do
you not that the arrest was supported by probable cause
and therefore was a valid arrest?
MR. PHILLIPS: In this instance, Your Honor?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. PHILLIPS: Certainly not.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Oh, I misunderstood. I
thought we were just talking about qualified immunity.
But you challenge the arrest itself even though
you admit there was probable cause for the arrest?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Your Honor, because we don't
feel that there was probable cause for the arrest.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't that challenge that
here, though. I asked you that question earlier, and I
thought you agreed that for purposes of our deciding this
case, we -- we will assume, though you do not concede the
point, that there was probable cause on one of the other
grounds.
MR. PHILLIPS: That in order to address the
Ninth Circuit's holding --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly, exactly.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And -- and there's no need for
the Ninth Circuit's rule unless there was probable cause
because if there was no probable cause, you win on that
ground. You don't have to get into this closely related
offense doctrine. Is that correct?
MR. PHILLIPS: If there was probable cause --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No. If there was no probable
cause.
MR. PHILLIPS: Oh, correct. If there was no
probable cause for --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then you win without this
fancy doctrine.
MR. PHILLIPS: That's -- that is correct, Your
Honor, and that was --
JUSTICE STEVENS: This -- this doctrine only
comes into play and is only required in cases involving a
valid arrest and a -- a mistake by the officer in
identifying the wrong cause for the arrest. So it's an
extension of the qualified -- it's a -- it's a -- an
application of the qualified immunity doctrine to say you
are not protected even though you acted lawfully.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, because it actually -- to
turn it back around, you're not protected because you did
not act lawfully. You did not act lawfully because --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, but if you say the arrest
was valid, he did act lawfully although we didn't realize
the reason why he did.
MR. PHILLIPS: Your Honor, the cases that have
examined this doctrine have -- have looked at it as sort
of straddling the Fourth Amendment and the qualified
immunity analysis.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But -- but don't you reconcile
the -- the problem of the straddle by saying that unless
the probable cause, which we will assume existed, is for a
closely related offense, the whole arrest was invalid?
Isn't that your position?
MR. PHILLIPS: Correct. Unreasonable.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
Now, let me ask you -- you one other question.
You -- you started out in getting down to first principles
with disfavor of warrantless arrests. Would your position
be different if the officer had somehow gotten an arrest
warrant on the spot for illegal taping? Wouldn't you be
making the same argument?
MR. PHILLIPS: Certainly, Your Honor, and there
we would --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So it has nothing to do,
essentially, with warrantless or nonwarrantless arrests.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, in this case it does, but
had there been a warrant --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, in this -- yes, but on
your theory, that is -- that is incidental. That is not
essential. If he had had an arrest warrant for illegal
taping, you'd be making the same argument.
MR. PHILLIPS: That there was no probable cause
for the arrest.
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's -- that's right.
MR. PHILLIPS: Correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. PHILLIPS: And I think that that -- of
course, that -- as we point out in our brief, there's
support for that, that historically the warrant must show
the reason that someone is being arrested. So as we
pointed out, there's this -- an odd --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, you don't have any case
law to cite to us for that. That gets us into a whole new
doctrine.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Your Honor, I think one of
the most fundamental principles that we can look at on
showing the reason why you're being arrested is the great
writ of habeas corpus where, in order to hold someone,
they must show why he is being held.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you've already conceded
that it -- Washington law doesn't require the officer on
the spot to say why he's making the arrest and that
there's no decision of this Court or any court that I know
that said the Constitution requires the officer on the
spot to give a reason.
MR. PHILLIPS: That's correct, Your Honor. So
what we have posited and what the Ninth Circuit -- what
they did in the Gasho case, for example, is after the fact
you can look at the actions that were taken by the
officers, the booking sheet, et cetera, to give you some
objectively verifiable evidence of the cause for the
arrest. And really what it's looking at is there needs to
be a nexus between conduct and arrest, and --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Phillips.
Ms. Hart, you have 5 -- 5 minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MAUREEN A. HART
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MS. HART: I think I'd only like to make one
point, Your Honors, and that is that the Fourth Amendment
does not make the validity of arrest a game that the
government loses even when there's probable cause for
arrest, but the closely related offense doctrine does.
And for that reason, it should be rejected and we
respectfully ask the Court to reverse the decision of the
Ninth Circuit.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Ms. Hart.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 10:58 a.m., the case in the
