IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL :
REVENUE, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 03-892
JOHN W. BANKS, II; :
and :
COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL :
REVENUE, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 03-907
SIGITAS J. BANAITIS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 1, 2004
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DAVID B. SALMONS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the Petitioner.
PHILIP N. JONES, ESQ., Portland, Oregon; on behalf of
Respondent Banaitis.
JAMES R. CARTY, ESQ., Los Angeles, California; on behalf
of Respondent Banks.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DAVID B. SALMONS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner
PHILIP N. JONES, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondent Banaitis
JAMES R. CARTY, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondent Banks 44
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID B. SALMONS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 55
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
JUSTICE STEVENS: We'll hear argument in two
cases, the Commissioner of Revenue -- Internal Revenue
against Banks and the Commissioner against Banaitis.
Mr. Salmons.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID B. SALMONS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SALMONS: Thank you, Justice Stevens, and
may it please the Court:
Section 61(a) of the Internal Revenue Code
defines gross income to include all income from whatever
source derived. As this Court has held, that definition
is sweeping and represents an intent by Congress to exert
the full measure of its taxing power.
The court of appeals decisions below, by
excluding from respondent's gross income the portion of
litigation proceeds paid to their attorneys under
contingent fee agreements, is inconsistent with two
longstanding Federal tax law principles for defining gross
income.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Now, if -- if this didn't
involve the alternative minimum tax, would the amount be
deductible?
MR. SALMONS: 	 Your Honor, but for the
alternative minimum tax, there would be an -- a
miscellaneous itemized deduction --
MR. SALMONS: -- under section 212 of the
code --
MR. SALMONS: -- that would be subject to the
limit of the 2 percent of adjusted gross income that
applies to itemized deductions. But section
(b)(1)(A) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's of annual income.
Right? 2 percent of -- of the person's annual income?
MR. SALMONS: Of the adjusted gross income.
JUSTICE SCALIA: For the year.
MR. SALMONS: For the year. That's correct,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But, gee, in the case of a --
of a major award, that 2 percent is very likely to be
exceeded, isn't it?
MR. SALMONS: It -- it certainly may, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So this is a problem that's
going to exist even -- even after the alternate minimum
tax is abolished. Right?
(Laughter.)
MR. SALMONS: I'm not sure entirely what you're
referring to as the problem, but it is the case that --
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you don't think -- the
Government doesn't think it's a problem. I'm talking
about taking a huge percentage of the -- of the person's
recovery. That -- that will happen even -- even in the
case where there's no minimum tax -- alternative.
MR. SALMONS: That is correct. That -- that is
correct, Your Honor. Now, I mean -- and let me make two
points about that.
The first is that as a -- as a general matter,
the tax code defines gross income expansively, and there's
a number of this Court's cases that make that clear. Then
-- then the question becomes are there deductions provided
that allow for certain expenses to be deducted.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Don't some States such as
Oregon require a plaintiff to remit a portion of punitive
damages recovered to the State so they don't even go to
the taxpayer? But is the taxpayer saddled with that too?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, I would think the
answer to that question is no. It's not a question that I
have examined in depth in -- in this case because it's not
presented, but as a general matter --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, what about attorney's
fees in class actions? As I understand it, those are not
regarded by the Government as attributable all to the
taxpayer.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: A plaintiff who's part of a
class in a class action suit where attorney's fees are
paid.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, we believe that the
same principles would apply to class action lawsuits as to
other lawsuits in terms of the taxation of litigation
proceeds. It may very well be the case in a number of
class action contexts that when applying those principles,
the proper -- the proper analysis leads to the conclusion
that the taxpayer doesn't exert sufficient control and
that the payment of attorney's fees is not in response to
a debt owed by the taxpayer. And so there might be a
different result.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, I -- I thought we were
-- our attention was pointed to a number of instances
where the Internal Revenue Service did not require the
taxpayer to show all the attorney's fees as income in
those class action situations.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, that is correct.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes.
MR. SALMONS: I want to be clear. We think the
same principles apply across the board to defining gross
income. In applying that in a number of class action
contexts, the proper answer may be that it's not included
in gross income because there wasn't sufficient control
and because it wasn't paid in -- in lieu of a debt owed by
the taxpayer. But here --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why -- why isn't there as much
control in each case? I mean, the -- somebody goes to a
lawyer with a claim and says, press the claim for me,
recover if you can. What's the difference in -- in terms
of control? So that if you win this case, why doesn't it
apply to class action?
MR. SALMONS: Again, the principles would apply
and there may very well be class actions --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, and I -- I want to know
why the result would be different.
MR. SALMONS: Again, I'm -- I'm trying to be as
specific as I can. There may be situations in which, even
in the class action context, there's a fee agreement
between the -- the class member and the lawyer so that the
payment of attorney's fees is in satisfaction of a debt
owed by the class member, and in that situation we think
that it would be --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why -- why would -- why would
that analysis appear? Certainly there's -- there's not
going to be any fee paid in the -- in the paradigm example
of the class action without a recovery.
MR. SALMONS: That's correct, Your Honor. There
-- there are situations --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So we're in the -- so we're in
the situation we're in right now, aren't we?
MR. SALMONS: We are in the situation in which
there's a need to apply the general principles for
defining gross income.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. But let me just --
I'll just press the point one more time. I don't
understand, based on what you've said, why the class
action result would be different from the result that
you're arguing for here if you win this case.
MR. SALMONS: And -- and what I'm trying to
point out, Your Honor, is that there may very well be
class actions where it's not different. There may be some
when -- where it is if it's the case that there's no
contractual obligations to pay the fee -- pay the fee
between the class member and the attorney, and if it's the
case that the class member really exerts no meaningful
control over the -- over the attorney's fees portion --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought the class action
distinction that the commissioner had was between opt in
and opt out.
MR. SALMONS: That is certainly one of the
factors that -- that the commissioner has looked to in
those class --
JUSTICE BREYER: So if you opt in, then you did
exercise control. So all the money is yours. But if you
opt out, you didn't have control over the suit because you
didn't opt out. I mean, you just were lethargic.
MR. SALMONS: Again, those are all facts --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's the basic thing. I
mean, I'm trying to understand what the principle is for
the reason that it's pretty hard for me to reconcile the
commissioner's view in the class action case with the
punitive damage case because there the person has control
over the lawsuit. So why doesn't all the punitive damage,
attorney's fees that come out of that, and so forth belong
to -- in other words, it sounds to me, as I read this,
something of a mess, and I'd like to know what the clear
principle is.
MR. SALMONS: Yes, Your Honor. And -- and just
to be clear, I -- I don't think the commissioner has ever
taken the position that all class actions don't present
the -- the possibility of the attorney's fees portion of
the award being included in -- in the class member's gross
income.
Now, there are real enforcement issues, as a
practical matter, to trying to -- to trying to implement
that. You can imagine a number of class actions --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When you say the class
member, do you -- you mean the named representative. The
class may include thousands of people, but it would be
income to the named representative? Is that --
MR. SALMONS: Well, presumably, Your Honor, that
-- only the portion of the attorney's fees that would be
attributable to the -- the named representative's recovery
would be included in the named representative's gross
income. I don't think that the named representative would
be on the hook, if you will, for all of the attorney's
fees that would relate to other class members' recoveries.
But I think what all this points out is that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, then -- then would it
be -- would the income then go to each class -- would each
class member have a share of the income?
MR. SALMONS: In a number of instances, yes,
Your Honor. Again, the -- the way that we think that
class action cases should be resolved is the same way that
-- that these issues are approached in all cases, which is
to look at the type of relationship that exists between
the -- the client and the attorney to see whether the
payment is made in -- in response to a debt owed by the
client and also to look to the degree of control that the
client has over the -- the underlying source of income.
And in this context, it is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Suppose -- suppose the same
amount were paid, as was paid here, to the attorney, but
it was not by way of a contingent fee, that the -- the
client had committed to pay this dollar amount in a dollar
amount.
MR. SALMONS: As a flat fee?
JUSTICE SCALIA: As a flat fee. What -- what
would the tax treatment of that be?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, I think in fact it is
undisputed in -- in the -- in these cases that if the
payment of attorney's fees had either been under an hourly
rate arrangement or a flat fee arrangement, that the
entire amount of the litigation proceeds would be included
in the -- in the respondent's gross income and nothing
about the contingent fee arrangements here should --
should alter that result. The respondents --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, let -- let me ask you
about Professor Davenport's theory. He filed a -- an
amicus brief here saying that the contingency fee or the
attorney's fees should be capitalized as a transaction
cost increasing the basis of the property which was the
claim in the lawsuit.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, I'm trying to recall
that amicus brief. I believe that -- was that an
argument, I believe, about the application of section 83
of the tax code when you have a transaction --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes.
MR. SALMONS: -- in exchange for services and
you provide property?
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes.
MR. SALMONS: We think that the better way to
analyze this is that in fact there was no transfer of the
underlying cause of action, and so we think that -- that
we -- that gets into a very complicated area as to how you
value the attorney's fees at the time.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you -- you don't need a
transfer of the -- I don't understand what you mean --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: No, I don't either.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- a transfer of the -- the
cause of action. Certainly if you buy a piece of real
estate and -- and there's lawyer's business connected with
it, you -- you don't -- you don't take an ordinary
deduction which is subject to the alternative minimum tax
for those lawyer's fees. You just say that's part of the
transaction, and it goes onto the basis of your property.
Right?
MR. SALMONS: I believe that's correct, Your
Honor. But the point I was making --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why isn't -- why isn't that
very similar to this? I mean, what difference does it
make whether there's a -- there's a transaction here,
isn't there? Isn't there a transaction?
MR. SALMONS: Well, there is an agreement to pay
a fee for a service, and in that sense there is a
transaction, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but a -- the service is
connected to a transaction, namely the conversion of the
chosen action into a money payment. You have this --
MR. SALMONS: That -- that is correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- this unformed chosen action.
You're entitled to it, but there's a transaction
converting it into a money payment. Now, why shouldn't
you attribute to that transaction all -- which is
profitable to you, all of the costs that go along with the
transaction?
MR. SALMONS: Well, again, Your Honor, we think
that transaction is essentially identical to numerous
transactions that take place every day out in the real
world where -- where taxpayers retain professional
services in exchange for a commission or a percentage of
the income that's generated.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That is a problem that occurs
to me. I don't know where you draw the line. And you say
you can't draw a line.
MR. SALMONS: That is absolutely correct. I
don't see any basis for distinguishing between --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How does it work?
MR. SALMONS: -- the attorneys here and -- and a
-- and an agent negotiating a book contract for an author
or a financial analyst.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You -- on that, that example,
you gave the book contract with the author and you gave, I
think, the investor. Would this problem arise in those
cases or would the author get an above-the-line deduction?
MR. SALMONS: No, Your Honor. I believe that
the author in those -- in that situation would receive the
same deduction that prior to the enactment of section 703
of the American Jobs Creation Act where Congress just
addressed in part the -- the issue raised in these
cases --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So you say the author -- that
these people are all in the same --
MR. SALMONS: They would have an itemized --
excuse me -- a miscellaneous itemized deduction for the
cost incurred in -- in producing income that under the
alternative minimum tax would not be allowed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is there any argument -- you
-- you said at the outset that it has to be an itemized
deduction subject to the two percent rule even if we set
aside the alternative minimum tax. Is that conceded by
everyone, or does somebody -- do some people say this is
an ordinary and necessary expense? I know it's not your
business, but it seems to me an ordinary and necessary
expense to recover the -- the -- for employment
discrimination, which is really part of your work. I
don't know why -- is it -- does everybody agree that this
is subject to the 2 percent rule?
MR. SALMONS: I will -- I will have to allow
respondents to speak for themselves to that question, but
as far as I'm aware, that is not in dispute in these cases
or in any of the cases that have been litigated that --
that but -- that but for the alternative minimum tax, the
way this would have been handled is that there would have
been a miscellaneous itemized deduction under section 212
of the code for the cost incurred in producing income, and
that the alternative minimum tax, along with, by the way,
a large number of other perfectly valid deductions, get
disallowed under the alternative minimum tax.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I can't get out of my
mind in this case that the mechanics of the particular
case may control. I know we need a national rule and so
forth. My recollection is that in some States when there
is a settlement or a judgment paid under a case where
there's a contingency fee contract, the check is made out
both to the attorney and to the client and is put in the
attorney's client's trust account. So the client never
has control over it.
MR. SALMONS: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let's assume that that's true
in most of the States.
MR. SALMONS: That -- that -- I know that were
-- that was the facts, Your Honor, in the -- in the Banks
case, that there was a check made out to both. In fact --
in fact, there was --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So in a very real -- in -- in
a very real sense, in a -- in the legal sense, the client
just doesn't have control.
MR. SALMONS: Well, Your Honor, we disagree with
that for, it seems to me, at least three reasons. The
first is that at the time the client entered into the fee
agreement, he certainly had control then. He had complete
control over his cause of action. He was --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, he -- he did or he
didn't, but there was no money there. There was nothing
there.
MR. SALMONS: Well, there was an entitlement to
recover. Now, there might have been a dispute as to the
proper amount or whether that claim was valid, but he was
entitled to recover based on the injury he suffered that
was cognizable at law and that gave raise to a cause of
action.
Now, in exchange for legal services, he promised
to pay a portion of the recovery to the lawyer. That is a
promise to pay a fee. That is not an assignment or any
other transfer of the underlying cause of action. And it
is undisputed, I think --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Salmons, doesn't the
plausibility of your argument here rest on the assumption
that what the -- that the cause of action at the time the
-- that the plaintiff made the agreement with the lawyer
is a cause of action which has the same value as the
ultimate recovery that the lawyer gets? Whereas, in fact,
the cause of action at the time of the agreement with the
lawyer has an inchoate value. The -- the value that is
actually realized is going to depend in part on the -- on
the skill and -- and the -- the gumption of the lawyer.
So that the -- what I'm getting at -- and -- and
going to Justice Kennedy's question, it seems to me that
the value realized as opposed to the right to sue are two
different figures. And I don't see realistically how the
client has complete control over the value realized, which
we don't even know until the lawyer has done his work and
gotten the check.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, two responses to that
question, if I may. The first is that, as a matter of
law, it is the client that controls the cause of action
and throughout the time period, even after they -- they
enter into an -- a contingent fee agreement, it is the
client that owns and controls the cause of action and he
decides whether to settle. He decides whether to press
forward or withdraw the case. He decides whether to fire
the lawyer or not. He is a -- he controls the source of
the income. Therefore --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Even -- even the potential
lawyer's fee. I mean, suppose this client has a major
dental repair and he's got a risk-taking dentist, and he
says, dentist, I'm going to give you a deal. I know you
like to take risks. I may win big in my lawsuit, in which
case you get everything; and I may lose, in which case you
get nothing. The dentist says, fine, I'll take it. Can
the client in that agreement with his dentist give what
will be the lawyer's fee, the part that will go to the
lawyer under the contingency fee agreement?
MR. SALMONS: Well, presumably, Your Honor, if
he's already -- he's already promised that to the
attorney, he would be in violation of his agreement with
the attorney if he did so, and his attorney could sue him
to recover or the dentist could sue him to recover.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then he doesn't have -- then
he doesn't have dominion over that portion.
MR. SALMONS: Well, because he's -- he's given
it away. In that sense I think -- and -- and in answering
this, if I may just go back to one point that Justice
Souter made and that is that I don't think it's the case
that our analysis turns at all on how you value the claim,
either at the time of the fee agreement or afterwards.
Our analysis says at all relevant times, regardless of
whether the value changed or not, the client was at all
times in control of the underlying source of income, and
it's just as if in Helvering v. Horst the father assigns
the -- the bond coupon to his son, but he controls the
underlying source of income.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but the bond coupon has a
certain value at the time the father assigns it.
MR. SALMONS: That's true.
JUSTICE SOUTER: The only thing that has to be
realized after the assignment of the coupon is the passage
of time at which it will be payable. Here we do not have
a definite value. We don't know -- there's no way to know
for sure what that value will be until the lawsuit is over
with. The -- the two are not comparable.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, that would be equally
true of an assignment of a stock dividend while I retain
the stock. I may not know what the dividend payment is
going to be, but if I control the underlying source of
income, i.e., the stock, then the transfer to someone else
of the dividend doesn't alter the incident of tax, even if
it's unknown.
And I would point out that in Lucas v. Earl, the
husband and wife in that case entered into agreement to
assign to each other 50 percent of their income in 1901,
long before the income tax was even instituted, and the
tax years at issue in that case were 1920 and 1921. If
anything, it was much more speculative and uncertain what
income would have been earned 20 years later in that case,
and that did not stop the Court from --
JUSTICE BREYER: So you're -- you're --
MR. SALMONS: -- applying this principle that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I -- can I ask you a
question relating to the Davenport -- what's been referred
to as the Davenport theory? I had thought that -- that
the service has used the -- the transaction theory with
regard to legal fees payable for a lawsuit seeking
increased compensation for the condemnation of real estate
where the taxpayer had objected to the amount that the
condemning entity was offering and brought suit in court
and with a contingent fee to the lawyer and that the
service treated that as -- as part of the transaction
cost. Am I wrong about that?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, to my knowledge, the
-- the IRS has had a consistent position that the entire
amount of litigation proceeds, including the amount that
may be paid to a lawyer under a contingent fee agreement,
even in the condemnation context, is tax -- is included in
the gross income of -- of the taxpayer.
And I would point Your Honor to the case out of
the Federal Circuit, Baylin v. United States. That case
involved a condemnation action, and the court of appeals
in that case addressed the issue that's presented in these
cases and concluded that it was includable in gross
income.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Maybe my recollection is wrong.
I'll look again.
MR. SALMONS: And -- and I would point out, Your
Honor -- and this has to do, I think, with the impact of
the new legislation that's been pointed to in the
supplemental briefs -- that at least six of the court of
appeals cases addressing the issue presented in these
cases involved claims that would not be covered under the
new section 703 because they -- they don't involve claims
for unlawful discrimination or -- or FCA claims or certain
Medicare claims --
JUSTICE BREYER: But can -- can I ask you to go
back for a minute? I guess the IRS -- you're seeing the
lawsuit as the income-generating asset.
MR. SALMONS: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And you're looking at the
control of the plaintiff, for example, over the lawsuit as
something that determines whether it's his income. And
he, of course, can't give away his income. But on that
theory, to go back to Justice O'Connor's original
question, then the punitive damages also must be his
income because he has equal control over them and they
grow out of the income-producing asset. And that, of
course, is what's bothering me because it seems to me that
your theory, which is a well-established theory, coupled
with a Congress that seems to be willing to take away
deductions for expenses that lead to the income, could
produce an income tax that in many cases, not just a few,
exceeds the income that an individual has. And I would
like to know what in the law is there to guard against
that result.
MR. SALMONS: Well, Your Honor, I guess my
response to that is that, first --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Other -- other than the mercy
of the Internal Revenue Service.
(Laughter.)
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, the fact of the matter
is, is that Congress has looked at -- at this issue, and
in the new section that I just referred to, section 703 --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, but does that happen?
You haven't answered the question. Are there instances
where plaintiffs in lawsuits end up receiving tax bills,
as a result of this scheme, for more money than they
received in the lawsuit?
MR. SALMONS: That has occurred, Your Honor.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes.
MR. SALMONS: And -- and Congress responded to
concerns about that very result --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but doesn't -- doesn't
that indicate --
MR. SALMONS: -- in the new section.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- something basically flawed
about your whole theory?
MR. SALMONS: No, Your Honor. It is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: This is not income in any --
in any real sense.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any constitutional
protection? The Sixteenth Amendment refers to an income
tax, and perhaps that doesn't include a tax that grossly
exceeds in many cases a person's income. That would be
quite a far-out theory at the moment.
MR. SALMONS: I think it would be, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I -- that's why I ask you.
Is there any protection in the law whatsoever? Or if
Congress decides to tax a set of people who, let's see --
say, earn $10,000 a year and because they're small
business people, they happen to have $20,000 expenses. So
it taxes them on $20,000, and the tax exceeds the income.
There's no protection in your view against that result.
And you just said, well, Congress decided to do it, it
decided to do it.
MR. SALMONS: But we do think, Your Honor, that
the only limit on Congress' taxing authority would be the
Constitution, and I don't see a constitutional violation
in disallowing a deduction, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: What about an assumption, for
example, that when we read the code, we read it with a
view towards thinking Congress did not want to produce
such unfair results?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, if I may. The way I
would respond to that concern is that the proper way to
address it is not as the courts below did and as
respondents urge, to alter or distort the general
definition for gross income under the -- under the tax
code which may have broad ramifications in a number of
areas outside of this one, but to go to Congress, as in
fact people have done, and to get them to make -- make
additional deductions or otherwise alter the alternative
minimum tax, which generates the primary concern I think
at issue in these cases.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What happened in the cases --
MR. SALMONS: That's the proper way to handle
that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There were cases -- we don't
have to deal in hypotheticals. There were cases where
this happened, where people ended up liable for a tax
greater than what they took in. What happened in those
cases?
MR. SALMONS: They were -- they were liable for
a tax greater than what they took in. Those were pointed
to Congress --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean, there was one that
was $99,000, if I remember right.
MR. SALMONS: I believe that's correct. Those
were pointed out to Congress and that was part of what
motivated Congress --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was there a private bill?
MR. SALMONS: -- to enact section 703 to
protect --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Or what happened? What
actually happened in that case, do you know?
MR. SALMONS: I do not know, Your Honor. My --
my understanding is that the tax was assessed and I don't
know whether --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Salmons, I -- I -- you've
cited the -- the Baylin case to me and I -- I've looked at
the description of it in the brief, which I had recalled,
and what it says is that it did, indeed, involve a taking
by the State, and when the State didn't offer what Baylin
thought was -- was enough, he went to court, he prevailed,
and recovered a much larger sum than the State had offered
him. His legal fees were, by the IRS, subtracted from the
award, and he was taxed only upon the proceeds reduced by
the legal fees. Now, how do you explain that situation
there?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, if I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And how does that --
MR. SALMONS: -- misremembered that case, I
apologize. My -- my recollection was that -- was that the
court in that case had included the attorney's fees in
gross income. But -- but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I doubt -- I doubt whether
Professor Davenport has misdescribed the case in -- in his
brief, but I --
MR. SALMONS: But -- but again, Your Honor, if I
may. I think the -- the basic point to recall here is
that the definition of gross income cuts across the tax
code. If there are concerns about application, then the
proper result is to go to Congress, as has been done.
Congress has addressed the very concerns cited by
respondents and the amici in this case, and that
specifically is the -- the application on civil rights
plaintiffs.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Does the Fifth Amendment
Takings Clause apply to a Government tax scheme that taxes
something beyond the income received?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, it -- there may be --
there may be a takings issue at some point. Again, there
may be constitutional limitations.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, at the point where the
Government charges more than the taxpayer received --
MR. SALMONS: But I think, Your --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- in income?
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, I think when -- when
what you're talking about is how to define --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: I mean, this is an appalling
situation.
MR. SALMONS: Again, Your Honor, I -- I think as
a general matter, the -- the proper definition of gross
income would include the attorney's fees portion of
litigation awards. It's important to note that the when
Congress --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What -- what do you we make of
the fact that two Senators apparently don't agree with
that position? I mean, I -- I'm referring to the colloquy
that was quoted in -- in one of the -- the briefs about
the recent legislation, and the -- the substance of the
colloquy was we're not making any change in the law, we're
just clarifying it. Well, in fact, if there is no textual
difference for tax purposes between the law, so far as it
concerns these -- these so-called discrimination
recoveries and non-discrimination recoveries that have the
same problem that Justice O'Connor is talking about,
shouldn't we infer that at least the Senate of the United
States assumes that this does not get into gross?
MR. SALMONS: No, Your Honor. In fact, what I
would say is that the thing to focus on is what Congress
actually enacted and it makes clear that all the
litigation proceeds --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I'm -- I'm talking about the
colloquy. I'm talking about the colloquy.
MR. SALMONS: I -- I understand that, Your
Honor, and what I'm trying to answer is that the -- the
legislation itself makes clear that it's included in gross
income and an above-the-line deduction is provided, and
that the colloquy was referring to a prior version of the
bill that would have been retroactive in part. The new
bill is not retroactive, and we think it's clear that it
does work a change because from, among other reasons, it's
undisputed that if these fees had been paid on an hourly
fee basis, they would have been included in gross income
and -- and the alternative minimum tax would apply.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't really know who
prepared that colloquy anyway, do we?
MR. SALMONS: We do not.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It might have been prepared by
the respondents here.
MR. SALMONS: We do not.
(Laughter.)
MR. SALMONS: If I may reserve the remainder of
my time.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Jones.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PHILIP N. JONES
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT BANAITIS
MR. JONES: Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may
it please the Court:
My client and I are asking the Court to rule
that the assignment of income doctrine does not apply when
unrelated persons combine their resources to jointly
generate income. And we --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What -- so what -- what about
the talent scout who tells the celebrity that he'll take
percent of the celebrity's movie proceeds or the
management search person that's going to take a -- a third
of the executive's pay for the first 6 months? Where --
are all -- all these cases ones in which there -- there's
no income to the -- to the principal, we'll call them?
MR. JONES: You mentioned the -- the management
agent and the -- I think you mentioned the talent agent,
and there was also mentioned the literary agent. The --
the author is in the trade or business and gets to deduct
all this off the top. There's no problem there.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's the -- that's the
question I asked Mr. Salmons --
MR. JONES: Yes. The literary agent --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- and he gave me the
opposite answer.
MR. JONES: Yes. The literary agent is in a
trade or business. That's off the top. That's an
ordinary and necessary business deduction on Schedule C.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that isn't the question.
MR. JONES: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: The -- the problem is you're --
you're trying to get a theory in response to him that I
think Justice Kennedy is asking about.
MR. JONES: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that theory, which is the
problem for your side of the case -- that theory has all
kinds of implications. I go out and I help the painter
paint my office. We have a joint venture. I -- so
there's no problem. I don't take it in -- you know, I get
a -- this is great. And so that I think, if I'm right,
was the thrust of Justice Kennedy's question.
MR. JONES: Our first choice, our preference for
this Court to rule is -- is not the partnership or joint
venture theory. Our first choice is for this Court to
simply look at the application of the assignment of income
doctrine and ask it -- if it is being misapplied. The --
the petitioner has not cited to the Court a single,
solitary case in which unrelated persons combine their
resources to jointly produce income, and that is the rule
of law I'm suggesting to the Court today. That is apart
and separate from the partnership theory, that two
unrelated persons who join together to produce income --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's a partnership theory when
you talk about two persons joining together. I don't like
this -- this gold mine view of litigation, that it's, you
know, like two prospectors. You know, there's money to be
obtained.
(Laughter.)
MR. JONES: I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's -- that's not what I
view of a chosen action as. I view it as a legal right --
MR. JONES: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that the person is entitled
to money, and ultimately the amount he's entitled to is
determined by the litigation. And I'm not about to adopt
a -- a legal theory that -- that views this as a -- as a
search for buried treasure --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- in -- in which the -- the
lawyer and the person who has been wronged are -- are
simply co-prospectors. I -- I just think that that's --
MR. JONES: Well, the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Maybe that's how you view the
-- the enterprise --
MR. JONES: I would like to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- but I don't think the law
does.
MR. JONES: I would like to suggest to the Court
three avenues to reach this result that I have just
suggested and the partnership/joint venture theory is only
one of those.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, let's move on to
something else because I have a couple --
(Laughter.)
MR. JONES: Okay. I will move on to that, and I
will not mention that again.
(Laughter.)
MR. JONES: This Court created the assignment of
income doctrine. Congress did not create it. This Court
has every right and power to limit its -- its definition,
to limit its scope to keep it from being misapplied. In
every case cited by the petitioner, we have a -- a family
situation, related people making gifts to each other with
no commercial purpose. Apart from the partnership and
joint venture theory, if we simply say that this case is
dramatically outside of the scope of that doctrine, of
good doctrine that has been applied properly in an inter-
family situation, but when you have two unrelated persons
joining forces to produce income --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Would you have a different
result if they were related? Supposing the lawyer is a
cousin of the client.
MR. JONES: This Court has a long history of
recognizing --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Or a good friend.
MR. JONES: -- of recognizing sham transactions.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, it's not a sham
transaction. You just happen to be related.
MR. JONES: All right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And I'm just wondering if
that --
MR. JONES: I would like to focus on the
gratuitous nature of the cases relied upon by the
petitioner and the non-gratuitous aspects of our case.
Let's talk about a personal injury case where this problem
does not arise because there's no tax involved. This
relationship of a contingent fee is entered into thousands
of times every week by people injured in automobile
accidents. They are not entering into this contingent fee
agreement for tax purposes. They're not trying to avoid
tax -- taxes. The commissioner is confusing intent
with --
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. On -- on that
theory, that there is a non-tax economic purpose, do you
still maintain that your theory should have as an element
unrelated people?
MR. JONES: I --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why do we need the question of
the relationship, which Justice Stevens's questions
raised, even to arise if -- if the principal criterion is
going to be economic non-tax purpose?
MR. JONES: I agree completely. I was trying to
emphasize the -- the intrafamily gratuitous nature of
those cases, but I agree --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There was no avoidance motive
in the --
MR. JONES: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- granddaddy of all cases.
The assignment there, although it was between family
members, had been made before there was an income tax.
MR. JONES: But we must --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The income tax didn't exist.
There -- there couldn't conceivably have been an avoidance
motive. So -- so our holding could hardly be based upon
-- upon the existence of an avoidance motive.
MR. JONES: I'm asking the Court to skip over
motive and look at result. The Court in that case was
attacking a result because that arrangement stayed in
place after the income tax was -- was enacted. The
Solicitor General is confusing intent with result. In
every case, in every single case, without exception, this
doctrine has been applied to the result.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but what if you had the
same result but -- in terms of the sharing of the expense
and the recovery, but it was computed on an hourly basis
rather than a percentage basis? Would that produce a
different result?
MR. JONES: It would produce a different result.
The commissioner's case is based on could have's. They say
they could have tried the case himself. He couldn't. But
-- but the main thing he --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, but he could have made --
I'm saying he could have said to the lawyer, I'll pay you
-- a -- a third of the recovery or I'll pay you $100 an
hour.
MR. JONES: Well, he --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And they come out exactly the
same result, but you -- but do you treat them differently
or the same?
MR. JONES: We treat them differently simply
because he didn't. I practice law in a partnership. I'm
taxed accordingly. I could -- I could be -- set up my
arrangement different ways and the tax results would be
different. We must honor these relationships --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is different?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, may I ask one --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is different?
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask one other
hypothetical? Supposing that the agreement on the
contingency is postponed until the middle of the
preparation, not made at the outset, but along the line,
they say we'll figure out what a fair percentage will be,
and when the recovery comes in, they then decide, okay,
you take a third. What -- what result do you do in that
case?
MR. JONES: I -- I have difficulty with that
question.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But I'm sure it arises fairly
often.
MR. JONES: My -- I believe that attorneys don't
allow themselves to be placed in that position. They get
the contingent fee agreement signed when the -- the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I did very often.
MR. JONES: But I don't know the answer to your
question. I -- I don't know that.
But an -- we -- the Internal Revenue Code
respects people who enter into corporations, who enter
into joint ventures, who enter into sole proprietorships,
who hire employees or allow themselves to be hired by
others. Those relationships are all respected and honored
by the Internal Revenue Code, and the commissioner is
asking you to dishonor this relationship because Mr.
Banaitis could have handled the case himself or could --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think probably what's --
what's one of the problems here is that the reason this is
income is it relates to employment. And I don't see why
hiring the attorney to get that income is not an ordinary
and necessary business expense under what used to be
section 162. That may be part of the problem. Do you
agree that it's not an ordinary and necessary business
expense?
MR. JONES: I believe the problem is that a
plaintiff has -- I wish I could say this plaintiff is in
-- engaged in a trade or business and can deduct it or
trade or -- as a trade or business expense.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, I suppose that's the
reason -- that's the reason why it's taxable to begin
with, is it relates to employment. If I hire an attorney
because I'm wrongfully discharged and I get -- I get my
job back, it seems to me that's an ordinary and necessary
business expense. That -- that's why -- one of the
reasons I have problems with this.
MR. JONES: I understand. But one of the -- the
odd result here of a person having to pay more in taxes
than they recover -- this actually comes up under a fee
shifting statute that applies to the Internal Revenue
Service where a person could be in litigation with the
Internal Revenue Service, the Internal Revenue Service
becomes obligated to pay fees because they acted
unreasonably. They pay those fees, and then they
simultaneously hand the taxpayer a bill for taxes on those
fees.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, let me get -- get to a
different point. It -- it does seem to me that we -- we
have to be very careful in this case not to distort the
revenue law for other transactions that are not before the
Court. And the -- the natural extension of your
position is that anytime when the taxpayer enters into an
agreement with an agent to pay the agents an amount
contingent on the success of the venture, that it's not
income, that -- that the -- that the payment is not income
to the principal. And I just can't accept it.
MR. JONES: No. That is not my position. My
position is that the assignment of income doctrine does
not apply. Those relationships are all governed by
existing law and there is a large body of law dealing with
those cases and they can be found in a cite that is
offered by the petitioner at page 3 of his reply brief.
It talks about the literary agents. It talks about the --
the management agents.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But what's the difference in
principle. I don't understand the difference in principle
when we're talking about who has the income. It's the
first thing you ask in -- in a first-year -- in -- in your
-- in your first class in tax. Where is the income? Who
gets the income?
MR. JONES: I -- I am not trying to avoid your
question, but I'm trying to clarify that I am not asking
this Court to determine who has the income in those cases
because there is a large body of law and a large body of
statutory law that answers the questions for each of those
examples. All I'm suggesting is that we do not get to
those answers. We should not get to those answers through
the assignment of income doctrine.
JUSTICE BREYER: What's your third? I just
don't want you to miss your third. You have the joint
venture theory, an exception to an assignment in income,
and you said you had a third.
MR. JONES: The Oregon question, Your Honor,
which I don't think the Court is likely interested in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The who?
MR. JONES: The -- the Oregon question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Oregon question.
MR. JONES: The Oregon question. That is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is the Oregon question?
MR. JONES: The Oregon question is part IV of
our brief beginning on page 31 which would not be a
national uniform rule. But what we're asking this Court
to do is simply, as narrowly as possible, to limit the
assignment of income doctrine and do nothing more than
that.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, what do you make of
Professor Davenport's proposal to capitalize the
contingency fee as a transaction?
MR. JONES: I believe Professor Davenport is
completely correct. I support his theory wholeheartedly.
We didn't make that argument because we believe the
limitation on the assignment of income doctrine is the
real issue and we believe that is the narrower issue.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if you took a settlement
-- his theory, I take it, was seeing the lawsuit as a
capital asset. Is that right?
MR. JONES: Yes. Well, I -- I think so.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, then whenever you settled
a lawsuit, it would be -- you'd have to pay capital gains
instead of ordinary income.
MR. JONES: I -- I'm sorry. I think I misspoke.
I'm not sure that's his theory. I'm not certain, and
I'm --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sure it's not his theory.
He -- he thinks it's -- it's attached to transactions, and
-- and much of his argument is devoted to showing that
capital transactions are no different from other
transactions as far as the Internal Revenue Code's desire
to match the -- the gain with the expenses concerned. And
that's the part of his theory that I'm not so sure about
because aside from the -- aside from the condemnation case
that I mentioned, I -- I don't know of any other cases in
which the Internal Revenue Service has treated transaction
costs the way he would have it done. Maybe it makes
sense, but I --
MR. JONES: I would like to make one additional
point in the few seconds I have left. The -- the
Solicitor General is arguing that the language, the
statutory language, of the new statute implies a
particular result. This Court decided as early as 1940 in
the Higgins v. Smith case when the commissioner made the
exact same argument, and this Court said -- and I quote --
that does not follow. The statutory language says that to
the extent this income is -- this -- this money is
included in income, to the extent it is included in income
-- it doesn't say whether it is or not -- then a deduction
will be allowed. And that as neutral a statement as I can
think of. There is nothing in the statutory language that
implies one answer or the other.
But I emphasize to the Court that the -- the
commissioner is confusing intent with result when he
discusses the cases upon which he is relying. Those cases
reached a result and they corrected that result. We don't
have an abuse in this situation. And the assignment of
income doctrine should not be stretched beyond its bounds
by this Court. It should be limited to its historical
use. This is a misuse.
Thank you very much.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Jones.
Mr. Carty.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES R. CARTY
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT BANKS
MR. CARTY: Thank you, Justice Stevens.
Neither section 61(a) nor any other provision of
the Internal Revenue Code expressly requires that a
Federal civil rights litigant, such as Mr. Banks, include
in his gross income the portion of a litigation recovery
that was earned by, retained by, and already taxed to his
attorney as a contingent fee.
The commissioner's position in this case relies
exclusively on the misapplication of a judicial doctrine
known as the assignment of income doctrine. That doctrine
originated and developed as a judicial anti-abuse rule,
designed to prevent high-bracket taxpayers --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, it didn't.
MR. CARTY: I respectfully --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It -- it originated in a case
where there could not possibly have been an intent -- an
intent to abuse because the -- the transfer had occurred
before there was any income tax.
MR. CARTY: Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, just -- just don't --
maybe you think that that's what it ought to be, but --
but please don't tell us that that is how it originated.
It plainly did not originate that way.
MR. CARTY: Justice Scalia, I respectfully
disagree. It is true, as the commissioner and you point
out, that at the time of the agreement between the husband
and wife, the income tax was not in existence. However,
the agreement certainly was in existence after the income
tax was passed. So that could have been a reason why the
agreement was never rescinded.
In addition, in another landmark case from 1937,
Blair, this Court expressly looked to whether there was a
tax avoidance motive. And this is how this principle is
taught in first-year tax class. That's the whole purpose
behind this. As a matter of fact, the commissioner in a
-- in a different context actually looked to the fact,
with respect to a particular transaction, whether there
was a tax avoidance purpose.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a different argument.
I'm -- I'm just quarreling over whether it originated that
way. If you want to say --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Under -- under your view --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that's fine.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- suppose that the attorney
is -- is waiting for payment of -- of his, say, one-third
contingent fee, and the client just absconds with the money.
How is -- what -- what happens from a tax standpoint under
your theory? I take it the attorney has to declare the
income on his return and then declare a loss?
MR. CARTY: Well, certainly the attorney has a
legal right to those funds. He has a contractual right
and under most --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm asking you about the tax
consequences.
MR. CARTY: Well, at -- at that point the income
wouldn't have inured to the benefit of the attorney.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but I -- I thought under
your view the moment the client gets the check for the
full amount, one-third of it is taxable to the attorney.
And I have some problems, incidentally, with
respect to tax years if it -- if you -- if the client
receives the check December 30 and is on vacation and
doesn't get around to remitting to the attorney until
January 5th, I'm -- I'm not quite sure how your theory
works, but --
MR. CARTY: Justice Kennedy, I -- I think the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But on the absconding theory,
how -- how is it handled from a tax standpoint?
MR. CARTY: I believe that for tax purposes the
attorney's right to the funds -- that's at the moment he
receives it. So if he doesn't have the funds in hand, he
wouldn't be liable for Federal tax. It would be at the
point he either receives the funds --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Aren't -- aren't you --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This is an academic question
because he would have an offsetting theft loss.
MR. CARTY: I -- I think that is an alternative
way to -- to view it. There would be a --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If -- if you view it as the
theft loss, you -- you maintain your theory. If you
argue, as you were arguing a second ago, I think what, in
fact, you're doing is adopting the mere lien theory.
MR. CARTY: Justice Souter, I -- I --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I think you better go with
Justice Ginsburg.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Like somebody stealing a check
out of my mailbox from my employer. Right? Okay.
MR. CARTY: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: So what is your theory, I mean,
precisely? A, an assignment of income, what would
otherwise count of A giving an assignment of income to B,
and therefore still be A's income because the asset
remains with A, the work, or whatever. Now, your theory
is but not in the case that. Now fill in the blank for
MR. CARTY: Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: Precisely, please.
MR. CARTY: It would not be in the case that the
funds are not under the control of the attorney.
JUSTICE BREYER: Not in the case -- it is an
assignment of income to B, but not in the case where the
funds are not in -- when B -- when B get -- when B, the
attorney, gets the funds, he controls them. What's --
what do you mean? I don't get it.
MR. CARTY: I thought your hypothetical --
JUSTICE BREYER: I want to know. You have three
-- your problem on your side for me is that maybe all the
equities are there, but I'd like to know the proposition
of law that you want us to write in this opinion. And now
we had three theories, and one, the one that you seem to
be adopting, is this exception to the assignment of income
doctrine. If that is what you're adopting, I'd like to
know the precise form of words that create the exception.
If that's not the theory you're adopting, I would like to
know what the theory you're adopting is.
MR. CARTY: I would state, Your Honor, that the
assignment of income doctrine simply does not apply when
the -- the client has no control or power of disposition
over the income that was subject to the assignment. There
are at least five reasons why this type of contract --
JUSTICE BREYER: But he did have control. He
could have settled the lawsuit or not settled the lawsuit.
He controlled when the income was generated, and moreover,
he could have stopped it from being generated by settling the
suit or dismissing it. Moreover, if he had not entered
into this assignment of income, it would have been paid
right into his bank account at the end. It sounds an
awful lot like the Lucases or like the Horsts or whoever,
Old Colony Trust. It sounds an awful lot like those
cases.
MR. CARTY: Justice Breyer, I -- I think it's
helpful to make a conceptual distinction between the
claim, the underlying litigation claim, and the right to
receive the funds. Now, certainly Mr. Banks in this case
had a right to enter into settlement or not. He had a
right to fire his attorney. But once he assigned the
contingent fee portion of the recovery, he, as a practical
matter, had no ability, he had no control over that
portion of the recovery.
Another fundamental difference between --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That -- that would be the same
with the theater agent or the commission agent.
MR. CARTY: We submit, Justice Kennedy, that the
nature of the attorney-client relationship is
fundamentally different from the types of relationships
you cited, and that's because an attorney here is the one
who's earning the income. It's the attorney who is making
the critical decisions.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, you could say the same
thing for the talent scout.
MR. CARTY: I would respectfully disagree. I --
I think there's a -- there's a fundamental difference.
Presumably a -- a actor or an entertainer -- their --
their market value is -- already has some type of tangible
value. The -- the agent might --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Your client, in effect, earned
the money by having this -- undergo this -- this
discrimination. That -- that's --
MR. CARTY: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: This is not the plumber
hypothetical, which is I think quite misleading. No. No,
I don't think that even the Government will defend that.
MR. CARTY: Again, Your Honor, I think with
respect to an entertainer, an entertainer necessarily
doesn't need an agent. Neither does an athlete.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Take an investment advisor
and the client is not at all -- doesn't know anything
about the market, and he's got this whiz-bang advisor who
makes millions for him that he never could have made on
his own.
MR. CARTY: I -- I think that might be more
similar to the attorney-client relationship. But Mr.
Banks, unlike the athlete or unlike the entertainer, had
no -- no ability to -- to recover these funds himself. He
essentially had two options. He could have either done
nothing and collected nothing --
JUSTICE BREYER: Your -- your -- you want to
fill in the blank, in other words, and say where the
assignment of income is such, such that B was in effect
the person who really earned the income, unlike Mrs.
Lucas' -- what Mr. Lucas' or maybe Mr. Earl -- I don't
know --
MR. CARTY: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- husband -- the wife didn't
earn the income.
MR. CARTY: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: The husband did. So you want
to say where the -- and then your answer, I guess -- don't
say I'm right if I'm not right, please, because I'll just
find out later.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: The -- the answer to the
hypothetical about the agent and so forth is, well, so be
it. If a person wants to go to the trouble of carving out
some of his income and assigning that over to the agent,
let him. Except for perhaps provisions of the code which
we cannot now envisage -- I can't because I'm not an
expert -- it doesn't matter since, after all, it would be
deductible anyway. Is that -- is that what you're saying?
MR. CARTY: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: Tell me if I'm wrong, please,
on this.
MR. CARTY: Again, I -- what we're saying is the
unique situation of an attorney and a client, it is the
attorney who's taking the laboring, or unlike the
entertainer example where the -- where -- or the athlete
example --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, I see. You say double.
Both the income is earned by the attorney, and at that
stage the client does virtually nothing. So it's the
reverse of the Earls or the Lucases where the husband was
doing the work and the wife is getting the income. It
would be as if the wife was doing all the work and the
husband just sat there and clipped coupons or whatever.
MR. CARTY: That's correct, Your Honor, and in
Lucas v. Earl, it was the assignor who earned the income
that was subject to disposition. Here --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm not so sure about that
because why doesn't the theory that -- that applies to the
lawyer equally apply to the wife? I mean, she took care
of everything going on at home, and that enabled him to go
out there and make all that money. So without her
services, just like without the lawyer's services --
MR. CARTY: That is an excellent point, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You should agree with that.
You should --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Those were less enlightened
times.
MR. CARTY: Nevertheless -- nevertheless, I -- I
think there may be some -- some difference in degree that
you might even recognize between the two cases.
Another issue I'd like to address is the impact
of the fee shifting statutes, if I could get to that
quickly. It is a bedrock principle of taxation that
settlements of a claim are taxed the same as a judgment
would have been taxed. Mr. Banks' settlement was achieved
in lieu of his claims under title VII and 42 U.S.C.,
sections 1981 and 1983.
Now, each of these statutes contains a fee
shifting provision which enables a court to award
attorney's fees to a prevailing plaintiff. The defendant
in Mr. Banks' case, the California Department of Education
-- they therefore settled Mr. Banks' claim in lieu of
their exposure under these fee shifting statutes.
An award pursuant to these fee shifting statutes
is separate and distinct from a damages recovery and
therefore should not be taxable to a plaintiff. And the
Federal tax consequences to Mr. Banks, the litigant who
settles, shouldn't be any different as well. Otherwise,
this Court would be discouraging settlement. Therefore, a
judicial anti-abuse rule should not be misused to
undermine the statutory scheme devised by Congress to
encourage civil rights litigants to bring meritorious
claims and vindicate national policy.
Unless the Court has any further questions?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The Government says on that
branch of it, well, the fees -- the lodestar fee, that's
one thing. A court awards it, but that's quite different
from the one-third/one-half even contingent fee. The
court has control over the fee shifting, but we're not
dealing with any court award here.
MR. CARTY: That's correct, Justice Ginsburg.
Mr. Banks settled his claims. Yet, we are pressing the
point that Mr. Banks shouldn't be treated any differently
for tax purposes than a litigant who recovers pursuant to
a fee shifting statute. Otherwise, the Court would be
discouraging settlement.
If there's any other questions.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Carty.
MR. CARTY: Thank you.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Salmons, you have a little
over 2 minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID B. SALMONS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SALMONS: Thank you, Your Honor.
It is clear that the only thing that
respondents' attorneys earned under the fee agreements was
the right to be paid a fee for their services. In
petitioner's view, those agreements don't even give rise
to an assignment of income in the ordinary sense. If you
look at the text of the fee agreement in the Banaitis case
-- the Banks' fee agreement is not in the record -- among
other things, it makes clear that if there is a
termination -- and it provides lots of grounds on which
the attorney-client relationship can be terminated -- that
the attorney will be paid a reasonable fee, calculated at
the sum of $175 per hour. That doesn't sound like an
assignment of any income or even an assignment of the
underlying cause of action. Even if it did, it is clear
that in every assignment of income case, the assignor
loses control over that income that he assigned. That
doesn't stop the application of the proper tax principles,
however.
The -- the respondents in these cases suffered a
legally cognizable injury. They had a claim. That claim
entitled them to a recovery. They retained services to
pursued that claim. If they had paid their lawyers on an
hourly basis, those lawyers may have been just as
necessary to the actual outcome of the case as their
contingent fee attorneys. Both the -- an hourly fee
attorney and a contingent fee attorney in both of the
States at issue here -- and in fact, in all States of
which I'm aware -- received precisely the same attorney's
lien. That lien makes clear that the relationship between
attorney and client starts out as that between a master
and an agent and then is converted through the fee
agreement to that between a creditor and a debtor, and the
lien secures the debt and ensures its payment. When the
proceeds from the litigation are paid to the attorney, it
satisfies the respondent's debt and is therefore income to
the attorney. Under the separate and alternative ground
of this Court's Old Colony decision, it goes far and
beyond even the holding with regard to an assignment of
income.
To address just a couple of questions that came
up, I would point out that in the class action context,
again, as I indicated, there are a number of differences.
And just to be a little more specific about some of them,
generally speaking there's no unilateral right to settle a
-- a case by class members. There's no unilateral right
to dismiss the case, and there's no right to a determined
fee.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you, Mr. Salmons.
MR. SALMONS: Thank you.
JUSTICE STEVENS: The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:00 a.m., the case in the
