IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
MOISES SANCHEZ-LLAMAS, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 04-10566
OREGON; :
and :
MARIO A. BUSTILLO, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 05-51
GENE M. JOHNSON, DIRECTOR, :
VIRGINIA DEPARTMENT OF :
CORRECTIONS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 29, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
PETER GARTLAN, ESQ., Salem, Oregon; on behalf of the
Petitioner in No. 04-10566.
MARK T. STANCIL, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioner in No. 05-51.
MARY H. WILLIAMS, ESQ., Oregon Solicitor General,
Salem, Oregon; on behalf of the Respondent in No.
-10566.
WILLIAM E. THRO, ESQ., State Solicitor General,
Richmond, Virginia; on behalf of the Respondent in
No. 05-51.
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
PETER GARTLAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner in No. 04-10566
MARK T. STANCIL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner in No. 05-51
MARY H. WILLIAMS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent in No. 04-10566 42
WILLIAM E. THRO, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent in No. 05-51 55
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States,
as amicus curiae, supporting the Respondents 65
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MARK T. STANCIL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner in No. 05-51 81
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in two cases, Sanchez-Llamas v.
Oregon and Bustillo v. Johnson.
Mr. Gartlan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER GARTLAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER IN 04-10566
MR. GARTLAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case presents three questions. The
first is, does article 36 of the Vienna Convention on
Consular Relations confer rights to individuals such as
Mr. Sanchez-Llamas? The second is can Mr. Sanchez-
Llamas enforce the right in a State criminal
prosecution. And the third is can the right be
enforced by suppression.
The first issue is -- is a matter of treaty
interpretation, and the language of the article 36 is
-- is plain. It confers three rights. Article 36(1)
says that the consulate and the individual can have
free communication between them. Article 36(1)(b)
gives to the detainee, the foreign national detainee,
the right to have his consulate notified of his arrest
and the right to forward communication to the
consulate. And it also imposes a duty on the detaining
authorities to inform the foreign national under -- of
his rights under that section. And it's critical, or
at least important, and telling to -- to notice that
the detainee gets to control the communication. The
detainee initiates and controls the communication with
the consulate. It's not the consulate contacting the
detainee initially. It's the detainee authorizes the
contact.
The secondary sources -- we -- we believe the
text is plain, but if the Court resorts any
secondary sources, that too will confirm the plain
language of -- of the article.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I thought that the
argument on the other side is that those references in
the secondary sources and in the document itself are
meant to make clear that if the individual detainee
does not want contact with his consular officials, for
example, in a case where he might be seeking asylum or
something like that, that it was, as you said earlier,
his decision and not necessarily that there was to be a
departure from the norm in international -- the
international context where treaties are between the
sovereigns and don't confer enforceable rights on
individuals.
MR. GARTLAN: Well, Your Honor, actually the
article 36 is -- is unique and different in that the
revolutionary part of this is that the detainee did,
for the first time, have the authority to have the
consulate notified. Typically most of the notification
statutes, bilateral treaties, multilateral treaties
require mandatory notification, but this is an instance
where the detainee gets to control. The detainee
decides whether or not the consulate is going to be
contacted.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. So the --
that's what the different countries, the signatories,
are supposed to provide, and if they don't, that's a
matter to be taken up bilaterally between the countries
involved and not necessarily an individual enforceable
right.
MR. GARTLAN: Well, it -- it could work on
the international level as well. You know, a state
could complain to another state, but the question here
is whether or not this article, as domestic law in the
United States, confers a personal right to a foreign
national detainee because a treaty in the United
States, a self-executing treaty -- and everybody agrees
this is that -- works in two spheres, on two levels.
One level is the international level, but by -- through
--
the Supremacy Clause, the treaty is also domestic law.
And the question is whether as domestic law this
treaty confers personal rights to individuals because
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And at least you have the
authority of the International Court of Justice that
says this is a right. This is not just a matter
between the states.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor. Yes, Your
Honor. In two cases, the ICJ has held that this
article 36 does confer rights to individuals. There's
the LaGrand case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That court is not a common
law court, is it?
MR. GARTLAN: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And not being a common law
court, it's not bound by its own prior decisions, is
MR. GARTLAN: I don't believe so, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think its statute says
that it -- it decides the particular case and does not
set forth propositions of law that are binding in
future cases. If it's not bound by its prior cases, I
don't know why we should be.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How many times now has the
ICJ said that this convention confers rights on the
individual?
MR. GARTLAN: At least two, Your Honor,
LaGrand and Avena, and both involved criminal cases.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And what is the view of
our treaty partners on that issue?
MR. GARTLAN: Many of the treaty partners
view it as conferring a right, at least 11 tell an
arrestee of his rights under -- under the treaty and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But do any of our
treaty partners apply the exclusionary rule to
violations of this?
MR. GARTLAN: That's beginning to happen,
Your Honor. In Australia and Great Britain, there -- I
believe it has been --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not at the time this
treaty came into force.
MR. GARTLAN: Excuse me, Your Honor?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not at the time the Vienna
Convention came into force.
MR. GARTLAN: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We were almost alone in
having suppression as the remedy.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We didn't even have
it then, did we?
MR. GARTLAN: In 1969? Yes, we did, Your
Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And that -- that's
when the convention came into effect?
MR. GARTLAN: That -- that -- excuse me.
That's when the United States ratified the treaty,
69.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what remedies have
other countries provided for -- for these rights? I
mean, it's -- it's easy to say the right exists. What
-- what have other countries done by way of vindicating
these rights?
MR. GARTLAN: Typically I think the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, advising them of
them is -- is really not vindicating them, it doesn't
seem to me.
MR. GARTLAN: Typically it is a matter of
state to state complaints or apologies and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's -- but, you
know, that's what the other side said the whole thing
should consist of, that it's a matter to be enforced by
-- by state-to-state protests, not -- not by the
judicial system or the legal system taking it upon
itself to provide a remedy.
What -- what remedies have been provided in
-- in other countries? You -- you mentioned an
exclusion in Australia?
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: When -- when was that?
MR. GARTLAN: Offhand -- I believe it's
within the last couple years.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Was there a showing of
prejudice in that case or just automatic exclusion?
MR. GARTLAN: No, it's not automatic.
Typically in the commonwealth countries, a judge has a
lot of equitable authority to kind of balance some
interests and decide whether or not to exclude the --
the evidence. And I'm not saying that it's happened
worldwide, that it's pervasive practice, but in -- in
some sense, what other countries are doing in their
individual systems, it's nice to know but it's not all
that controlling because the question, again, is how
does this statute work as domestic law?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, is that -- that -- my
question was going to be are -- are you suggesting or
arguing that the remedy ought to be exclusion as a
matter of domestic law or as a necessary implication of
-- of the treaty?
MR. GARTLAN: It's a necessary implication or
it's an implication of the treaty, of section 2 of
article 36. But --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, what would you do in a
country that does not apply an exclusion remedy in --
in domestic cases given the provision, which I can't
quote correctly, but you'll know what it is, the -- the
provision that the treaty will -- will be administered
in accordance with or consistently with, I guess it is,
domestic law so long as full effect is given to its
substantive provisions? I would have thought that that
-- that that provision for administration in accordance
with domestic law would have a great bearing, if -- if
not being dispositive, on the remedy, so that if I were
answering the question I -- I had asked you, I -- I
would have said, well, it's probably a domestic law
basis for -- for exclusion, but not a treaty basis.
So why in those countries -- getting back to
-- to my -- why -- why in those countries that do not
customarily apply an exclusion remedy wouldn't it be
consistent with the treaty for them to decline to apply
it given the provision for administration consistently
with -- with domestic law?
MR. GARTLAN: It could be appropriate. The
treaty was prepared -- drafted full knowing that there
are various and myriad kinds of legal systems
--
throughout the world, and it wasn't intended to say,
here's the -- here's the remedy because typically under
international law, the remedy is -- is a domestic
remedy. And this -- this doesn't -- the treaty does
not say, thou shalt suppress.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if it doesn't
JUSTICE SOUTER: So if the treaty --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why don't you go
ahead?
JUSTICE SOUTER: The -- the treaty provision
then governs only in the sense that for remedy it
refers you to domestic law. Is that it?
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- so if the
treaty doesn't say suppress, what authority does a
Federal court have to direct a State court to exclude
evidence?
MR. GARTLAN: Through the Supremacy Clause,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Supremacy Clause
gives effect to the treaty. You just told me the
treaty doesn't require suppression.
MR. GARTLAN: Well, the treaty doesn't in --
in its text doesn't say, thou shalt suppress, but is --
it is a source of authority because the treaty says
thou shalt give full effect to the law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's a source of
authority but not a source of authority for
suppression. And I find it implausible that we signed
a treaty which requires us to suppress evidence of this
sort, but allows the other treaty partners to do
whatever they like, not -- not suppress, let it in,
rely upon consular protests. Is -- is that what this
provision, you know, in accordance with domestic law,
means, that -- you know, each man to himself?
MR. GARTLAN: In -- in many cases, yes, Your
Honor. Again, the -- the drafters recognized that
remedies would be local, and so the question is for our
system, for the United States system, how does the
United States system -- how does it remedy breaches?
And it depends upon the type of the breach. In this
instance, the breach here involved statements, and so
the breach occurred when the authorities did not inform
Mr. Sanchez-Llamas of his right to contact the
consulate.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, of course, that's
assuming a causal link, which is an altogether
different problem.
But it's still not clear to me. Are you
saying that we should require the States to follow and
the United States Government to follow an exclusionary
rule because that's what the treaty requires or because
this is the remedy that we ought to devise in the
exercise of our supervisory powers? And if it's the
latter, it seems to me surely there must be some causal
linkage between the violation and the -- and the
statement at -- at a minimum.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor. Well, it's
kind of a combination of both. The treaty directs give
effect to these rights. And we are asking the Court to
exercise its authority to remedy the breach because
suppression is a creature of this Court's authority,
common law authority.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You don't think that the
-- that the remedy that the ICJ imposed in the case
where the United States was before it as a party, that
that would be the appropriate remedy? It was not
suppression. It was reconsider this, taking account of
the failure to notify and what might have happened if
notice had been provided.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor, and then
supply whatever remedy would be appropriate. And
again, that -- that's a call upon the judiciary to
remedy treaty violations, and -- and that's been --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there wasn't any word
in either of the ICJ judgments, if I recall them
correctly, that said, United States, you have a
suppression remedy, so you should suppress.
MR. GARTLAN: No, Your Honor, because again,
remedies are a question of domestic law, so it's up to
the domestic courts to decide what would be the
appropriate remedy.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, did you ask for any
remedy in this case other than suppression? This arose
on the motion to suppress, am I right?
MR. GARTLAN: Correct, Your Honor. No other
remedy but -- but suppression.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: One of the things -- and I
-- I really have this question for all counsel. If the
Miranda warning is given, it seems to me that that
comprehends the relief that you need. If the accused
talks with his attorney, his attorney is presumed to
know the treaty's -- the provisions of the convention.
If he does not, he proceeds at his risk. Attorneys
have lots of things they can tell clients, and if you
don't have an attorney, you proceed at your risk. I
just think this is a very important point here.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor, and many
courts have held that -- well, the Miranda rights
pretty much encompasses these rights, but they're
different. These are standalone rights, and what's
critical about this, what's really important is that
for every United States citizen who's arrested -- and
typically interrogation is going to follow quickly on
the heels of the arrest -- they're giving the Miranda
warnings. And essentially they have three options.
They can speak to the police. They can invoke the
right to silence, or they can invoke the right to an
attorney. However, foreign nationals have a fourth
option and that fourth option is they can have the
consulate contacted, if they want. And the consulate
provides different kinds of information and support for
the arrestee.
And it's -- what's critical is -- what's hard
to see is that because we're in this country, we don't
see it, but if you're overseas and you've been arrested
-- let's say you're in Damascus and you're given a dime
and your options are to call the local attorney
provided by your jailers or the American consulate.
And I think it's pretty clear that most people are
going to call the American consulate. Why? It's
because there's a kind of a familiarity. There's an
attraction there. There's an appeal. There's
security. You're dealing with the known. Whereas, a
local attorney, it's the unknown, and it's provided by
the local authorities.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That may give you a warmer
feeling inside, but do you think that the foreign
consulate is -- is more likely to give you good advice
about what you should do under American law than an
American lawyer that you've been provided?
MR. GARTLAN: Well, you know, Your Honor,
it's not really the content of the advice. The
question is at this point what would people do, and the
legal error here, what's wrong, is that the foreign
national is given the same three options, but by law,
he's supposed to have a fourth option.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but I'm just saying
whether it makes any difference. I mean, you're
talking about anything that -- that affects substantive
rights. He's been provided an attorney who knows
American law better, presumably, than -- than a
consular official. What -- other than the comfort of
-- of speaking to somebody from his own country, what
-- what's the substantive harm here?
MR. GARTLAN: Well, but really he hasn't been
given an attorney yet, Your Honor. We have to remember
this is the arrest has been made and he's confronted
with options.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but you -- you want
us to write an opinion to say that we're holding our
attorneys to the same standard of evaluation as the
attorneys in Syria --
MR. GARTLAN: Oh, no, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- and -- and our bar is --
is not to be trusted to have the expertise that's at
least equivalent to that of the foreign counsel?
MR. GARTLAN: No. What I'm saying, Your
Honor, is that if you're arrested, the next -- you have
a choice, and you have one of three if you are a
national, but if you're a foreigner, you have one of
four. And the question --
JUSTICE BREYER: The question --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the question is who
tells you about that choice, and your attorney can tell
you about that choice.
MR. GARTLAN: But this contemplates that the
detaining authorities informed the person of -- of what
their rights are to contact the consulate.
JUSTICE BREYER: Suppose they don't do it.
They don't do it. They violated the treaty.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: We assume that. Then the
question is, what is a proper remedy?
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And I'll assume with you,
for the moment, that -- that the treaty has to be read
as saying you have to have some kind of appropriate
remedy, but it doesn't say what kind. So why isn't it
an appropriate remedy that he was given a lawyer, if he
wanted one, and the lawyer either told him about the
right to talk to the consul or he didn't. And if he
didn't -- if he did, he found out, and if he didn't and
it mattered, maybe that was ineffective assistance of
counsel. So if we have ineffective assistance of
counsel claims to take care of the tough cases where it
really did matter, doesn't that suffice under the
treaty, or does it?
MR. GARTLAN: Your Honor, I'd -- I'd like to
-- to move back the discussion to there's no attorney
yet, and the question is what can that person do. And
-- and the error --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, he's stuck without an
attorney. I have no doubt about that. I have no doubt
that the treaty was violated. I follow you that far,
but now you're talking about the domestic court's power
to do what there is an international obligation to do,
which is to create a remedy. I'm not sure why that
remedy need always be suppression.
MR. GARTLAN: Your Honor, it needn't --
JUSTICE BREYER: I think sometimes it could
be something else.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes. It depends on the legal
injury that flows from the violation. Now, in this
instance, we're dealing with statements because again,
to illustrate perhaps, even a national, given these
three options -- what if the police forgot to tell the
-- the person that he has a right to an attorney? Now,
he's given these two options, and he -- he waives
those. And that waiver is voluntary, but it's still
invalid as a matter of law because he wasn't given all
the options he's supposed to be given. And that's the
difference because we don't know what would have --
typically you don't know what would have happened if
somebody were given all the options. That's -- that's
a problem. So now --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we do know, don't we,
Mr. Gartlan, that if the treaty had been followed, it
still would have been permissible for the police,
having given Miranda warnings, to commence
interrogation? The treaty does not require that the
enforcing officials in this country immediately call
the foreign consulate. Isn't that so?
MR. GARTLAN: Well, actually the language of
the article says without delay, Your Honor, so that
suggests that there's some kind of promptness that's --
that's involved.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Promptness. And I think
that the United States has told us it's generally done
here somewhere between 24 and 72 hours. A suspect who
has been given Miranda warnings as here -- the
conversation with the police, the interrogation, could
begin before that 24 hours or 72 hours expires.
MR. GARTLAN: And our reading of the article
is that once the -- the police know or have grounds to
believe that the -- that the person is probably a
foreign national, then that duty arises on the police
to give him his rights.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's fine, but --
JUSTICE SOUTER: It's a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Go ahead.
JUSTICE SOUTER: We keep doing this.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, we do.
JUSTICE SOUTER: It's -- it's a duty to
advise him of -- of his right to have them notify the
-- the consulate. It is not a duty to remain silent
until the consulate responds. And even if you are
correct that the obligation to -- to advise him and to
give the notice arises immediately upon the realization
that he's a foreign national, I don't see anything in
the treaty that requires them to defer interrogation
until the -- the consulate has decided whether it wants
to do anything or not.
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor, but in -- in
this case, the -- the statements that we're seeking to
suppress, the harmful ones, occurred about 8 hours
after the initial arrest. However --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, do you -- do you say,
going back to -- to the point Justice Ginsburg made, if
the United States follows a 48- to 72-hour rule, is --
is that a violation of the treaty?
MR. GARTLAN: Yes, Your Honor, because our
position is that once somebody says, yes, I -- I want
to speak with the consulate, it's like saying I want to
speak with my attorney or I want to invoke my right to
silence. It's a signal that this person believes that
they are being overwhelmed by the situation, that they
are no longer in control, and they're trying to
exercise some control.
Now, this Court doesn't have to make this
ruling in this case, but our position would be if
somebody invoked --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, we -- we might have to
make it in this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We'd have to make an 8-hour
ruling in this case anyway if -- if we agree with you.
MR. GARTLAN: Well, our -- our position is
that if there's an indication of a right to have the
consulate contacted, that's like a cry for help. It's
like -- it's an alternative way of saying I want -- I
can't deal with this anymore. I'm -- I'd like my right
to silence. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Gee, what about -- what
about countries that don't have an extensive telephone
system, you know, where you -- you have to send a
runner to notify the consul?
MR. GARTLAN: That would be a problem for
that country and people in that country. But now we're
dealing with --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it -- it just makes me
think that -- that instant contact is not what was
envisioned by the treaty.
MR. GARTLAN: The treaty is supposed to be
applied in every country, and there are going to be
different results. The drafters recognized some --
some countries have different systems, different
waiting periods before there's interrogation or before
there's contact. And all this treaty does is it puts
the foreign national on par with an American, with the
United States citizen. That all intends to do.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Gartlan.
MR. GARTLAN: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Stancil.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MARK T. STANCIL
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER IN NO. 05-51
MR. STANCIL: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Mario -- Mario Bustillo was not advised of
his rights under article 36 in direct contravention of
the treaty. As a result, he went to trial for first-
degree murder, having had no contact with a consular
officer from his home country and being completely
unaware that he was entitled to do so.
The Virginia courts improperly relied upon
the result of that violation, itself the product of
failure to comply with the treaty, to refuse to
consider critical exculpatory evidence that was
uniquely in the possession and available with the
assistance of the consular officers. That evidence
would have included official government immigration
records, corroborating a key defense witness, and
proving that the alternative suspect, a Honduran
national, known as Sirena, fled to Honduras the day
after the victim died. The Honduran consulate also
would have provided Sirena's address and attempted to
interview him. Indeed, once Bustillo's habeas counsel
located Sirena in Honduras, he obtained a
surreptitiously videotaped confession in which Sirena
admitted, in chilling detail, to committing the crime
and acknowledged that Mario Bustillo had been wrongly
convicted.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Has the Honduran Government
offered to arrest and extradite that witness from
Honduras to bring him back to the United States?
MR. STANCIL: Not on this record, Your Honor,
but the Honduran consulate has offered -- has said it
would have attempted to locate Sirena and interview
him. And acting with far fewer resources, before the
Honduran consulate was even aware of this case,
Petitioner's habeas counsel got this confession, the
point being it wasn't that hard to get, to trick this
person into admitting, yes, he -- he committed the
crime. And in the confession, which is on pages 33 to
of the -- of the joint appendix, there are a number
of -- of details in that confession he could have known
no other way.
Moreover, the Honduran consulate would have
provided, and ultimately did provide, a photograph of
Sirena.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, that, Mr. -- could your
client's attorney have argued in the Virginia habeas
proceeding that his procedural default should have been
excused because of ineffective assistance of trial
counsel at the time of the default?
MR. STANCIL: Yes. However, an ineffective
assistance claim -- and I should back up. It was
raised. The -- the habeas court disposed of it on two
grounds, saying it was beyond the statute of
limitations because an ineffective assistance claim,
based on the Vienna Convention, did not relate back,
but also denied it on the merits and said it wouldn't
have met the Strickland standard anyway.
But the ineffective assistance claim is
ineffective to address a treaty violation for two
reasons. First, the treaty gives you a right to be
notified. It protects the special relationship between
a consular officer and the detained foreign national,
and channeling these claims to ineffective assistance
doesn't vindicate that separate Federal right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, Miranda gives
you the same, you know, right to -- to reach a counsel,
a right to remain silent, and yet, if your lawyer
doesn't raise a Miranda violation in trial, it can be
waived.
MR. STANCIL: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why should this be
elevated to a special status beyond that?
MR. STANCIL: It's not elevated, Your Honor.
It's actually treated more like the right it
resembles, like a Brady right, which is not defaulted
if you don't raise it -- raise it at trial, for three
reasons.
First, like a Brady case, a Vienna Convention
violation resulting in the exclusion of exculpatory
evidence is, by its nature, not known at the time of
trial.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but isn't -- isn't the
problem with your analogy that counsel do not advise
their clients about Brady rights because, by definition
or in the normal case by definition, counsel doesn't
know whether there's a Brady violation. But counsel
does know or, it seems to me, can properly be charged
with knowing that when he's representing a foreign
national, the foreign national has a Vienna Convention
right, just as much as the foreign national has a
Miranda right, and he can advise him of that. So it
seems to me the Brady analogy is -- is not apt.
MR. STANCIL: A Brady violation is a closer
match than a -- for example, a Miranda violation, for
the central reason that the consular officer and the
foreign national, working together, know best whether
to exercise those rights.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But in this case, wasn't
it true that the trial counsel knew about the Vienna
Convention right and, for whatever reason, thought his
client would not be aided by talking to the Honduran
counsel -- consul.
MR. STANCIL: As an initial matter, it's --
it's not perfectly clear in the record. He submitted
an affidavit stating that he never advised clients of
Vienna Convention violations, but it does not say on
this record that he knew at the time of trial about the
Vienna Convention.
But even granting that he did, the attorney
is not in the position to make that decision. This
case illustrates why, and this is my second reason why
an ineffective assistance claim, Justice Alito, would
be insufficient, which is ineffective assistance trusts
strategic decisions about whether to invoke a right to
the counsel, but the counsel, the lawyer, is not -- is
not in a position to make that decision for his client.
As this case illustrates, even assuming that the
counsel knew about the Vienna Convention right, he
said, well, that's more trouble than it's worth. This
case illustrates precisely why we don't leave those
decisions with the lawyers. First and foremost --
JUSTICE ALITO: That may or may not have been
ineffective assistance of counsel. But I don't
understand why -- if a jurisdiction in this country has
a procedural default rule that can be overcome by a
showing of cause and prejudice with ineffective
assistance of counsel being cause, why isn't that a
remedy that is sufficient to give full effect to the
treaty, which is what the treaty requires?
MR. STANCIL: Because that cuts out an entire
category of treaty violations where it may have been a
strategic decision by counsel not to raise it, but
where that decision is ultimately mistaken. And as the
treaty is structured --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's true about
the right to remain silent or any other rights that are
very much the rights of the defendant, not the rights
of the counsel, but they're exercised in consultation
with the counsel, and if they make a determination not
to contact the consul, then that's a decision that
counsel made, and if it's ineffective, there are
remedies for that. I'm not sure how it's different
than the right to remain silent.
MR. STANCIL: Well, I should back up and --
and point to the first reason why a lawyer isn't
effective in making this decision and -- and first,
state that the lawyer here never told Mario Bustillo
about the Vienna Convention. So it isn't that
situation where he consulted with his client and
elected not to raise it. He didn't even tell his
client.
But more fundamentally, the lawyer operates
under inherent conflict of interest. The first thing
the consular officer does, when he makes contact with a
foreign national, is decide is the lawyer that he has
good enough. In fact, it's the only form of consular
assistance that's specified in the text of the treaty.
In article 36(1)(c), it says to ensure that he can
obtain adequate legal representation. So the lawyer,
who's deciding whether to get the consulate involved,
has to think in the back of his mind, well, is the
first word out of this consular officer's mouth going
to be, well, you know, fire this guy and get a new
lawyer. That's why we don't trust those rights to the
lawyer, and that's why the treaty doesn't trust those
rights to the lawyer.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But once, at least --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why -- the ultimate question
I think is the one Justice Alito asked. I think, as I
read the ICJ treaty, we're under a legal obligation in
this country to provide a reasonable, effective remedy.
And why isn't that a reasonably effective remedy? Treat
it, you know, like any other problem where the client
should have learned something and he didn't. If the
lawyer is there, this is the obligation. The lawyer tells
him, and if the lawyer fails to tell him, then that's
ineffective assistance in an appropriate circumstance,
or if it isn't, it isn't. But that's a good remedy.
What's wrong with that?
And the other obligation is, counsel, you
have to raise this issue as soon as everybody learns
about it, in which case you might be out because I
don't -- he's certainly learned about it by the time he
was on appeal, and as I read your brief here, he didn't
raise it on appeal either.
MR. STANCIL: I'd -- I'd like to correct that
very clearly. As soon as Mr. Bustillo got new counsel
on direct appeal --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. STANCIL: -- he submitted a motion to
remand to -- back to the trial court, saying there's a
Vienna Convention violation --
JUSTICE BREYER: He said -- when I read that
motion, which I'll do -- so it's in the record?
MR. STANCIL: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: Where?
MR. STANCIL: It's -- the Virginia courts
don't paginate the record --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do I have it in front of me
somewhere?
MR. STANCIL: It's in the record, yes, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, in other
words, he did raise it. Okay. If he did raise it,
then maybe he would be entitled to this relief.
MR. STANCIL: We would have --
JUSTICE BREYER: But is -- my general
question is, is that approach sufficient under the law?
MR. STANCIL: Getting back -- is ineffective
assistance sufficient? Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Say, in an appropriate case,
I can't find a rule for every case -- but that our
obligation, as interpreted by the ICJ, is that we have,
as the law of the land, a treaty that says you tell the
person about his Vienna Convention right, and if you
don't, now says the ICJ, there has to be some kind of
-- of effective remedy. Now, assuming that's the law
of the United States, why isn't this approach an
effective remedy?
MR. STANCIL: Because relying on the lawyer
to do the duty of the State does not effectuate the
fundamental interest the treaty serves, which is
establishing direct contact between the consular
officer and the lawyer.
JUSTICE SOUTER: The -- the only thing in
-- in the second part of Justice Breyer's question, the
only thing that the lawyer has to be relied upon is to
get the issue raised at the appropriate point in the
trial process. And -- and so, at the very least, what
Virginia is -- is arguing here is that he waived it
because no objection was raised based upon a prior
Vienna Convention failure. That is a very conventional
obligation upon lawyers. It -- it's an obligation that
goes to Miranda. It's an obligation that goes to any
denial of rights of which counsel could or should be
charged with knowing, and I don't see why there should
be an exception made to -- to that obligation to raise
the issue.
MR. STANCIL: Leaving aside the conflict of
interest that the lawyer would suffer on two additional
reasons why the -- why the lawyer is not --
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I come back to the
conflict of interest? Was -- was this lawyer a
compensated lawyer, or was he a public defender?
MR. STANCIL: He was retained.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He was retained.
MR. STANCIL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: By whom?
MR. STANCIL: By the defendant's family.
JUSTICE BREYER: There -- there are rules on
conflicts of interest too, you know. So following our
normal rules, is there any country, is there any
international law, is there anything in American law
that would suggest, in respect to any kind of
significant procedural failure, that the State has to
do more than we're just talking about?
MR. STANCIL: I'm not sure I --
JUSTICE BREYER: And if so, what is it?
MR. STANCIL: Is there international
authority required --
JUSTICE BREYER: Anywhere. I -- I just think
MR. STANCIL: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- think for our most severe
violations, we provide an approach that you tell the
lawyer. The lawyer brings it up. If the lawyer
doesn't bring it up and it's important or there's a
conflict of interest or something terrible is going on,
normally you'd say that's ineffective assistance. And
I just wonder if that approach doesn't work here.
MR. STANCIL: It does not. First and
foremost, it doesn't vindicate --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I'm not interested in,
now at the moment, whether it does or does not work. I
want to know if there's any country or anywhere else in
American law or international law where people have
gone further than that. And there might be. I'm
asking it seriously.
MR. STANCIL: Well, the -- well, the ICJ has
held that you can't rely -- that these procedural
default rules are not adequate to vindicate the treaty
interests.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not talking about a
procedural default rule. I'm talking about the system
that was suggested.
MR. STANCIL: In -- in terms of ineffective
assistance?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, the procedural default
rule would mean you get procedurally defaulted if you
fail to bring it up, but I think you might say if you
failed to bring it up the first time that the lawyer
knew about it. And if it's his fault for not bringing
it up or he should have known about it, then he's out
-- the client. But if it's not, he's not out.
MR. STANCIL: I believe that actually would
not be the practice in civil law countries, for
example, where a judge as the inquisitor has much more
flexibility than he does in an adversarial system when
and whether to consider evidence that may or may not
have come in at the certain time.
But I'd like to get back to, Justice Souter,
your question, with respect to two additional points
why the treaty -- and I'm not saying this is our rule
-- the treaty says the State has to notify and -- and
it doesn't say the lawyer has to notify.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. And I'm not -- I'm not
suggesting anything that -- that affects that. Yes,
the State does have to notify him, and if he wants, the
State has to make the phone call.
What I am suggesting is that the lawyer
should be taxed with knowing that that is the
individual's right. The lawyer should be taxed with
knowing that because it's the law of the land. It's a
treaty. And -- and it seems to me the obligation is
upon the lawyer to say, well, did they -- did they tell
you, did they notify the consul, just as the lawyer
would say, did you get the Miranda warnings. And --
and if the lawyer does not make that inquiry and does
not raise an objection, whatever it may be, if in fact
the individual didn't get his rights, then I don't see
why there should be -- there should not be a waiver
with respect to the Vienna Convention objection, just
as there is a waiver with respect to a Miranda
objection or a search and seizure objection and -- and
other constitutional rights.
MR. STANCIL: And again, ineffective -- an
ineffective assistance claim doesn't give full effect
because under this Court's cases, if it's -- if it's in
the rubric of ineffective assistance, you leave
strategic decisions to the lawyer, and so if --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, the problem at the
trial level, I think, is you would be -- you couldn't
make it at that stage because it's the very lawyer
who's ineffective. Here, it was raised by a new
counsel on appeal, and that's really the first
opportunity it could come up because the -- the lawyer
who didn't give this advice certainly isn't going to
say, in -- in the course of the trial, I was
ineffective. So -- and that's I think the point that
the ICJ was trying to make when it said you couldn't
use the procedural default rule.
MR. STANCIL: Yes, Justice Ginsburg, and in
that sense, it's very much like the rule this Court
laid down in Federal cases in Massaro where it -- it
explained just the practical difficulties associated
with requiring claims that need, for example, a
prejudice record, and everybody believes that a
prejudice showing would need to be made before you
could establish a violation.
But here, we'd have to -- we have to go back
and we need the tools of post-conviction review to
establish prejudice. And here, once we got there --
this is -- this is not speculation. This is a lawyer
made a strategic decision, he says, not to tell his
client. And then we tried to raise an ineffective
assistance claim, and the court said -- in addition to
saying it was barred for other reasons, said that
doesn't meet Strickland. This is that category of
treaty violations that, if you push these claims to
ineffective assistance, they evaporate, and that does
not get --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's the same point
we've been covering, but all seem to concede that the
particular characteristics of a national system have to
be taken into account. And the distinguishing feature
of our system is that it's an adversary system. And
you're asking us to make an exception to that system --
MR. STANCIL: I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- an exception to the
usual rules that prevail in that system, and that's not
consistent with what the treaty requires.
MR. STANCIL: Your Honor, it's no more of an
exception than Brady, which is exactly the same
situation where you have a right that you don't know
either the violation has occurred, because they didn't
tell him and his lawyer didn't tell him, and you don't
know the evidence that could have been developed.
Here, once that -- once that missing piece, that one
critical part of article 36, direct notification and
contact with the consulate, once that key is removed,
everything else follows.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but that's because in
Brady, as Justice Souter has already pointed out,
there's a factual piece of evidence that the State has
withheld. Here, the lawyer is presumed to know the
law. It's just not an apt analogy.
MR. STANCIL: We believe it is, in part,
because this is an affirmative obligation on the State.
Miranda is a rule, for example, that requires you to
say what the -- the rules of the game are and this is
how it works. This is different. This is
fundamentally different. This says, you've got to tell
him individually to go out -- you've got to tell him
that he has a right to go out and ask somebody for
help, and it gets him access to resources that are
uniquely within the possession and control of a
consular officer. The government immigration records.
The consular -- the lawyer could not have gotten those
records. They were crucial to the defense. More
fundamentally, the lawyer didn't even know those
existed.
So even if you would assume that an
ineffective assistance claim could remedy violations --
and -- and we certainly believe this case and a large
category of other cases could never be remedied through
ineffective assistance claims as a practical matter.
Even then, all it does is breed ineffective assistance
claim after ineffective assistance claim because the
trial lawyer doesn't know what's in the embassy's file.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, maybe after the first
ineffective assistance claim is decided in the client's
favor, people are going to wake up. I mean, you have
to admit at this stage of the game -- and it's not your
client's fault, but the -- this is a fairly rare bird.
And -- and if, in fact, it were held to be --
let's -- let's assume that -- that on -- on collateral
review, someone in your client's position made the
following claim. Number one, the State didn't tell me.
They -- they failed in their Vienna Convention right.
Number two, my lawyer never inquired of me or of
anybody else whether the State had given me my -- my
Vienna Convention rights. And therefore, my -- my
lawyer was ineffective. If on collateral review a
claim like that is made, it is accepted and prejudice
is found, I would imagine the bar is going to wake up
fairly fast to what's going on. Don't you?
MR. STANCIL: It doesn't seem to be the case.
In fact -- and our research has revealed that about 60
ineffective assistance claims based on the Vienna
Convention violations -- it's ambiguous as to whether
there's one or none where the court has granted relief
either on prejudice grounds or performance grounds. So
litigants have tried, but that just shows what a poor
fit ineffective assistance claims are.
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I ask you one factual
question? And I -- I should know this. I just -- if
-- if I did know it, I can't remember it now.
Was any ineffective assistance claim raised
-- I -- I take it there's no ineffective assistance
claim that was ever raised on collateral review here
because you've never gotten to a collateral review
stage. Is that correct?
MR. STANCIL: We did file an ineffective
assistance claim in the State habeas petition.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that -- wasn't -- I'm --
I'm sorry?
MR. STANCIL: The -- the circuit court -- we
then tried to amend -- habeas counsel tried to amend
the petition to specify an additional -- that to
include within that ineffective assistance claim the
failure to notify.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you did that on
collateral review as opposed to trying to supplement
the direct appeal?
MR. STANCIL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. STANCIL: If I may, I'd like to reserve
the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Stancil.
Ms. Williams.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MARY H. WILLIAMS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT IN NO. 04-10566
MS. WILLIAMS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Counsel describes the rule that he asks this
Court to announce under article 36 as revolutionary,
and I think that's accurate. It would be revolutionary
for this Court to construe the article 36 of the Vienna
Convention to grant an individual foreign national a
right to obtain a judicially created sanction against
the State for its failure to provide the information
that it is obliged to -- to provide under article 36.
No other signatory's court has construed the treaty to
permit an individual in a criminal proceeding to raise
the kind of challenge that Petitioner seeks to raise
here, and certainly no other court has suggested that
exclusion of lawfully obtained evidence would be the
appropriate remedy for that violation.
JUSTICE BREYER: Have there been courts
that have held the contrary? Have there been courts
that said when somebody wasn't notified and they sought
to obtain some remedy for that, that even though the
treaty has been violated, you have no remedy under our
system?
MS. WILLIAMS: There have been only a handful
of courts that have dealt with the issue.
JUSTICE BREYER: Which are -- which is the
best authority abroad for you that -- where they say,
no, we're sorry, we give you no remedy, even though we
violated the treaty?
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, Your Honor. The -- a
Canadian court has said that the -- that there is no --
no remedy for -- in a criminal proceeding for that sort
of remedy. And there are, in fact --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's a holding? They --
they held that?
MS. WILLIAMS: It is a holding. It's a lower
court opinion. It's not the --
JUSTICE BREYER: So we have a lower court
opinion in Canada, and you -- and they have a lower
court opinion in Australia. Is it fair if I come to
the conclusion no one has ever really decided this?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think that's absolutely
fair, and what's --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. If -- then if
that's fair, is it fair also for us to say that -- that
we have to take this treaty, since it's self-executing,
as if it were written into American law?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think, though, it is --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that fair?
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, that is fair, but I think
it --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. If that's fair, then
suppose you're coming -- suppose the treaty had said --
and it's part of American law.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: It didn't say this, but
suppose it had. You have to inform this individual,
and if you don't inform the individual, you have to
give him a remedy so that he is not prejudiced thereby.
Now, if it had said that and the State or the Federal
Government refused to give him a remedy and it's part
of American law, wouldn't we have to say that American
law, Federal law, treaty law requires you to do that
rather than what you're doing, if it had said that?
MS. WILLIAMS: If it had said that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MS. WILLIAMS: -- I would agree with you.
JUSTICE BREYER: And once we're there, it
seems to me what we're arguing about is not this
metaphysical thing about rights. We're arguing about
what the treaty says. Now, if that's so, I -- I think
we're back to where we were in the last case and say
does this treaty or does it not, as a matter of
American law, say that the person is entitled to some
kind of remedy. And our problem there is that the ICJ
has said, yes, it does, but it doesn't mention it, but
it does say that you cannot have procedural rights that
do not give full effect to the purpose of -- of this
section. So where are we?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think the starting point is
with the text and context of the treaty, and beginning
with the preamble that makes it very clear that this
treaty, like other international treaties, is an
international agreement concerned with the obligations
of the signatories, not with any particular granting of
rights for the individuals who may benefit from those
obligations.
And one thing that the preamble makes very
clear is that matters not expressly regulated by the
provisions of the treaty are left to the rules of
customary international law.
The only remedy that is discussed as part of
the -- the treaty negotiation is the optional protocol
that would permit signatories, not individuals, to take
a dispute under the treaty to the International Court
of Justice. So there is little evidence in the context
of the treaty and there is evidence contrary --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the -- the thing is, I
found stronger the other way, which you can answer, is
that ordinarily, I guess, since they quote in one these
amicus briefs, since at least 1927 we consider -- our
State Department -- the treaties that have obligations
are -- also require appropriate enforcement remedies,
et cetera. And we have Avena and we have LaGrand, and
there the ICJ, as I read it, has said you have to have
some kind of remedy, being pretty vague about what kind
it is. All right. So normally we follow the ICJ, if
we can. Schooner Betsy and go back forever.
All right. So why not? Just follow what
they say, say there has to be some kind of remedy. And
then we put our minds to figuring out what that kind
MS. WILLIAMS: Your Honor, even following the
ICJ opinion in Avena does not get Petitioner the relief
that he seeks in this Court or that he sought below.
It does not get you to suppression of the statements
that were made.
It's -- it's -- there are a couple of very
important things to consider in the Avena decision from
the ICJ. They discuss suppression and the exclusionary
rule, and they specifically reject Mexico's assertion
that there's a connection somehow between the provision
of information and -- under the article 36 and the
ongoing criminal interrogation. So -- and they also
discuss the -- the concept of without delay and what
that meant to -- to those who put together the treaty.
And it does not mean immediately. So there -- under
the ICJ's reading of the treaty, there would not be a
basis to suppress the statements that Petitioner seeks
to suppress in our court.
I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there any other relief
sought by the Petitioner? There was the suppression
request. Was there any other? Was there a request of
the kind that the ICJ thought would be appropriate,
which was, court, reconsider this and determine whether
the defendant was prejudiced by the absence of Vienna
Convention notice?
MS. WILLIAMS: There -- there was not, Your
Honor. The only remedy that Petitioner has sought in
this case is suppression of the statements.
And it's also important, I think, to make the
distinction between the Oregon case and the Virginia
case. In the Oregon case, it's clear that counsel for
Petitioner knew about the obligations under article 36
and raised them in the motion to suppress. And so
there's no question about the State's obligation to --
to inform the consul that the -- that Petitioner was
being detained or any concern with interference with
consular access and communication. The only violation
that we have in the case is that the State failed to
provide the information that it was obligated to
provide under article 36.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There's a question I would
like to ask you about the State. Now, if everything
worked ideally, it would be the police officer, along
with the Miranda warnings, says, would you like to call
your consulate. You could do that if you wish. If it
-- if the State has an obligation to give this
information under the treaty, but many police officers
don't know anything about any Vienna Convention, do
judges, Federal judges, State judges, have an
obligation, when they see that an alien defendant is
before them, to, on the judge's own motion, ask the
prosecutor has he been told about the Vienna
Convention, and if not, the judge would have an
obligation to do so?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think that would be one way
to ensure better compliance with our obligations under
the treaty. The treaty requires competent authorities
to provide the information and doesn't specify exactly
who is included and who is not included in that
category.
Oregon and other States, along with --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So State -- you don't
have any problem with State judges being enlisted as
officers to execute Federal treaty obligations on
behalf of the State Department or someone?
MS. WILLIAMS: I -- I was hearing the
question, I guess, of whether that would be something
that judges could do, and I -- and I was responding to
-- to that part of it. I don't think that -- that
judges are obligated to provide that as a requirement
of the treaty. I think it does fall on the State
authorities to provide that information.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can you tell us what the
State of Oregon has done in this regard --
MS. WILLIAMS: This --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- or other States?
MS. WILLIAMS: We have done a number of
things. In 2000, the Attorney General put together a
task force that included consular officials, law
enforcement officials, jail managers and, working
together, devised some better education tools so that
-- that there could be more education in terms of the
-- the competent authorities who need to provide this
information.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, how do you think it
should -- you think the police officer should give it
as part of the Miranda warnings, or what's -- what's
your conclusion as to how it should be implemented?
MS. WILLIAMS: The State Department has
recommended that as soon as it is known that the
individual is a foreign national, that the information
be given. I think that it is not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does this mean that the --
the desk sergeant in the police station or who?
MS. WILLIAMS: We've actually worked with our
jail managers to develop a form that could be used as
part of the booking process to provide the information.
And the -- I mean, I think the more we do the
education, probably the better the compliance will be.
But what's important is that we're attempting to do
that not because the treaty obligates that sort of
immediate notification at the risk of not being able to
use evidence obtained in a later criminal proceeding.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, it does obligate
immediate notification to the defendant, doesn't it?
MS. WILLIAMS: It says without delay that the
information should be provided, but that phrase,
without delay, when you look at the prefatory materials
and how the ICJ has construed it, doesn't mean
immediately.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, but there are two
different without delay points: one, when you tell the
-- the defendant; and secondly, whether or not he wants
the consulate notified, and there's the second delay.
MS. WILLIAMS: And the way the ICJ has
construed that, after reviewing the materials, is that
the phrase, without delay, means the same thing in the
three places that it's used in the treaty. And so
there is -- it's not an immediate requirement. There
is some time that can pass, and in some countries,
there may be considerable time.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you think it's -- it's
not -- it's not required for police interrogators in
the station to include this? They can -- they can
wait?
MS. WILLIAMS: It is not required under the
treaty that the advice be given prior to interrogation.
That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, how about during the
interrogation?
MS. WILLIAMS: At some point in a prolonged
interrogation, that right is -- that obligation will
arise.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, it seems to me it's
not like rocket science. You've had study groups and
everything. Well, you just tell the policemen give
them -- give them the advice. End of case.
MS. WILLIAMS: Well, and part of the
difficulty is it's not so easy to give simply a simple
advice because it's not always clear that someone is a
foreign national, and even if there's a suggestion that
someone might be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that's easy. If you
are a foreign national, you -- that's easy too. I
don't -- I don't see why this is so complicated.
MS. WILLIAMS: The other difficulty is that
for some foreign nationals, this is not -- this is not
the case where the detainee controls the contact with
consular officials. We have mandatory notification
obligations. So it's important to establish what
country the individual is from, and some individuals
would prefer that the officials not know what country
they are from.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but --I mean, all
you've got to do is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's their problem.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You ask him what his name
is. Why don't you ask him whether he's an American
citizen? If he says no, say what country are you a
citizen of. I mean, I -- I don't see the difficulty of
that.
MS. WILLIAMS: And certainly we're hoping to
move toward better compliance by moving toward that
goal. But the question in this case --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But, I mean, why does it
have to be a distant goal? I mean, it seems easy.
MS. WILLIAMS: And I think it gets easier as
more cases like this one certainly get the message out.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Of course, he doesn't
have to answer that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Your answer -- your answer
doesn't give me confidence that you're implementing the
treaty.
MS. WILLIAMS: But the question is when there
is a violation and -- and if it's from lack of
education or lack of effort on the State's part to
ensure that people understand the obligation, then does
the treaty give the individual the right in a criminal
proceeding to have that lawfully obtained evidence kept
out of the proceeding. And so certainly we can make
better efforts to improve compliance with what is an
obligation that we have under the treaty, but that
doesn't take this Court to suppressing the evidence in
the criminal proceeding, and that's what Petitioner has
sought from the Court.
JUSTICE STEVENS: A little while ago you were
asked about the judge asking whether or not to ask the
defendant if the advice was given him. And the
suggestion was made there's no duty on the State judge
to enforce a Federal treaty, but if it's a matter of
Federal law, why wouldn't it be a duty to -- on the
judge to obey Federal law if -- if it is part of our
Federal requirement?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think the question would
come down to whether the judge falls in the category of
competent authorities under the treaty, and I'm not
sure how that would be construed, whether it would be
construed to include the judge or if it's primarily
focused on the -- the State government officials who
would be involved in the -- the criminal proceeding.
Unless the Court has further questions, thank
you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms.
Williams.
Mr. Thro.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM E. THRO
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT IN NO. 05-51
MR. THRO: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Vienna Convention does not create
judicially enforceable individual rights.
Nevertheless, if this Court were to hold that it does
create individual rights, those treaty claims should
not be treated more favorably than constitutional
claims.
In Virginia, if a criminal defendant has a
Miranda claim or a Fourth Amendment claim and fails to
raise it at trial, he may not raise it on collateral
review. The same reasoning should apply with respect
to any violation of the Vienna Convention. There's no
reason to elevate a treaty claim above a Miranda claim
or a Fourth Amendment claim.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Does -- does -- would
Virginia allow the -- a claim of ineffective assistance
of counsel to be raised on collateral review for a
failure of counsel to -- to advise the client or take
action on the client's behalf under the Virginia
Convention -- the Vienna Convention during -- during
the -- the direct proceedings?
MR. THRO: Yes, Your Honor. If -- if this
Court were to announce a new rule that the Vienna
Convention confers individual rights, and if counsel
failed to raise that at trial, and if that failure
constituted ineffective assistance under the standard
articulated in Strickland v. Washington, then it would
be permissible for that criminal defendant to raise it
in his collateral review. Yes.
And in fact, Mr. Bustillo attempted to raise
an ineffective assistance of counsel claim, did raise
an ineffective assistance of counsel claim in the State
trial court. That claim was denied, and for whatever
reason, he chose not to appeal that to the Virginia
Supreme Court.
JUSTICE BREYER: I have a couple --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: There was a State
collateral review?
MR. THRO: Yes. It was on State collateral
review, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- thinking of the wrong
thing, but it seemed to me I have a couple of opinions
here on habeas, State habeas, where they did raise it.
Am I thinking of the other case?
MR. THRO: It -- it was raised in the -- in
the State trial court, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And -- and not on --
MR. THRO: But -- but what was -- and the
State trial court chose to deny the ineffective
assistance of counsel claim on a variety of reasons,
and it was chosen -- he chose not to appeal that to the
Supreme Court of Virginia.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the first time
it was raised was on direct appeal by appellate
counsel.
MR. THRO: Appellate counsel on direct appeal
attempted to raise it. He filed a motion requesting a
-- a remand. That motion was denied as -- as improper.
Then in -- once the conviction had been
affirmed by the Virginia Court of Appeals, by the
Supreme Court of Virginia, and review had been denied
by this Court, he went back and filed a collateral
review claiming ineffective assistance of counsel for,
among other things, failure to raise the Vienna
Convention. The trial court denied that ineffective
assistance of counsel claim, and then there was no --
and then the decision was made not to pursue that --
the appeal of the denial of the ineffective assistance
of counsel claim to the Supreme Court of Virginia.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the reason for the
denial?
MR. THRO: There were several reasons for the
denial, one of which was statute of limitations, but
the court also noted that even if it had been made
within the statute of limitations, there was no merit
to it.
The record reflects, Your Honor, that Mr.
Bustillo's retained trial counsel was fully aware of
the Vienna Convention claim. In fact, he was the son
of Salvadoran diplomats and was familiar with Vienna
Convention issues. He made a strategic decision that
it would be better to -- to contain his client and to
contain the amount of people talking to his client and,
therefore, he should not raise the Vienna Convention
issue at trial. And that is set forth in the affidavit
of retained counsel, set forth on pages 318 through 319
of the habeas record in the Fairfax County Circuit
Court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I think that counsel said
that the -- the people at the consulate -- they tend to
talk a lot?
MR. THRO: Yes, he -- yes, he did, Your
Honor, and having grown up as the son of diplomats, he
was obviously familiar with diplomats and their
behavior in social settings. And it was his feeling and
his strategic view that his client was better off not
raising and not contacting the consulate.
But, again, this goes back to the basic point
that Justice Kennedy raised earlier. In America, we
give all criminal defendants, regardless of
nationality, a lawyer to represent them. We charge
that lawyer with knowing their rights and with
vindicating their rights, with making the objections
necessary to vindicate Miranda rights, with making the
necessary objections with respect to the Fourth
Amendment.
The Vienna Convention should be no different.
If this treaty does, in fact, create judicially
enforceable individual rights, then the attorneys who
are appointed or to represent these people will know
about that and will be responsible for vindicating.
That's how we do things in the American system.
JUSTICE BREYER: So then the -- then the only
question really is this thing that I find metaphysical,
and maybe you can explain it. To start talking about
the individual rights that -- enforceable, that sounds
to me like a -- you know, a case that arises under 1983
or something. But I thought we don't need that
concept. We all agree that -- that this -- this is the
law of the United States. It's self-executing. And
the only question is whether the action here violates a
provision of the treaty, which is the law of the land.
What else is there?
And -- and the only thing I read that the ICJ
said, it said, by the way, I'll tell you what kind of
procedural rule you can't have. You can't have a
procedural rule that says after you failed to inform
him of the right and after he's unbelievably
prejudiced, you say he can't raise it because he didn't
raise it before he could possibly have found out about
the right. That would be self-defeating. So you can't
have that kind of a rule.
Now, do you agree with that?
MR. THRO: No. No, Your Honor. We --
JUSTICE BREYER: You explain to me where I --
where I --
MR. THRO: Well, I will certainly attempt to
do so.
I -- I think the flaw in the ICJ's reasoning
is failure to recognize that in the United States all
criminal defendants are -- are given an attorney, and
that that attorney is charged with providing
constitutionally effective assistance of counsel,
meaning being aware of all of the constitutional rights
and all of the Federal and State statutory, and presumably
Federal -- Federal treaty rights as well.
There's no doubt that no Virginia official
informed Mr. Bustillo of his opportunity to contact the
consulate, but it is also clear that his retained
counsel knew of it and chose not to pursue it. Now,
that may or may not be ineffective assistance of
counsel, but it does not justify setting aside the
State's procedural bars on collateral review, which
would apply for a Miranda violation or a Fourth
Amendment violation.
I would also note, Your Honor, that the
United States is unique in the world in having an
extensive system of collateral review for criminal
convictions. Most of the rest of the world doesn't
have a method of collateral attack. So if the rest of
the world doesn't have to have a method of collateral
attack, it seems rather disingenuous to suggest that
the United States has to modify our rules of collateral
attack in order to accommodate the treaty.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is -- is a defense
counsel a competent authority under the treaty for the
purposes of notifying the accused?
MR. THRO: I -- I don't think that -- that he
is, Your Honor. However, the -- a defense counsel
would be, if this Court were to announce a new rule --
would be charged with the knowledge and, therefore,
could I think correct any error that may have been made
by the failure of the local officials or the national
officials to inform the criminal defendant of his
opportunity to contact the consulate.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You know, one thing I find
difficulty understanding in this case is I just can't
understand how a lawyer thought it would be to his
client's advantage not to consul -- not to tell the
consul because the facts are quite persuasive that he
really was severely prejudiced by the fact he didn't
get all the help he could have gotten.
MR. THRO: Your -- Your Honor, I would refer
--
-- I -- the only thing in the record is the affidavits
of -- of the retained counsel. He made that as a
strategic judgment. Obviously --
JUSTICE STEVENS: How -- how could he make
such a judgment? I just don't understand it. You know
MR. THRO: I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Because the prejudice is
just stark in -- in this case. It just stands out and
-- and you just wonder what was going on here.
MR. THRO: Well, with all due respect, Your
Honor, we would disagree as to whether -- as to the
extent of the prejudice. I believe that his affidavit
in -- both with respect to the Vienna Convention claim
and his previous affidavit with respect to just other
varieties of ineffective assistance of counsel claims,
indicates that he had some concern about the
credibility of some these witnesses who were
identifying Mr. Sirena.
But in any event, he made that strategic
judgment. The trial court said that it was not
ineffective assistance of counsel, and for whatever
reason, that judgment was not appealed to the Virginia
Supreme Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You know, that's kind
of a tough position to put the lawyer in. If he's not
a competent authority for notification purposes and he
makes the judgment that, you know, I don't think it's
going to do any good to notify the consulate, wouldn't
he be better advised not to tell his client about it?
Because if he does, then it's, I guess, harmless error
that the State hasn't notified him, and if he doesn't,
it's kind of an ace in the hole. You see how the trial
goes, and at the end say, by the way, the State never
notified my client.
MR. THRO: That's perhaps so, Your Honor, and
that's one thing -- thing that, whatever rule you
craft, you need to be very careful of and that is
preventing gamesmanship on -- on the part of attorneys
and criminal defendants so that these Vienna Convention
claims are not raised after the fact, which is another
reason to -- to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's kind of like a
speedy trial claim. Right? I mean, if the lawyer knows
he has a right to a trial within a certain number of
days, and he doesn't -- it's not his obligation to
notify the State. He just kind of watches the clock
and lets the clock run out, and then he has a claim
based on that. Right?
MR. THRO: Yes, Your Honor, he would.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Of course, that might be
likely if there had been a history of these claims
being successful, but none has ever prevailed. So I
doubt if that would be very -- very good to figure you
can, you know, save your -- your key argument that has
no precedent of winning.
MR. THRO: Yes, Your Honor, and that would
obviously be if your -- if this Court announced a new
rule, then that would perhaps change the thing.
If there are no further questions, thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Thro.
Mr. Garre.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY G. GARRE
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING THE RESPONDENTS
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
The failure to inform a foreign national that
his consulate may be notified in the event of his
arrest gives rise to a treaty violation between
sovereign states, but it does not give rise to an
individually enforceable right. That follows from the
text of the Vienna Convention and its ratification
history --
JUSTICE BREYER: I wonder what that means.
Suppose that the treaty provides that if the individual
sends a letter to the counsel, they have to deliver it.
Doesn't it?
MR. GARRE: It does, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, suppose a sheriff
somewhere grabs the letter, keeps it, and the counsel
sues him under State property law. And State property
law, they say, entitles me, says the counsel, to this
letter. It's mine. It was sent to me. Now, if that
happens to be the interpretation of the judge in the
State of X the sheriff can keep the letter, wouldn't
you say that that property law of the State is invalid
in light of this provision of the treaty, which is the
law of the United States self-executing?
MR. GARRE: I think in that situation you
would have -- you wouldn't be asserting an individual
right under the treaty. You ultimately --
JUSTICE BREYER: No. I just would like an
answer to my question.
MR. GARRE: There could be situations --
JUSTICE BREYER: No. I've given you the
straight facts. The straight facts are they sue -- I
don't have to repeat them. I want to know under --
under my straight facts, wouldn't you say that -- you
got the question.
MR. GARRE: The straight -- I think the
answer would be is you would have a treaty violation if
you had a State law which prevented our Nation from
giving effect to our obligations under the Vienna
Convention --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm not saying a treaty.
I'm saying there's a letter and wouldn't it be the
case that the judge would have to say, here, Mr.
Sheriff, you take the letter and you hand it to the
counsel? It's his property.
MR. GARRE: If they were asserting a cause of
action under State property law and that were the
result, then yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's correct.
MR. GARRE: That would be the case, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, fine.
MR. GARRE: But -- but --
JUSTICE BREYER: And now what they're doing
here is they're saying we have a cause of action. It's
called habeas corpus. And we're asking for a rule of
decision in that cause of action, and the rule of
decision in this cause of action, just like mine, was
in property. Is the decision -- the rule of decision
is the rule written into the treaty, just like in the
property case, and you cannot do anything that
contravenes it though, of course, you can argue about
the content of that rule of decision.
MR. GARRE: In these -- in these two cases --
one you have on Federal habeas, one you had on direct
appeal -- individuals are seeking to affirmatively
invoke rights that they claim that they can enforce
under the Vienna Convention, and we don't think that
the Vienna Convention confers those individual rights.
If -- if I could try to explain the -- the --
what you referred to as a metaphysical question
earlier. We agree that the Vienna Convention, as a
self-executing treaty, is part of our Federal law.
JUSTICE ALITO: But is there a difference
between the rights that could be asserted by the consul
or a consulate official and the rights that could be
asserted by a criminal defendant?
MR. GARRE: I don't think so, Justice Alito.
The -- the treaty has an enforcement mechanism, and
that's -- that's an important thing to keep in mind.
The -- the signatories to this treaty permitted for a
judicial enforcement mechanism.
JUSTICE ALITO: If the consulate official
knew that a national of that country was being detained
and wanted access to that person and that was being
denied by -- by the State officials, there would be no
remedy in Federal court? The consulate -- the foreign
country could not obtain -- could not get Federal
enforcement of that right to get access?
MR. GARRE: That's right, Justice Alito. The
remedy would be the traditional remedy for enforcement
of treaties, diplomatic repercussions, diplomatic
protests, and that happens all the time. That happens
in this country where -- where consulates complain to
the United States State Department. It happens
overseas where the State Department complains about the
treatment of American citizens. This -- this --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are there any
countries that recognize individually enforceable
rights under this convention overseas on behalf of
American citizens?
MR. GARRE: No, Your Honor, and what -- the
Petitioners and their amici here are asking this Court
to be the first court to recognize an individually
enforceable right under this treaty.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about that Australian
case that was mentioned, I believe one case where they
say --
MR. GARRE: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- evidence was excluded?
That would have been a --
MR. GARRE: There -- there is Australian
authority going directly to the contrary. It's -- it's
the R. v. Abbrederis case which we cite, which -- which
recognizes that the article 36 is individually
enforceable.
The -- the other cases that are referred to
by some of Petitioners' amici are -- are addressed at
length in the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation amicus
brief. And they explain that in those situations,
there -- first of all, the cases are a little bit vague
as to which provisions they're purporting to enforce.
But, second of all, there are domestic statutes which
we think that the correct reading of the cases is in
those cases they were giving effect to the domestic
statutes.
There's certainly no -- no unambiguous
example that --
JUSTICE BREYER: I imagine there's not --
there's some little authority both ways. To put it in
my perhaps -- I know you disagree with this way of
thinking about it. But I'm -- I'm thinking about this
article 36 and thinking that you're reading it as if it
said, inform the individual, but if you don't, he can't
do anything about it. And the other way is to read the
silence as if it said, inform the individual, but if
you don't, he can do something about it. We're not
saying what. Okay.
Now, between those two interpretations, we
have the ICJ picking interpretation two and rejecting
interpretation one in, I grant you, a different case.
But I guess since a lot of these amicus briefs tell us
throughout history, a long history, we've tried to
follow ICJ interpretations of treaties to which we are
parties. Why -- it's all up to us, but we've tried to.
Why -- why should we not, given the two possible
interpretations -- they choose one. Why should we not
choose to follow theirs here?
MR. GARRE: Because, to be blunt, the ICJ
decision is wrong. This Court gives respectful
consideration to the decisions of the ICJ and other
international tribunals, but it's certainly not bound
by those decisions. This Court should look carefully
to the text of the treaty itself, to the ratification
history, to the consistent interpretation of the
executive branch, and to implementing practice in other
states.
At best, they -- Petitioners and their amici
have suggested that there's some ambiguity in -- in two
states, Australia and Great Britain. There are more
than 160 contracting states to this -- to this treaty.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, then you're going back
to putting weight on the absence of authority. In
those contracting states, most of which I guess are
civil system states, and in civil systems, you'll have
magistrates who do take this kind of thing into
account, but you won't find a case on it. So -- so --
MR. GARRE: What you don't --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- are there authorities in
these other states to the contrary? I'm surprised if
there is.
MR. GARRE: There are authorities that we've
cited where courts have rejected the notion that
article 36 creates individually enforceable rights, in
Canada and Australia, and there's a case in Germany
where they refused to provide for a suppression remedy.
So there are authorities going the other way.
The manner in which this treaty is
implemented by the State Department overseas and by the
State Department here is to provide for enforcement
through the traditional means. This Court, as long
back as the Head Money Cases, said that the traditional
-- treaties are compacts between states. The
traditional means of enforcing those obligations is
through diplomatic repercussions.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In your view, just as a
practical matter, what we have here, how -- how should
the States enforce this obligation?
MR. GARRE: Well, the States should enforce
it generally by giving information to the detainee at
the point in time when they realize -- determine that
he's a foreign national. The State Department is
engaged in extensive --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do they have any obligation
to inquire whether he is? And -- and can you be more
specific? Should it happen --
MR. GARRE: Generally --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- when you first give him
the Miranda warnings, or tell me how you think it
should work?
MR. GARRE: Generally it happens during the
arrest process. If -- if, during the course of
questioning, they determine that a detainee or arrestee
is a foreign national, then at that point in time,
generally they would provide consular notification.
The State --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you think they have the
affirmative obligation to ask him if he is a foreign
national?
MR. GARRE: The State Department advises law
enforcement officers at the Federal and State and local
level that ordinarily they should make that
determination.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If they don't -- if
they can't ask him -- I mean, I assume many foreign
nationals are detained fairly close to the border, and
if you start saying, well, my first question is, are
you a citizen or not, you've got to give Miranda
warnings first saying you don't have to answer any
question that might incriminate you.
MR. GARRE: That's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's kind of a catch
MR. GARRE: That's right, Mr. Chief Justice.
And many foreign nationals are reluctant to provide
information about their citizenship because they fear
that that could result in other legal jeopardy.
Importantly, Justice Kennedy, article 36 is
in no way an interrogation right. It has no connection
to interrogation. The International Court of Justice
in the Avena decision, at page -- at paragraph 87,
specifically made that point, that this was not related
to interrogation. In many European countries,
detainees who are arrested not only can't have access
to consular officials during questioning, they don't
even have access to lawyers during questioning. So --
so this --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I thought you
indicated that you advise the States that they do have
to advise him of this right during the booking process
or the interrogation.
MR. GARRE: Well, when they -- when they
learn that the person is a foreign national.
Oftentimes, that could happen -- that could happen
during questioning, although oftentimes it doesn't. It
could happen at booking. It could happen later in the
process. That's what the State Department advises law
enforcement officials.
The State Department has engaged in extensive
efforts to ensure compliance with this treaty in order
to abide by our international obligations. We -- we
have sent information to State and local law
enforcement officers how to comply with this treaty.
There have been training videos. There have been cards
similar to Miranda cards. More than 600,000 of those
cards have been sent out to local officials, and -- and
the initial indications that we've received is that
these efforts are working. In fact, these indicate --
these efforts are -- are outlined in the Hardy
affidavit, which is in volume II of the Counter
Memorial and Avena decision, which we've offered to
lodge with the Court.
But -- but we -- the feedback we've gotten is
that in some offices, they're being overwhelmed by
notifications. So the United States is seeking to
abide by its treaty obligations. Those efforts are
working.
This --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Has it worked the other
way around when a young American citizen is detained in
-- in a jail someplace abroad, and has the United
States ever then -- what efforts have been made?
MR. GARRE: Your Honor, the efforts that we
undertake are diplomatic efforts. We do not go into
foreign courts and assert or suggest that American
citizens should go into foreign courts and assert a
right to individually enforce this treaty either
through suppression or any of the other remedies that
have been suggested.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Has it worked anyplace?
Take Mexico, Turkey, any country you'd like.
MR. GARRE: Yes, Your Honor. In fact, during
the 1980's the United States complained to Mexico about
the fact that American citizens had not received
consular notification, and through the result of those
diplomatic discourses, they negotiated an -- a
agreement whereby American citizens were brought back
to the United States for custody. But significantly
there, the -- the United States didn't take the
position that those convictions were unlawful or could
be set aside under the Vienna Convention. They simply,
through diplomatic discourse, the traditional means of
enforcing a treaty, provided for the -- the transfer of
these citizens back to the United States to serve out
their custody.
The -- the traditional rule in international
law is that treaties don't create individually
enforceable rights. Many treaties, by their terms, do
expressly contemplate private enforcement in domestic
courts. Look at article 28 of the Warsaw Convention.
Look at article 2, subsection 3 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. These treaties
do expressly contemplate that theirs -- their
provisions will be individually enforceable in the
domestic courts. It would have been --
JUSTICE SOUTER: When you say they -- they
contemplate it, how do they express that contemplation?
I mean, are -- are there magic words that diplomats
understand or -- or what?
MR. GARRE: Your Honor, they refer to rights
that individuals can assert or should be able to assert
in judicial courts, in the domestic courts.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But they -- they provide
expressly that these are rights that may be asserted
individually in national courts?
MR. GARRE: There -- Your Honor, there are
varying degrees of specificity, but yes, they -- in
some cases they do provide for that explicitly.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But they -- they go beyond
the reference to rights as -- as in article 36.
MR. GARRE: Yes. They -- they refer to
domestic enforcement.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do they, in all those
property cases, you know, from like the early part of
this republic where property law was determined in
accordance with -- you know all those cases that are
cited.
MR. GARRE: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: In those treaties where the
courts then looked to the treaty to help decide who
owned what property, they used it as a rule of
decision. Do those cases -- treaties all use the word
individually enforceable rights?
MR. GARRE: They didn't, Your Honor, but
those treaties, as we explain in our brief, are dealing
with commercial relations, property rights, and -- and
are almost entirely dealing with individuals and how
they should be treated in foreign states, are much more
amenable to a construction that they create
individually enforceable rights. And the Vienna
Convention, which after all is a convention about the
quintessential matter of interstate relations, consular
functions between states -- we don't think that that
treaty can be interpreted to confer individually
enforceable rights.
JUSTICE BREYER: Where does this term come
from as applied to a rule of decision? I mean, when
somebody is arguing that the treaty should apply a rule
of decision in a case brought under some other cause of
action, what's the best thing I could read? I'm not an
expert.
MR. GARRE: Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: You say the way to think
about that --
MR. GARRE: -- read --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is the, quote,
individually enforceable rights.
MR. GARRE: We would suggest read the treaty.
It's -- it's -- we agree with you that you get back to
the treaty and you have to make the determination that
the signatory states to the treaty intended for private
enforcement in domestic courts.
The signatory states to this treaty provided
for a very limited judicial enforcement mechanism, only
contracting states that join the optional protocol and
only in the ICJ. It would have been an extraordinary
thing for those contracting states that so carefully
limited that remedy to -- to subject themselves to suit
in their own courts to any number of foreign nationals
who went abroad into their countries.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I -- I would agree
there, but we're not -- this -- this isn't a case about
subjecting them to suit.
MR. GARRE: What you -- what you -- what
they're asking you to do, Your Honor, is to say that
this treaty is individually enforceable in our courts.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, yes, but -- but that
is -- that's not equivalent to saying that it's -- it
is subjecting the United States to suit.
MR. GARRE: May I answer the question?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. GARRE: It is, Your Honor, insofar as if
you think it in waiver of sovereign immunity terms. A
state may waive its sovereign immunities from some
types of claims, but not other types of claims. And
what they're claiming here is that these claims are
enforceable, and we think that they are incorrect.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Stancil, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MARK T. STANCIL
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER IN NO. 05-51
MR. STANCIL: Thank you. I'd like to first
briefly address two points on behalf of Mr. Sanchez-
Llamas.
First, with -- with respect to him, the
question is how to give full effect to the treaty in
the context of custodial interrogation, and his
position is that suppression is necessary to give full
effect. And we need look no further than the fact that
the custodial -- that the remedies that are currently
afforded in a context of custodial interrogation are
ineffective.
And secondly, admitting evidence encourages
violations, and that's been the -- the result that's
been a constant pattern and practice of violations.
If I could switch back to Mr. Bustillo's
case, and I'd like to address what Mr. Garre just said,
which is that there's a presumption or that -- that
treaties don't create individually enforceable rights.
Every decision of this Court is unambiguously
clear. Where you have a treaty that becomes part of
the domestic law -- here it is. Where that treaty
creates rights -- here the treaty says his rights. And
third and critically, where you have a cause of action
to enforce those rights, it is judicially enforceable
as a matter of domestic law. Regardless of the
international dimension of the treaty, as a matter of
domestic law, it is enforceable.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it refers to his
rights, to make it clear that the consular office does
not have the right to contact him in the situations
where he would prefer not to be contacted by his
consul.
MR. STANCIL: I disagree, Your Honor. If --
if you look at the treaty's text, it says, you shall
notify the person affected of his rights. It's
referring to the foreign national specifically. And
twice more, article 36(2) talks about the rights that
are created. These all flow directly to the foreign
national. He decides whether to exercise them. This
is a classic rights-creating piece of -- it's not a --
it's not a statute, but it's treated on par.
And if you look at the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I thought you said the
third condition was creation of a cause of action.
MR. STANCIL: Availability of a cause of
action. Here --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where -- where is that in
this statute?
MR. STANCIL: The Virginia habeas statute
provides a cause of action if you are held in violation
of Federal law, and in Sanchez-Llamas, the cause of
action is the criminal prosecution. That's what the
Court did in Rauscher where it allowed him to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You meant the statute has to
create a cause of action.
MR. STANCIL: The cause of action, just like
83, allows --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, the -- the treaty
has to create a cause of action.
MR. STANCIL: That's not correct. Just like
83 has to create a cause of action to vindicate
Federal rights, here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, 1983 is a good
example. If you have a -- a treaty between a State and
the Federal Government, a Spending Clause provision,
that says you've got to spend the money this way, give
certain rights to the individuals, we don't always
automatically hold that the individuals have
enforceable rights even under 1983.
MR. STANCIL: Not automatically, but if you
have a statute that said his rights and refers rights
and makes it his obligation and his decision whether to
invoke them, it would be classic rights-creating.
If I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It said his rights in
Gonzaga v. Doe, which dealt with the student privacy
rights act, and we held -- and the -- we -- the Court
held that that was -- did not give rise to individually
enforceable rights.
MR. STANCIL: I would -- I would compare the
language of article 36(2) to any of the rights cases
this Court has decided.
If I could, in my remaining minute, describe
why -- and this goes to the heart of what we were
talking about with the procedural bar. If the question
is, as Justice Breyer put it, whether pushing these
claims to ineffective assistance is self-defeating, we
have ample evidence here that it is. The State says,
well, it may or may not be ineffective assistance. The
State court said it wasn't ineffective assistance.
That's because trial counsel doesn't have unique
experience and knowledge necessary to make these
decisions. That's why the treaty expressly puts it in
the hands of the foreign national to make these
decisions, not the lawyer.
And, with respect, if -- if -- the State has
asserted that we haven't raised an ineffective
assistance claim. We did -- we did recharacterize in
the Virginia Supreme Court, on pages -- page 203, note
of the joint appendix, that if you wanted to flip all
this on its head, you could certainly -- you would
certainly have to conclude that he created -- that he
committed ineffective assistance of counsel.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Stancil.
MR. STANCIL: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the case in the
