IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
WISCONSIN RIGHT TO LIFE, INC.
Petitioner,
: No. 04-1581
FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, January 17, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:13 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JAMES BOPP, JR., ESQ., Terre Haute, Indiana; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ., Solicitor General, Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JAMES BOPP, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner
PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JAMES BOPP, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 53
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:13 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first today in No. 04-1581, Wisconsin Right to Life,
Incorporated v. Federal Election Commission.
Mr. Bopp.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES BOPP, JR.
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BOPP: Thank you, and Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
This case involves the fundamental First
Amendment question of whether the Government can shield
lawmakers from grassroots lobbying about upcoming votes
in Congress through campaign finance laws.
This Court has distinguished the regulation
of corporate electioneering from efforts to influence
lawmaking, finding sufficiently compelling
governmental interests in regulating electioneering,
but not grassroots lobbying.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Bopp, right -- right
there I guess I -- I have a problem with -- with your
argument, and I just want to get it out. I went back
and looked at some of the examples that were given at
-- in -- in the McConnell case for parallels between
what we -- what we thought was covered in those cases
and -- and yours -- your case. And the -- the one
which I -- I guessed was probably the closest was the --
was the advertisements there in -- in the McConnell
case on the -- the lobbying on the Chinese trade
relations. The basic message in -- in that case was
China uses forced labor. The Congress of the United
States is about to make it easier for -- for Chinese
goods to get in here and for China to have a
respectable trade status. And -- and it said, call
Congressman Myrick, I think it was, in any case, a
Member of Congress, and -- and say what you think.
In this case, you're -- you're talking about
a -- a filibuster, and you say, you know, they're
filibustering nominees and they're not coming up to --
to a vote. Tell the two Senators in this State, Kohl
and Feingold, that -- that you don't like this.
The only difference that I could see
basically between the two kinds of ads was that in the
first one -- in -- in the Myrick ad, they actually gave
the number of the -- of the congressional office to
call and say, hey, don't do this.
In this case, your clients did not give a --
a number. They gave a Web site to an organization.
Insofar as I know, it doesn't have a number.
Which gets me to the question. If the -- the
Chinese trade relations ad was presumably validly
subject to the act, I don't see why your client's ad is
not, for the same reason, subject to the act and for
the further reason that it doesn't even give a phone
number to call -- to -- to lobby the people. So it seems
to me that on stare decisis grounds, unless we're going
to go back and simply reexamine McConnell to -- to --
from -- from scratch, that your clients fall within the
general rule as -- as we held it in McConnell. So why
doesn't precedent foreclose this?
MR. BOPP: Well, there -- there is a few
specifics about the -- about our ad that -- that I
would like to remind the Court of.
First, it was not -- the call to action at
the end of the ad was not just call them up and tell
them what you think. The call to action was to call
the Senators and ask them to oppose the filibuster. So
it was specific.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but you didn't even
give their phone numbers.
MR. BOPP: Well, and then it refers to a Web
site, befair.org, which contained prominently on the
first page the phone numbers and addresses and all
contact information for these two Senators. The
decision was made by the speaker here that it would be
more likely that the recipient of the ad would remember
the phrase, befair.org, and seek the information on
that Web site than to have a -- you know, a -- a phone
number that is just simply more difficult to -- to
remember.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. So if we accept that
extra step, that's -- that gets you -- if -- if we
accept the extra step that gets you parallel to the --
to the ad that we considered in McConnell.
MR. BOPP: Well, it -- it doesn't, the one
that you mentioned, because it was just call them up
and --
JUSTICE BREYER: If -- if it's the fact that
you go to the Web site and that's what's supposed to
make this what it was in McConnell which, by the way,
we said was illegal, what they -- the first thing
they're going to see when they get to the Web site,
which I agree with you -- four times in 3 of the 12
sentences of this ad -- in 3 of the 12 -- it says,
befair.org, visit befair.org, go to befair.org. And
the first thing that they're going to see when they get
to befair.org is a big headline in bold -- gold -- bold
letters which says, Feingold and Kohl continue to
support unprecedented filibusters of judicial nominees.
So, in fact, if befair.org is brought into the
picture, that makes this ad look much more like an
effort to -- to defeat Senator Feingold than the ad
that we considered in our previous case.
MR. BOPP: Well, it --
JUSTICE BREYER: Doesn't it?
MR. BOPP: No. In your previous case, there
were certainly genuine issue ads. This Court
recognized that it -- that there were genuine issue ads
that were not for the purpose of influencing an
election. I believe that these ads are at the very
core of what a genuine issue ad is. It involves a -- a
pending legislative issue, and the only reference to
the Senator -- and it was both Senators, not just the
one up for election -- was to contact them about --
about how -- whether to support or oppose that specific
initiative.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yes, but in McConnell --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if you are right --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- in McConnell, the Court
said corporations and unions may finance genuine issue
ads during election blackout periods by simply avoiding
any specific reference to Federal candidates or, in
doubtful cases, by paying for the ad from a segregated
fund. Now, that language indicates, to me at least,
that the Court was saying there are no genuine issue
ads meeting the definition as you would have us apply
it here.
MR. BOPP: Well, that -- that part of the
opinion needs to be read in light of the footnote,
which is attached to those very words, which said in
footnote 88 that the interests that support regulation
of electioneering may not apply to genuine grassroots
lobbying and distinguished the McConnell case from
Bellotti and McIntyre.
So we do have to recognize that there's two
things going on here. There -- there is an election,
but also Congress is in session. The Government is
engaging in its lawmaking function.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Bopp, to what extent
can we take into account the surrounding circumstances?
One thing that you advocate is to look at this ad in
isolation. But if you add to it that your organization
made it clear that it opposed the candidacy of Senator
Feingold and that it supported his opponents, that your
organization also connected, as Justice Breyer just
brought out, Senator Feingold with this filibuster, and
then if the filibuster was such an important thing for
grassroots lobbying, why was it that when the election
was over, this ad was not repeated?
MR. BOPP: Well, of course, the final point
is -- is in the record, that -- that is, it was -- the
-- it was supposed to come to a head in November and
then it did not. It was abandoned.
But the -- but the point is you cannot -- I
don't think that the Government can condition --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I don't -- I don't
understand what you just said.
MR. BOPP: Well -- well, the -- the
filibuster issue, as it related to that session of
Congress, it was thought that it was going to come to a
head in -- in October -- excuse me -- but it -- but as
a -- but it did not. So that is the reason why it was
-- it would not have been run after November.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but I mean, once it didn't
come to a head in November and it was still an issue, why
didn't you continue to run it?
MR. BOPP: Well, each organization has to
make an assessment with respect to the different issues
that they want to be lobbying on and the -- their
pressing nature. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your point
was that it was not an issue after the election.
MR. BOPP: Well -- well, it was in the -- in
the next session of Congress and has been an -- an
issue. But each -- a lobby organization makes a
decision about the priorities that they have and
whether or not their lobbying efforts will most likely
affect legislative action. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Were you taking a
position on this issue prior to the election time
frame?
MR. BOPP: Yes. The --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Had you taken out
advertisements prior to that time frame?
MR. BOPP: Yes. Yes, and in fact these radio
and television ads were continuing up until the
blackout period and it was the blackout period that
triggered the case.
JUSTICE BREYER: But the basic question I
think is this. All of us -- or almost all of us who
are here -- spent an entire summer reading through one
of the longest set of opinions I've ever seen from the
lower courts and going through a record that they had
compiled over months reflecting 6 years of
congressional effort. And what that record showed with
dozens, hundreds I think, of examples was the basis for
Congress' conclusion that there's simply no way to know
whether an ad like yours is a genuine issue ad or
isn't. And the only way that we have a hope of
stopping rich people or corporations or labor unions
from simply trying to defeat candidates by writing sham
ads is to have the rule that we had.
Now, you have a very good argument, but it's
an argument that I heard right in that case. And we
considered right in that case issues like yours, just
ads like yours, ads that were even less sham-like than
yours, if you want to call yours a sham -- I don't mean
to be pejorative. But we considered all that, and then
we used them as an example. And of course, it was
close. 5 to 4 this Court said ads that are even more
apparently neutral on their face than yours, Congress
can impose this requirement.
Now, what's different about your ad than the
ads we put right in that opinion as examples of what
we'd allow Congress to control? What's different now
or are you asking us to go back only a year later and
undo what we did?
MR. BOPP: No. I'm asking you to give
meaning to the holding of this Court that there were
genuine issue ads that were broadcast during that
period of time. The Government conceded 7 percent,
asked you to do a Broadrick analysis upholding the
statute on its face, reserving as-applied challenges to
genuine issue ads in subsequent cases. That is what
this case is about.
And the difference here is that as Judge Leon
-- the record of the case -- in Judge Leon's opinion,
he went for a number of pages explaining what genuine
issue ads in his view were, and what -- and he said
that if the ad discusses a current legislative issue
and refers to the Member of Congress in calling on him
or her to take a particular action on that issue, that
constitutes a genuine issue ad.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can we return to --
MR. BOPP: These people are lawmaking.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Bopp, then can we
return to my question? Do we view the ad in isolation,
and do we discount the connection by your organization
of this Senator with the filibuster that you said was
a very bad thing?
MR. BOPP: And I'm sorry. I was interrupted.
I wasn't able to get to that question.
And the -- the Government cannot condition
the exercise of one right on exercising another.
There's a First Amendment right for the PAC of
Wisconsin Right to Life to support or oppose
candidates. That's different than what its lobby group
does. Its lobby group is primarily involved in
influencing current lawmaking. And so that is why, in
the First Amendment, petition is separately listed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the electorate will
know that this issue is presented to them in connection
with this Senator and that your organization has linked
the two very clearly.
MR. BOPP: But, you know, the -- the effect
on an election is remote and speculative and not proven
by -- in terms of genuine issue ads in this record.
But these people are lawmaking now. So there's a
pressing need and, indeed, right for people today to
influence the Government's lawmaking regardless of the
incidental, remote, speculative, and unproven effect
that that genuine issue ad may have on an election.
There -- there is simply -- we just cannot
get away from the fact that the most important thing
that Government does is lawmaking, and because they've
scheduled an election should not immunize the
incumbents from being lobbied about that very law-
making function that they're engaged in today.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why didn't we have to
go the other way in the Chinese trade relation example?
I mean, everything --
MR. BOPP: Well, I don't think you --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- unless I'm missing
something in your argument, everything you are saying
in this argument could have been said with respect to
that ad and, as Justice Breyer said, to a couple of
others.
MR. BOPP: Well that may very well have been
a genuine issue ad in the mind of this Court. You only
cited one ad, which was on page 193, which was the
Yellowtail ad, as an example of sham issue advertising.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. BOPP: And there, you know --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And -- and we -- we cited
some other examples as -- as examples that, on the face
of it and on the face of the record, would -- would
lawfully fall within the -- the general rule that we
said Congress could prescribe.
MR. BOPP: Well -- well, the Yellowtail ad,
which you cited and quoted as a example of sham issue
ad, said that the -- Mr. Yellowtail had taken a swing
at his wife and he justified that because he said he
didn't hit her.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but the point --
MR. BOPP: And then it said basically call
him up and yell at him.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I -- I don't want to cut
you off from your Yellowtail argument, if -- if you
want to make it, but it seems to me that the problem in
this case is that your ad is very much like a non-
Yellowtail ad. And the problem that we would have in
accepting your argument is, number one, a problem of
precedent and, number two, the problem that Justice
Breyer raised that, again, we had dealt with in the
prior case.
MR. BOPP: How could it be --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, no. Let me just finish
my question.
MR. BOPP: Sorry.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Once you get out of the
sphere of -- of kind of sham ads that just hit you in
your face, there isn't a practical way to tell the
difference. There isn't a kind of magic formula. We
rejected the magic word, or Congress rejected the magic
word's approach. And therefore, Congress came up with
a rule that it did within certain time limits,
identified candidates, identified audiences. You can't
do it within this period of time unless you do it
through a PAC.
What is different in your case from those
paradigm examples in -- in McConnell?
MR. BOPP: Well, as I was describing, the
Yellowtail ad was --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But Yellowtail --
MR. BOPP: -- which involves very --
--
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- is -- is an ad of -- an
obviously sham ad. The problem that we're dealing with
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Bopp, did -- did the
opinion refer to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: May -- may I finish?
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- sham ads?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Excuse me. May I -- may I
finish my question?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did the opinion refer to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Justice Souter.
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I finish my question?
The -- the -- no one is saying that your ad
in this case is an obviously sham ad like Yellowtail.
Your ad in this case is one of those ads that it's
difficult to deal with fairly. You can say, well, you
know, it's an electioneering ad and you can say it's --
it's a lobbying ad. And -- and Congress decided how to
deal with them. We said that's okay. Why doesn't --
MR. BOPP: Only on a facial challenge.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but why doesn't your ad
fall within the reasoning that we used in approving --
on the facial challenge, in approving the statute?
MR. BOPP: Because the Broadrick facial
challenge analysis that you engaged in in McConnell is
--
not completed because that includes future as-applied
challenges. The Government argues that there were --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No -- no question about it.
MR. BOPP: -- 7 percent --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But your -- your as-applied
MR. BOPP: -- genuine issue ads --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- challenge has got to have
something different about it, something unusual that
says this is why my ad does not fall within the general
rule. And that's what I'm trying to get at.
MR. BOPP: Well, I -- I will repeat. The --
it involves a currently pending legislative issue. It
does not talk --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Wasn't the Chinese trade
issue currently pending?
MR. BOPP: Yes, it was, and you know, the
Chinese --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So that's no difference.
MR. BOPP: But -- but, Your Honor, the
Chinese example was not cited by this Court. It was in
the record. And it may be a -- a genuine issue ad.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Sure.
MR. BOPP: Okay? And -- and the Government
argued there were 7 percent genuine issue ads really
trying to exercise the constitutional right to petition
Government, because Government is regulating us right
now in terms of their votes and their actions. And, of
course, that's why in the First Amendment, it doesn't
just say speech and -- and association and press. It
-- it says --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I --
MR. BOPP: -- petition the Government.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- may I ask one question
just to find out? Are you contending that there is a
sharp distinction? There's a category of issue ads and
a category of election ads that are mutually exclusive?
MR. BOPP: I think you can create objective
criteria, just like this Court has --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No. If you can answer my
question yes or no. Are -- are you arguing there are
two mutually exclusive categories, or are there ads
that fit somewhat in both?
MR. BOPP: Well, I -- I think that you can
adopt objective criteria as you have in the Noerr v.
Pennington doctrine to separate the two.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are you able to answer my
question yes or no?
MR. BOPP: I -- I would say no.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You're not claiming there
are separate categories.
MR. BOPP: Then I misunderstood your
question, Your Honor. I am saying that they are
separate categories. This Court --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So it's either -- it's
either an issue ad or it's a candidate ad.
MR. BOPP: Yes. And I'm not saying at the --
at the margins there -- there may not be doubtful
cases, but what I'm saying is that this Court in Noerr
v. Pennington doctrine has recognized and adopted
objective criteria to distinguish between genuine
efforts to influence the Government, which is not
subject to the Sherman Act, and sham issues -- efforts
to regulate --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does the -- does the
FEC draw -- distinguish between sham ads and genuine
issue ads?
MR. BOPP: No, the -- no, they haven't. But
right before the 2004 election -- excuse me -- they
gave an exception to an auto dealership that wanted to
continue to run the name of the owner of the
dealership, despite the fact that he was a Senator -- a
candidate for United States Senate, during the blackout
period. And the commercial interests at stake there
were sufficient for the FEC to grant an as-applied
exception even though there may have been some
incidental effect on the election. So the FEC has
recognized that there is interests which are sufficient
and -- and also that the -- the possible impact on an
election is so remote that -- that the interests are --
are sufficient.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So what is the
test? Because I -- my vague recollection from a year
and a half ago is that there was in that testimony
political consultants who said if you really want to
defeat a Senator, here's how you do it.
MR. BOPP: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Run an ad that just speaks
about a group of Senators. It's plain that they're
bad, and then put in some words that mention his name
and everybody will get the point. They said that's
even better than saying, vote against.
And then our opinion said there is little
difference between an ad that urges voters to vote
against Jane Doe and one that condemns Jane Doe's
record on a particular issue while exhorting viewers to
call Jane Doe and tell her what you think. That was
the opinion.
So, now, what's your test to decide whether
that's what's going on or whether this is a genuine
issue ad?
MR. BOPP: I think that you would look at,
one, whether the -- the ad discusses a current
legislative issue; two, whether or not it made any
reference to the legislator beyond lobbying him or her
about that specific issue. So there should not be any
references to the election or the candidacy of the
incumbent or any of those type references. And if you
had that, you would have a bona fide, genuine effort to
lobby.
They are voting. They're taxing us. They're
regulating us. And as we know, the record reflects
that usually most of the -- of these issues are decided
in the context of this blackout period at the end of --
end of Congress.
So I know it is difficult to balance these
interests, but there is more interest among the people
than simply the remote and speculative effort to
influence an election. There is an immediate need to
influence how Government is regulating and taxing us.
So that is the interest that is presented here. That
is the interest that the Court in McConnell recognized
when the Court said there are genuine issue ads and --
and only engage in what the Government urged was a
Broadrick facial challenge analysis.
The Government said in McConnell, well, any
of these genuine issue ads can be dealt with in an as-
applied challenge. Now, they have switched sides here,
having asked the Court and the Court engaging in a
Broadrick facial challenge analysis -- are now saying
that even though Broadrick would allow as-applied, that
you are not to entertain any as-applied. I just don't
see --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Now, this ad could have
been run by your clients by a segregated fund.
MR. BOPP: Yes. Yes, that is true. And --
and, of course, as -- as this Court has recognized --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: It just ran out of money.
Is that the deal?
MR. BOPP: Well, that was only part of it.
They -- they didn't raise money with the anticipation
of doing their lobbying with it. In other words, they
raised all their lobbying money in their -- in their
general treasury. The -- the only funds they raised in
their PAC is to advocate the election or defeat of
candidates or give money to candidates, which -- which
this Court has recognized is a proper way of directly
affecting an elections.
But making lobbying into a PAC means that,
number one, you're going to have to identify that
effort to influence a vote -- about an upcoming vote in
Congress, you're going to have to identify that as a
political activity.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. If you can do
this, can a labor union do it?
MR. BOPP: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And a corporation?
MR. BOPP: Yes. Of course, the prohibition
we're attacking is against corporations --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Well, then --
then we're back to -- I mean, I've heard this. This is
very familiar music to me and I think you raise a tough
issue. I just thought we perhaps had decided it.
But the -- the reason that this was so tough
was then these very, very wealthy individuals -- and
since I once read through the list, I know who they
are. And they -- they say, I'm going to give $15
million. You know, I'm going to give $15 million. So
they hire this genius political consultant that's there
in the record. And what happens is ads that look an
awful like this, and this consultant says, hey, we have
$15 million to pay for it from this one person. And
they run them all over the country. And Senator after
Senator is boom, boom, boom, boom.
MR. BOPP: Yes, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: It becomes a question of
motive and how do we know what the motive is?
MR. BOPP: That's not what advocacy groups
are doing. You know, people who want -- the wealthy
people you're talking about have gone into giving money
to 527 unincorporated groups that -- that are using
issue ads lawfully through that vehicle.
But, you know, before this all happened, the
96 and the record of McConnell where, all of a
sudden, there were more of these issue ads, the record
also reflects that there had been issue ads, you know,
throughout history. And -- and, of course, those were
all these efforts to influence the upcoming votes in
Congress. So that occurred before this effort with
sham issue ads. It -- it would occur now except that
genuine issue advocacy through grassroots lobbying is
now swept in under the reason that it might have an
incidental effect on elections.
This Court just simply needs to recognize
that there's more to Government than elections, and
even more importantly than elections is the lawmaking
function and that -- that people should not be disabled
from using most effective means to influence that law-
making with -- on the basis that simply there's an
election coming up.
I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Bopp.
General Clement, we'll hear now from you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL D. CLEMENT
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
GENERAL CLEMENT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In McConnell against FEC, this Court upheld
title II's definition and regulation of electioneering
communications by corporations and unions as defined in
the act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In McConnell against
FEC, you stood there and told us that this was a facial
challenge and that as-applied challenges could be
brought in the future. This is an as-applied challenge
and now you're telling us that it's already been
decided. It's a classic bait and switch.
GENERAL CLEMENT: No. In -- in fairness, Mr.
Chief Justice, in the McConnell case at pages 105 and
6 of our brief, we said that as-applied challenges
would arguably be available. But the principal
argument we stressed in the brief and in oral argument
was that, in a sense, overbreadth analysis here and
even as-applied challenges, though we didn't put it in
those terms, are a little bit beside the point because
of the nature of the regulatory structure here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there any other
case that you can cite where we've upheld a facial
challenge and then later said that an as-applied
challenge was barred by our ruling on the facial
challenge?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, I
will answer it, and I -- and I think actually --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Like Justice Stevens,
I think that's a yes or no.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL CLEMENT: Okay. Yes. Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What --
GENERAL CLEMENT: Lane and Hibbs. I can't
imagine after those two decisions which upheld in
facial challenges the statutes at issue there and said
that there was not too much prophylaxis for purposes of
section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I beg your pardon. I
didn't hear the names of the cases.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Lane and Hibbs. Tennessee
against Lane and Nevada against Hibbs. I can't imagine
after those decisions that somebody --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's a very
different question. That's interpreting the scope of
Congress's power under section 5 of the Fourteenth
Amendment. The issue is whether it's limited to the
constitutional violations or sweeps more broadly. If
you conclude that it sweeps more broadly, it's not
suggesting that an as-applied challenge can be brought
by someone who's covered by the broader sweep. That's
a very different question.
Is there any First Amendment case where we've
said this is facially valid and then said as-applied
challenges can't be brought?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I don't think this Court has --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it would be
like in any of those cases where you have a -- a broad
prohibition and you say, yes, there may be situations
where it's unconstitutional, but the statute is valid
on its face. And then someone comes in and says, well,
my situation is one where it's unconstitutional. We've
never said, well, it's too bad because it's valid on
its face, have we?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I think the case really
hasn't arisen because generally when this Court clearly
identifies an area where Congress can regulate in
prophylactic terms, somebody doesn't come back in and
try to bring the exact same challenge. And if I could
give you two examples.
If somebody after Burson against Freeman,
which you may remember is the case where this Court
upheld a 100-foot buffer zone around a polling place --
if somebody came in after that decision and said, well,
that can't apply to me in an as-applied challenge
because I only want to stand 90 feet away, I think they
would have gotten laughed out of Court because this
Court already said that a 100-foot buffer zone was
sufficient.
I think in a similar way --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it might have been
that 90 feet included a public street and you couldn't
go down a public street without -- so -- and so --
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It -- it does seems strange
to me in a speech case to say we're foreclosing as-
applied challenges.
GENERAL CLEMENT: And -- and, Justice Kennedy,
please understand me. I don't mean to suggest that
McConnell somehow magically jurisdictionally foreclosed
as-applied challenges. And I suppose if somebody could
come in after Burson and give a good reason why their
situation is very different, that there's a super
highway 90 feet away or that all they were talking
about is a bumper sticker on a car, well, then maybe
that --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, I suppose you can
say, yes, you can have an as-applied challenge, but
this one doesn't meet the test.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Exactly, Justice O'Connor.
And again, it's not because it's foreclosed. It's
because the reasoning of this Court in McConnell
forecloses the decision.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So let's say you had
an organization that every month of every year it took
out an ad the first week of every month, and it said
the same thing and it said, contact your Senators.
This issue is important to us. And they do that every
month. All of a sudden, their ad's nature changes
because an election is -- happens to be coming up and
it's illegal the month before the election, even though
it was clearly something that they did without regard
to the election.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Mr. Chief Justice, that
would be a better as-applied challenge. I still think
that with respect to the ads in the 30 days before the
primary and the 60 days before the -- the general
election, that corporation could look at this Court's
decision in McConnell and say, oh, I understand. Our
remedy is not an as as-applied challenge. Our remedy --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If we want to place
an ad in October, the solution is to place an ad
November through September, and then we're okay. And
the only reason we're going to do it November through
September is so we can do it in October?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, no.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's a pretty broad
definition of a sham.
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, no. The point would be in
October either -- do exactly what this Court said at
page 206 of the McConnell opinion: either make the ad
in terms that doesn't expressly refer to the candidate
which, if you're not interested in influencing the
candidate election, shouldn't be a problem, or fund
that one advertisement through a separate, segregated
fund.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But on an issue like
this, the filibuster, it's the Senators who are doing
it, and their ad referred to not only the Senator who
was up for election, but the one who was not.
GENERAL CLEMENT: I understand that, Mr. Chief
Justice, but I think if you focus in on this particular
ad, you will see that whatever the true intent of the
advertisers here, this is the kind of ad that clearly
would have an impact on the election. I mean, it talks
about the -- the filibusters in colorful terms,
associates them with gridlock and with a state of
emergency, and then associates it with a candidate.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You think Congress has the
power to prohibit any First Amendment contact --
conduct that might have an impact on the election? I
mean, is that the criterion for whether it -- it can be
prohibited?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, Justice Scalia, it's not.
But I think what this Court very clearly did in
McConnell is it rejected an argument that said that the
only thing that Congress could regulate is that which
was unambiguously targeted at candidate elections.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you think there is a
compelling interest in preventing people from thinking
about an issue and then calling their Senator during
the blackout period. That's the compelling interest
that, in effect, you are arguing for.
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, Justice Kennedy. What
we're arguing for stems from the observation that this
Court made in McConnell, which is that when you get up
between 60 days before an election and you look at the
ads that are run, most of the ads, in fact, are
designed to influence candidate elections. It's very
difficult to figure out exactly which ones, and there
are very serious problems with adopting a very vague
intent standard.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are -- are Web sites and
chat rooms covered by the McCain-Feingold?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, they're not, Justice
Kennedy. The Internet is not covered.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But certainly under your
view, they ought to be. If you funded a Web site which
was very popular or a chat room, I certainly think it
should come within your proscription so that we can't
talk about issues during an election.
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, Justice Kennedy. I
think the fact that there are alternative methods
available to communicate these ideas in these ads is a
virtue, not a defect with this regulatory structure.
And I would like to focus in on these ads
because while it is true that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, why -- why not?
Suppose -- suppose most people look at the Web site and
they don't listen to the -- listen to the radio. I
think certainly McCain-Feingold should be extended to
that under your view.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Kennedy, I --
I'm not sure you really do think that -- that McCain-
Feingold should be extended to that.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL CLEMENT: And I do think that this is
an area where this Court, in fairness, has recognized
that -- that any effort to regulate in this area
effectively has to avoid three pitfalls. And it's a very
difficult task for Congress. It has to avoid being vague.
It has to avoid being overbroad. And as your question
suggests, it also has to avoid being so under-inclusive
and easy to evade that it can simply be circumvented in
a way that Congress can't achieve its purpose.
JUSTICE BREYER: What is the difference with
this? I mean, in my mind are possible as-applied
challenges. Bread for the City. Never supported the
candidate, worried about the hurricane in Louisiana.
Vote for relief for New Orleans. Write your Senator,
Senator X.
Organization two. Never supported a
candidate one way or the other, but has an issue
they're always interested in, and they run ads cycle
after cycle after cycle and they don't want to pull
them just because October has come along.
All right? Now, think of those organizations
where I think maybe, sure, maybe they'd win their as-
applied challenge. And here, you're not arguing it --
he doesn't have a right to bring it. You're arguing,
of course, he can bring an as-applied challenge. He's
just going to lose given our rationale. All right?
Why?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I -- I want to be
responsive and I think the way to respond is that this
Court's decision recognized that these ads were going
to be difficult to classify and that you needed some
kind of bright line rule and that the consequences of
having a bright line rule in this consequence -- in
this area weren't terrible because there were
alternative ways for them to communicate either through
a separate, segregated fund which served the interests
of the statute or by avoiding the kind of references
that would raise serious questions about tying the ad
to a candidate election.
And I think if you look at -- if -- if you
want to keep the possibility open of some as-applied
challenge and you focus on these ads, these are ads
that clearly, I think, would implicate the concerns of
Congress.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was the bright line
rule that -- that you think the -- the opinion
established? I thought the bright line rule was
whether it's an issue ad or -- or, rather, a phony
issue ad. I thought that was the -- the line that --
that the opinion was trying to -- to draw. You -- you
say that the opinion drew the line between what? All
issue ads are out?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I think all issue ads that
come within the statutory prohibition are permissibly
regulable. I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No issue ads during the --
the blackout.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Sure, you can run issue ads
as long as you either fund them through a separate,
segregated fund or you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No --
GENERAL CLEMENT: -- omit the reference to the
candidate.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, of course, I know.
GENERAL CLEMENT: And -- and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And stand on your head. But
the --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Within -- within the
framework of the statute, you think the clear line that
is established by the opinion is no issue ads without
this special funding during the blackout. You think
that's what the opinion says?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I think that this -- I do
think that is what the opinion says and stands for. And
I think this Court recognized --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why does it speak about sham
issue ads?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Scalia, for one
thing, I think it's important to recognize that the
discussion about sham versus genuine issue ads was
really a factor of the fact that necessarily in looking
at the record there, what the Court had to do is look
at ads that were run in previous election cycles where
this regulatory structure wasn't in place and try to
classify those ads. And as I understand it, sort of
genuine versus sham was a way of capturing whether or
not it was an ad that seemed primarily focused on an
issue or primarily focused on a candidate election.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why did you say there were 7
percent of these that -- that are probably okay?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I'm not sure which figure Mr.
Bopp is referring to as the 7 percent figure. I don't
-- I don't remember conceding that 7 percent of the ads
were okay.
And I think what we very clearly said -- and
if you go back and look at our briefs, as I did, I
think you'll see this. What we very clearly said --
and the Court picked up on it in that line on page 206
that Justice O'Connor read earlier -- is that whatever
was true about a retrospective analysis of ads that
were run in an election cycle that wasn't governed by
the statute, that in the future corporations could
avoid the -- the strictures of the statute by simply
doing one of two things: either avoiding making an
express reference to the candidate, which ought not to
be too difficult if you're really just engaged in issue
advocacy, not trying to influence a candidate election,
or alternatively, you can fund it through the separate,
segregated fund.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I deny the first thing,
that it's easy to do issue ads without naming the
candidate. The -- the point of an issue ad is to put
pressure on -- on the candidate that you want to vote
your way. Without -- without telling people to call --
not the candidate -- the -- the incumbent that you want
to vote your way -- without telling people to call the
office of that incumbent, you're not doing very much.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Scalia, they
didn't even do that in this ad, as has already been
pointed out. And if they would have said find out what
you can do to stop judicial filibusters, visit
befair.org, and avoided a reference to Senator
Feingold, they could have run this through their
--
general treasury funds. But they couldn't resist the
temptation to mention Senator Feingold in this context
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Could they have said in
the ad, call your elected representatives, not naming
any names?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Yes, Justice O'Connor, they
also could have done that.
And I think that the very fact that they
couldn't resist the temptation to link the filibuster
issue to Senator Feingold is not that surprising --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: General --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That may be because
the people who were doing the filibuster were the
Senators. It's not -- it's not a surprising thing to
link the Senators to that issue.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, and again, Mr. Chief
Justice, though, I mean, fair enough, but I think you
also have to keep in mind that this is a context where
this filibuster issue isn't some idiosyncratic interest
of the appellant here. This is an issue that was
identified as a campaign issue by the -- by -- by the
candidates opposing Senator Feingold, by the Wisconsin
Republican Party, and by appellant's own PAC. And to
the extent you're trying to figure out whether this was
really designed to influence the pending legislative
votes or the election, the timing of this ad strongly
suggests it was designed to influence the election.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The fact that it
mentions both -- the fact that it mentions both
Senators strongly suggests to me that it's concerned
about the issue because one of the Senators wasn't up
for election.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, that
gets back to Justice Stevens' question as to whether or
not these categories are mutually exclusive. I'm not
here to tell you that appellants weren't genuinely
issued about -- genuinely interested about the
filibuster issue. I think they were also, as their
political action committee press release shows,
genuinely interested in sending Senator Feingold
packing. And they had an opportunity to run this ad
and effectively get a twofer by naming Senator
Feingold. Now, they could have resisted that and only
gotten the influence on the -- the filibuster issue, if
they had taken the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And they -- and they could
have -- they could have named Senator Kohl, I take it.
GENERAL CLEMENT: They -- they could have,
Senator Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's such an odd calculus.
Who is the person more likely to be influenced with an
issue ad? The person who's running or the person who's
not going to run for 4 years? Obviously, the former.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Obviously --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that's -- and that's
the one area where the ad is prohibited.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Obviously, you're right,
Justice Kennedy, but obviously, there are concerns that
are implicated when somebody is running in cycle and
the ad has targeted the electorate in the immediate
run-up to the election that aren't present there with
Senator Kohl and, therefore, the Congress has -- has
struck a different balance in that case.
But just to focus on the timing of these ads,
they were run on day 4 of a 45-day August recess of the
Senate. Now, that timing, if what you were trying to
do, is to influence a pending legislative vote, is
very, very odd timing. It could hardly be worse. If,
on the other hand, you're trying to influence the
upcoming election, the timing of that ad makes a great
deal of sense.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if you're
trying to influence the Senators who are presumably or
possibly in their home State during a recess, that's
perfect timing to influence the Senators who are the
ones engaging in the filibuster --
GENERAL CLEMENT: I'm not sure I would --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- without regard to
whether they're running for election or not.
GENERAL CLEMENT: With respect, Mr. Chief
Justice, I'm not sure I'd pick day 4 of the August
recess to do that. Maybe 14 days before they're going
back, something like that, would be an appropriate time
to catch their attention in a -- in a period where
they're going to remember it when they go and vote.
But I think day 4 of a 45-day recess is probably not
when I would pick to start running these ads.
I don't suggest, though, the timing factor or
any other one factor ought to be dispositive. I think
what it goes to show is how difficult it would be to
try to get into a fact-intensive as-applied analysis of
these various issues. And all of that presumably would
have to be done in the context of TRO hearings and
preliminary injunction hearings on the eve of
elections.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I've lost track of
it. Your -- your answer to Justice Breyer's
hypothetical about Bread for the City and the hurricane
and all that is that that would be an illegal ad?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, no, I think my answer to
that would be that we'd still be here suggesting that
that's controlled. I think my answer was also that
that would be a far better as-applied challenge than
the one that this Court has before it.
And I think, you know, in -- in one sense we
make this point in the brief. I mean, contrasting this
case with a case like MCFL I think is quite
instructive. There, you're not focused on the content
or intent of specific ads. You look at the
organization as a whole and come up with fairly bright
lines. And once you've made a determination about the
organization in an as-applied challenge, you're done
with the issue.
Here, the kind of --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you do -- you do an
ideological history, an ideological pedigree of various
speakers. You think that's consistent with the First
Amendment? That -- that was the ACLU's suggestion
which, it seems to me, shows you how far we've gone
down this road.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I mean, that may speak
about where the ACLU is going. I don't think it speaks
about where this Court is going because this Court
hasn't adopted that test. The test that this Court
adopted in MCFL would -- did not get into that kind of
inquiry. What it did is it focused on three relatively
bright line factors about whether you accept corporate
money, whether you have other sources of income from
the corporation, and whether or not you were formed
expressly for political views but without any sort of
censorship or inquiry into what kind of political
views. And that I think this Court has found
administrable.
JUSTICE BREYER: But --
GENERAL CLEMENT: The FEC administers that.
That's --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's what I want to know
exactly. I didn't think -- I thought Congress
considered this impossible question. I thought that 7
percent figure was from a study, in fact, dozens of
studies, where these people who were experts, quote,
decided that about 7 percent of the ads like this one
distinguishing between really interested in issues or
interested in issues but, in significant part,
defeating the Senator. In the latter, of course, it's
campaign and it's part of the regulation of campaign
funds.
But they didn't think we could do it. They
thought first they could do it, and then they told the
FEC to go and produce a set of regs that would, in
fact, try to screen out that legitimate 7 percent. Am
I wrong about how the statute was supposed to work?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, you're not wrong, Justice
Breyer. And I would say that the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why haven't they done
And I had thought also that they were
supposed to control 527's by having regs or individual
cases that would decide whether there was a mix of
personnel between the campaign and the 527, whether
they talked to people and planned their strategy. Have
there been those regs written?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Breyer, let me
answer both questions.
As to the 527 issue, as I understand it, the
commission has decided to proceed on case-by-case
inquiries and has not tried to have a broad regulatory
approach yet.
Now, on to the issue of electioneering
communications, you're absolutely right that there is a
statutory authorization to create exceptions. But the
regulatory authority of the commission is limited, and
it's limited in the sense that they can't approve an
exception that would allow for ads that engage -- that
-- that fairly read, engage in promoting, attacking,
supporting, or opposing a candidate.
And what the FEC has found in practice is
that it's very difficult to create that kind of
regulatory exception because, as this Court recognized
in Buckley and in McConnell, one does not want to
naively underestimate the creativity of corporate
spenders or political consultants. And if you create a
bright line and say, all right, if you do this, that's
grassroots lobbying, that's not electioneering
communication, they're going to be able to drive a
truck through that kind of exception --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General --
GENERAL CLEMENT: -- unless you're exceedingly
careful.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General Clement, if you
could clarify for me some -- a response that Mr. Bopp
gave. Did this ad run, was it broadcast or televised
before the blackout period?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Ginsburg, as I
understand the record, the first effort to broadcast
this ad was on, I think, July 26th, and that was sort
of a few days before the -- the cutoff period would
kick in. So there was an effort by a matter of weeks
to broadcast this ad. But I think, you know, whether
one views that as setting the stage for this litigation
or being kind of an independent decision, I'll -- I'll
leave to others.
What I think is important, though, is that
although they were engaged on this issue before then,
up until that point, they had found it perfectly
satisfactory to engage on the issue without engaging in
broadcast advertisement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May I ask you one other
thing about the setting? When you went to the Web site
to get further information, what was conveyed about
Senator Feingold when you went to get that further
information?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
-- I don't have as good an answer for that as I would
like because the -- the Web site is now defunct. And
so maybe Mr. Bopp can answer that in rebuttal.
As I understand it, consistent with what
Justice Breyer said, that there was sort of additional
arguments about the Feingold record on -- on
filibusters and Senator Kohl's record on filibusters,
and then there was -- there was information about how
to contact them.
But I think, again, as -- as Mr. Bopp has
said, if -- if you don't find the broadcast medium a
particularly effective way to convey the phone numbers
and you have to reference people to the Web site
anyways, the very fact that you could reference them to
the Web sites without naming the candidates' names and
avoid the strictures entirely seems like the kind of
thing that this Court had in mind when it said on page
6 that there were ways to deal with this problem
prospectively and that you didn't need a as-applied
challenge like this one.
And again, I think you can't overestimate the
difficulties here because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: General Clement, you --
you've pointed out the difficulties, but I don't know
any other area where we said, well, you know, the --
the -- when you're dealing with important -- important
freedoms, important guarantees, where we shrug our
shoulders and say, well, the only way to accomplish
what the Government wants to do is to ride right --
right over those guarantees. I mean, we say, we -- we
cannot bust up this -- this drug conspiracy unless we
use warrantless searches. So, you know, whatever it
takes. We don't -- we don't operate that way. And
here, you're -- you're dealing with a very fundamental
guarantee --
GENERAL CLEMENT: Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the -- the right which I
think applies to corporations, as well as to anybody
else, and for individuals to associate with one another
to bring to bear influence on the legislative process.
That's a fundamental guarantee. And it doesn't
satisfy me to say, well, there's no other way to stop
people from criticizing incumbents during -- during the
election blackout period. Maybe you can't do entirely
what you want to do.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I hope that's not the
case, Justice Scalia. Let me give you two other First
Amendment examples: the first admittedly involving
intermediate scrutiny; the second, a strict scrutiny
case.
The first thing I have in mind is the
contribution limits themselves. This Court has fully
admitted that it doesn't have a scalpel to probe the
difference between $2,000, $1,000, $4,000 as a
contribution limit. And it's perfectly willing to
admit in its opinions that not every high-value donor
is going to be involved in an effort at corruption.
Yet, this Court approved the approach of the
contribution limits, which are hard to understand as
anything other than prophylactic limits. Now, that's
an example from intermediate scrutiny.
Even in the strict scrutiny context, though,
a case like Burson, I mean, this Court understood and
said in the opinion, we can't tell whether 75 feet
would be precisely okay or whether 90 feet or 100 feet.
We don't have a scalpel to probe that either. But
we're going to approve 100 feet because it's a basic
way of dealing with this problem, identifying the area
of potential concern, and people can do their
electioneering 101 feet away. They can do it here on
the 61st day. They can do it through the segregated
fund. I think that is an approach that this Court has
found acceptable, even in the First Amendment area, in
dealing with these intractable problems.
And I think Buckley --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But both of those
examples, of course, are quantities, and once you -- I
think it was Holmes who said, once you admit the
necessity of drawing a line, you know, you can always
find something on one side or the other. It's quite
different between $1,000 and $2,000 or 100 feet and 75
feet and advocacy with respect to an election and
advocacy with respect to an issue. It's an entirely
different quality of a distinction, it seems to me.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And -- and the difference
-- the difference is this is a content-based inquiry.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well but, Justice Kennedy,
precisely because you can't engage in just a formless
content-based inquiry and precisely because there isn't
any neat division between issue ads and candidate ads,
that is why you need to have a different regulatory
approach. I mean, this Court recognized --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I think the real bottom
line for the -- your opponent is that even a pure
election ad should get the same constitutional
protection as an issue ad, which is something we've
rejected.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Absolutely, Justice Stevens.
And of course, an even position one step intermediary
from that or one step backtracking from that would be
to say that all Congress can do in this area is
regulate those ads that are unambiguously election
oriented. And, of course, what's the class of those
ads? Well, that would be express advocacy.
And the one thing that I think is clear from
this Court's decision in McConnell is this Court made
clear that express advocacy is not a constitutional
line. Congress is not disempowered to go after mixed
ads that are -- yes, they have a component of issue
ads, but you bet you they're intended to influence the
election. Those ads are what are at issue here, and I
think in order to be able to regulate those in a way
that makes sense, the key is to regulate in a way
that's not vague, that's not overbroad, but is not so
under-inclusive that it can be easily evaded.
And I think Buckley shows how hard that is.
It's a tall order. In Buckley, this Court had a
provision of FECA that prohibited independent
expenditures related to a candidate election. The only
way the Court could save that provision from the
vagueness concern was to limit it to express advocacy.
But having done that, the Court said, well, it's so
limited, it's so easy to evade, we're going to find
that it fails strict scrutiny.
In McConnell, this Court said that in BCRA,
after careful study, Congress had actually found out a
way to avoid those three pitfalls. All of the proposed
alternatives of -- of appellants run headlong into one
or more of those obstacles. Look at the tests they've
proposed. They've proposed looking at 16 factors, 4
details. They disclaim any interest intent, but any of
those tests I think would be vague and unworkable.
In contrast, they pluck a definition from the
IRS regs that is designed to deal with 501(c)(3)
corporations in a completely different context or a
modification of a proposal by BCRA's sponsors, and they
-- and they put those tests out there. And those would
be very, very easy to evade in practice.
In fact, I think if you use some of the tests
that they propose or their amici proposed and you look
at the body of ads that were before this Court in
McConnell, you'd end up finding that a substantial
percentage of them were grassroots lobbying.
Well, if one thing has to be inconsistent
with this Court's decision in McConnell, it's the
conclusion that a substantial amount of the ads covered
by this definition are unconstitutionally regulated
because this Court clearly rejected a substantial
overbreadth claim.
The one thing I would say in -- in closing is
to understand that Congress, having sort of avoided
these very difficult pitfalls of vagueness,
overbreadth, and easy evasion, came up with this
definition in title II. But as this Court recognized
in McConnell, title II of the statute does not stand
alone. It is part and parcel of the broader regulatory
regime here. And without title II, title I's
limitations on soft money contributions to parties will
succeed only in taking that soft money and directing it
to corporations that are closely aligned with
candidates or with the parties themselves.
This statutory as-applied challenge that you
have before it -- you strikes at the heart of the
McConnell decision and at the heart of BCRA's title II.
This Court should reject the invitation to revisit the
McConnell decision and should give Congress' effort in
this area a fair chance at success.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
Mr. Bopp, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES BOPP, JR.
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BOPP: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
What this -- what plaintiffs are relying upon
here is the distinction that this Court has made
between lobbying, on the one hand, and political
campaigns on the other. As summarized by Justice
Stevens' concurrence in Austin, quote, there is a vast
difference between lobbying and debating public issues,
on the one hand, and political campaigns for election
to public office on the other hand. And that is
because that the interests that have justified the
regulation of corporate electioneering do not apply to
corporate --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There is a vast difference,
but the question I have is whether Congress has any
voice in trying to draw the line that divides the two
categories.
MR. BOPP: I think they do, and they drew a
line that was upheld on its face because the vast
majority of ads --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And -- and if we are in a
gray area that there's some who could say it's issue
and some could say it's electioneering, do we owe any
deference to Congress' test that it has drafted?
MR. BOPP: I -- I don't think you owe
deference to the test. Under strict scrutiny, you owe
the fidelity of the Constitution, and the Constitution
concludes the right to petition.
So it is a difficult question. It's fact-
intensive, as all as-applied questions are.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So your position basically
would say we should take all of these cases on a case-
by-case basis and not give any presumptive weight to
what -- what Congress has done.
MR. BOPP: No. I think that you can draw a
rule that relies on objective criteria, just as you
have in the Noerr-Pennington doctrine, to distinguish
between illegitimate efforts to -- for predatory
anticompetitive practices or monopolies, to distinguish
between those and -- and -- the Court has even used the
phrase, genuine efforts to influence Congress with
respect to -- or any governmental agency with respect
to the adoption of laws.
That has been based on objective criteria as
the Court has explained. You have adopted objective
criteria to distinguish lawsuits that fall within the
right to a petition or those that were brought
illegitimately for anticompetitive reasons.
It's not that this is -- this exercise is an
easy exercise, but it is demanded by the fact that the
-- the Congress adopted a very broad statute. The only
content in this electioneering communication provision
-- the only content requirement is that you name the
candidate. And the reality is that those candidates
often are incumbents and they are engaged in lawmaking
functions during these election periods.
I mean, there is a difference like in
Britain. You know, Parliament is dissolved so that
there -- there is a bright line distinction between an
election and Parliament actually exercising
governmental power. But when these things overlap and
when the Constitution demands the recognition of the
right to petition, then that needs to be dealt with in
this as-applied challenge.
Now, there's a vast -- there's a huge number
of -- of lobby groups. They have made a conscious
decision that it is more important to them to influence
what Government does today than to influence in a
speculative and remote manner who is going to be
exercising that power next year through elections.
Wisconsin Right to Life, in the face of these
restrictions, have still decided that it's more
important to lobby than it is to advocate the election
or defeat of candidates and give money to candidates.
The -- this is just the reality of our complex
Government. It's the reality of the freedoms that
individuals have to participate in that Government.
It's not just about elections. It's more importantly
about lawmaking and citizens have a robust right to
participate in that lawmaking power, and as a result,
this Court should recognize an as-applied exception for
grassroots lobbying.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Bopp.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:10 a.m., the case in the
