IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
GIL GARCETTI, ET AL.,
Petitioners,
: No. 04-473
RICHARD CEBALLOS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 12, 2005
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CINDY S. LEE, ESQ., Glendale, California; on behalf of the
Petitioners.
DAN HIMMELFARB, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting the
Petitioners.
BONNIE I. ROBIN-VERGEER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CINDY S. LEE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DAN HIMMELFARB, ESQ.
For the United States, as amicus curiae,
Supporting the Petitioners 21
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
BONNIE I. ROBIN-VERGEER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 31
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CINDY S. LEE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 63
P R O C E E D I N G S
[10:01 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument now
in Garcetti v. Ceballos.
Ms. Lee.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CINDY LEE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MS. LEE: Chief Justice Roberts, and may it
please the Court:
The issue presented is whether the first
amendment requires protection for all public employee
speech that touches on a matter of public concern without
any consideration of whether the speech was expressed as a
citizen.
The Ninth Circuit's approach affords no
consideration for the role of the speaker as a citizen or
an employee at the time of the speech. This approach,
however, plants a seed of a constitutional claim in
virtually every speech that public employees express while
carrying out their regular job duties.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, that's -- I mean, I can
see --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Do you think that the Court
tried to apply the Pickering test?
MS. LEE: The Ninth Circuit clearly did not
--
apply the Pickering test when they were doing the initial
analysis, a threshold analysis, of whether or not the
speech at issue was constitutionally protected.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Do you think that the
Pickering test, properly applied, would have reached a
different result in this case?
MS. LEE: Not necessarily, not the way the Ninth
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: It could have --
MS. LEE: -- Circuit viewed it.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- certainly.
MS. LEE: Well, in the Ninth Circuit's view, the
capacity of an employee at the time of the speech is of
some factor. It's a determinative factor. But, in its
view, it was a factor that should be weighed against
finding no constitutional protection. In its view --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Do you think that the proper
application of Pickering would yield a different result in
this case?
MS. LEE: Our view is that --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Could it?
MS. LEE: -- if the application of the Pickering
is rearticulated such that when job-required speech is at
issue, like in this case, the employer should invariably
win or have a -- an easier time of prevailing. But, in
this case, the Ninth Circuit didn't see it that way. The
Ninth Circuit took the view that the capacity of an
employee at the time of the speech is a factor, but it
would be difficult for an employer to justify employment
decisions made when the employee is speaking as required
by the duties of employment.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Counsel, you've made the point
that if we go the Ninth Circuit way, every time an
employee gets in Dutch there's a potential first amendment
issue. Why hasn't that been a problem since 1988 in the
Ninth Circuit? I think 1988 was the year of the Circuit's
Roth decision. So, we haven't seen a deluge, and doesn't
that rather discount your argument?
MS. LEE: Well, our view is that if we accept
the Ninth Circuit's approach, then speech by public
employees expressed while carrying out their assigned job
duties would virtually -- invariably be --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No.
MS. LEE: -- a matter --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I realize that, but that -- as
I understand it, that has been true since the Ninth
Circuit's Roth decision in 1988. And apparently we have
not seen a deluge of these claims, or we would have had
citations to the cases. So, doesn't that rather discount
the concern that you express?
MS. LEE: Not necessarily. The Ninth Circuit
and the other circuits that have made, primarily, content
the determinative factor in finding presumptive first-
amendment protection have, in some regards, considered the
capacity of an employee as whether or not the speech
should be protected under the first amendment, but they've
done so in the context of whether or not it is a matter of
public concern. So, the Ninth Circuit is alone in having
addressed squarely whether or not job-required speech
should not be afforded presumptive first-amendment
protection. The other --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But didn't -- maybe I'm wrong
on my assumption, but didn't the Ninth Circuit take that
position, back in 1988?
MS. LEE: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do you do with a
public university professor, who -- is fired for the
content of his lectures? Certainly, in the course of his
employment, that's what he's paid to do. That has no
first-amendment protection?
MS. LEE: Well, it would be our view that if the
assigned job duties of that university professor was to
speak on a particular topic or content, and they were
getting paid for doing that, that that is a job-required
speech and that it should not be entitled, presumptively,
to first-amendment protection. Now, that is a far cry
from --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: "Should not be entitled,
presumptively, to first-amendment protection," what does
that mean? That there might be first amendment
protection, in light of the particular context --
MS. LEE: Our --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- of the speech?
MS. LEE: Well, according to the Ninth Circuit's
view, anything -- anytime a public employee speaks, and
that speech relates to a matter of public concern, that is
presumptively entitled to first-amendment protection, such
that the burden is on the employer to justify the
decisions for the employment actions taken.
Our view is that the employer should not have
that burden until the first threshold is made, that the
speech is expressed as a citizen on a matter of public
concern.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I suppose that, in the
situation the Chief Justice mentioned, the professor would
still be able to contend that the university fired him
because it disagreed with the political content of his
speech or because of the university's politics. He could
still make that claim, couldn't he?
--
MS. LEE: Our approach would not prohibit that
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the --
MS. LEE: -- kind of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- burden would be on him, as
it would be in most cases --
MS. LEE: That's correct, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to show that that was true.
MS. LEE: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whereas, the Ninth Circuit
would put it on the -- put the burden on the university to
show that it wasn't true.
MS. LEE: That's correct. The ninth --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I would have thought you
might have argued that it's speech paid for by the
Government, that's what they pay him for, it's their
speech; and so, there's no first-amendment issue at all.
MS. LEE: In essence, the principle of our
approach is supported by those Government subsidizer
cases, like the Rust v. Sullivan. Our --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But in Rust v. Sullivan, the
Government was buying a commodity. It was the
Government's program, and it was employing people, funding
people to implement that program. Here is a person whose
job includes being candid, serving justice, serving truth.
If that's part of his job responsibilities, that's quite
different from speaking the speech that the Government
wants spoken.
MS. LEE: Well, in this case, we think that the
job duties are aligned with those subsidizer cases. We
have a deputy district attorney whose job duty was to
assess the merits of the prosecution's case, which he did.
That includes assessing the credibility of a witness.
Because his conclusions in this case were that the
prosecution's witness was not very credible does not make
that task extraordinary.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess if your job is to speak
truth, and you speak falsehood, that's a good reason to
fire you, which is what happened here.
MS. LEE: That could be a --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you don't --
MS. LEE: -- legitimate reason. Or --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- contend that, do you?
MS. LEE: -- or the employer doesn't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you contend --
MS. LEE: -- necessarily have to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- that his statement was
false? Do you contend the speech was false?
MS. LEE: Our position is that the speech was
inaccurate and that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but how do we know that?
We're at summary judgment.
MS. LEE: Well, we have the -- the deputy
district attorney's disposition memorandum assessed that
-- in his view, that the prosecution was going to lose on
the pending motion to dismiss, in -- on the grounds of
that the search warrant was going to be -- was going to be
found invalid. That was the essence of the deputy
district attorney's assessment. And in his memorandum, as
part of his prosecutorial duties, he evaluated that. He
told his supervisor, "Look, you know, I'm looking at the
credibility of the officer. I conducted an investigation.
I don't think we're going to win on this case." The
supervisor initially thought, "Okay, you have a point,"
but ultimately decided, "You know what? I'm not as sure
as you are. We have a motion to traverse on calendar,
where we have a judge who's going to be assessing that, so
let's see what happens." That judge found that the search
warrant was valid. And so, in essence, we have a public
employee who is challenging employment decisions made by
his supervisors --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I realize that, but where
do you -- how do you infer, from that, that the
individual, the employee, was not telling the truth?
MS. LEE: That --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If --
MS. LEE: It is not our --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if I --
MS. LEE: -- position --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if my ethical record
amounted to a lie every time I made a -- an inaccurate
prediction about what a court was going to do when I was a
young lawyer, I would have had a very short career.
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE SOUTER: And that seems to me as much as
you can infer from what this individual did.
MS. LEE: Justice Souter, it is not our
position, and we have never taken the stance, that the
deputy district attorney in this case was reckless in
regards of his speech --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh. Oh. Okay.
MS. LEE: -- or his evaluation.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So, we don't --
MS. LEE: Our view is that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- we don't know why it didn't
pan out the way he said it was going to, and we don't know
that he was -- that he was lying.
MS. LEE: Correct. What --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MS. LEE: -- we do know is that the -- it is our
view that the supervisor -- while the supervisor contended
that he did not react to this speech adversely, that he
could have. We have here speech that was required by the
job. The employee here -- if we take the Ninth Circuit's
approach, we would be providing public employees a
constitutional right to perform their assigned job-
required duties in a way that is to the dissatisfaction of
the public employer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't have to establish
that he was lying; just that his prediction -- his job,
was to predict, and he made a -- an erroneous -- a false
prediction. Don't have to show that he intended to do
that.
MS. LEE: That's correct, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but the disposition by
the -- I mean, his grievance by the hearing examiner was
that there was no retaliation. He assumed that the speech
was proper and there was no inefficiency or misconduct on
the part of the speaker.
MS. LEE: Well, the internal grievance procedure
resulted in the finding that the supervisors did not
retaliate against the deputy district attorney for the --
for his job-required duties.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And, in my understanding, that
was the only defense that was made for the charge, that,
"We didn't retaliate." There was no claim that the speech
was improper in any way. Am I wrong on that?
MS. LEE: That's correct --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MS. LEE: -- Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So, we assume, for purposes of
our case, that what he said was totally accurate and did
not, itself, provide the basis for saying he was
incompetent or something of that -- like that.
MS. LEE: Well, we assume, for purposes of the
summary judgment motion, that he was within his
prosecutorial duties in making those assessments.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Can I ask you one --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me, I'm not sure I
understood the answer to the first question, John. Was he
not fired because he had made an improper assessment?
JUSTICE STEVENS: No.
MS. LEE: No, our position has never been that
the supervisors took any retaliatory action as a result of
his speech. He was not fired. What the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MS. LEE: -- deputy district attorney --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. LEE: -- challenges here is various
employment decisions by his supervisor, claiming that they
--
were in retaliation for him having prepared and
communicated a disposition memorandum that was within the
course and scope of his employment duties.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And your defense is that the --
MS. LEE: Our --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- actions were not taken with
any reference to this -- to this at all.
MS. LEE: -- our position has been that the
employer could certainly have reacted, or responded, to
the speech or the way he conducted his job, or performed
his job, but they didn't, in this case. There were --
there were legitimate business reasons for the employment
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's surely a --
MS. LEE: -- decisions made.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- surely a factual inquiry,
which will be disputed. If you want to win on summary
judgment, it seems to me you have to establish that,
assuming he was fired because of this speech, that would
be -- or not promoted because of his speech -- that would
be perfectly okay.
MS. LEE: That's correct --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's where --
MS. LEE: -- Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- we are.
MS. LEE: That's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We assume --
MS. LEE: -- that's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that that was the reason for
the later actions.
MS. LEE: And the problem with the Ninth
Circuit's approach is that every time there is job
performance at issue that's required by the public
employee, it essentially puts the question before a jury
or a Federal court to assess the motives --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what is your position?
MS. LEE: -- to assess the reasonableness of the
decisions made.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Ms. Lee, is your position
that job-required speech -- an assistant district
attorney's obligation is to give his best opinion -- that
job-required speech is outside the first-amendment
protection? You say the Ninth Circuit went too far, in
one way. But are you saying that as long as it's related
to his job, it's simply not protected by the first
amendment? Is that your position?
MS. LEE: Our view is that job-required speech
is not of a character for which principles of first
amendment should protect. In Pickering, the public school
teacher sought to be treated as a member of the general
public when he sent his letter to the newspaper
criticizing the allocation of financial resources by the
school board.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, I understand --
MS. LEE: Nothing like that arises --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- I understand that, but I
was confused by your answer to Justice O'Connor, because
the question was, Would this come out a different way
under Pickering? And I take it your answer is, this
doesn't come in the door, because he's not speaking as a
citizen.
MS. LEE: Under the current -- my -- under my
current understanding of the Pickering balancing -- which
is -- shifts the burden to the employer to justify the
employment decisions made -- that we don't -- I don't
necessarily believe that the Pickering would clearly weigh
in favor of the employer in this case, even though the
speech was so connected to the duties of employment --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm confused. You think that
this -- there was an aspect of it that was citizen speech?
Why --
MS. LEE: No.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I --
MS. LEE: We contend that it should -- in
situations where the speech at issue is job-required, and
that employee is getting paid for engaging in that kind of
duty, that the balance should weigh in favor of the
employer. And I believe the respondent --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, what do you mean --
MS. LEE: -- concedes as much.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- by "the balance, weigh in
favor"? Because, a moment ago, I thought you answered me,
"This kind of speech simply is not shielded by the" --
MS. LEE: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- "first amendment."
MS. LEE: Our -- the -- our view is that job-
required speech should not be protected under the first
amendment, so there is no need to go into the balancing,
there is no need to go into the weighing of the interests
of the employer versus the interest of the employee. The
balancing has been required in the -- in the line of cases
that the Court has held -- the language that the Court has
used in this first-amendment public-employment context is,
when you do the balancing, you weigh the interests of the
State, as an employer, versus the interests of the
employee, as a citizen, when engaging in this speech. Our
view is that the balancing should only be required when
the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You would give --
MS. LEE: -- public employee --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- greater protection to a
public speech than to a comment from -- on the job from --
to one's superior. Can you give me an example of a
statement that would provide -- be entitled to complete
first-amendment protection if made in a speech, but could
justify a discharge if made face to face with your
employer?
MS. LEE: I'm sorry, could you repeat that?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Could you give me an example
of a statement that would be protected in a public speech,
but, if made privately to your superior, could provide the
basis for a discharge?
MS. LEE: I believe the Court's referring to
facts similar to Givhan, where there you had speech made
privately to a supervisor, and --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Which was --
MS. LEE: -- this Court --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- protected.
MS. LEE: -- this Court has found that it was
protected under the first amendment.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MS. LEE: However, the Court did not need to
address the role of the speaker in that case, because
there you had an English teacher who was criticizing the
racial --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You're not --
MS. LEE: -- policies --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- responding to my question.
My question is, Can you give me an example of a statement
that would be entitled to protection if made in a public
speech, but could be a basis for discharge if made face to
face?
MS. LEE: It could be in this case, where the
prosecutor, who is assigned, or authorized, to speak on
behalf of the DA's office in a pending criminal action,
made comments to the press about the nature of the case,
but, rather -- and, in this particular scenario, goes too
far, goes beyond what the DA's office allowed him to speak
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I'm --
MS. LEE: He could --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- asking you if --
MS. LEE: -- certainly be discharged for that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- what he says privately
could the basis for a discharge. Surely, he couldn't be
discharged for what you just described.
MS. LEE: The -- under our approach, the issue
is not whether it's privately or publicly. If the job
requires him to speak in a -- within the internal
channels, then that speech -- he's doing his job, he's
getting paid for it, and he should not be entitled to
first-amendment protection.
Unless there are any other questions --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is that --
MS. LEE: -- I'd like to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- is that true in this case?
I realize they didn't get to it on summary judgment, but
is that true in this case with respect to a Brady
disclosure?
MS. LEE: Brady disclosures are the obligations
of the district attorney's office. So, in this case, when
the deputy district attorney believed that it should be
disclosed, his supervisor had an absolute right to, say,
on behalf of the DA's office, challenge that decision to
disclose.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if -- what if the lawyer
simply believes that he has an ethical obligation to make
the disclosure, and he makes it, and he is then subject to
retaliation? No first amendment claim on his part?
MS. LEE: Those ethical obligations would build
-- would arise from his capacity as a prosecutor.
Prosecutors are employees. Governmental employees have a
general standard of ethical conduct. That doesn't mean
that they are getting paid for the same assigned job
duties.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, does that mean -- what's
your answer to my question? If he makes the Brady
disclosure because he believes that is an ethical
obligation, and he is then subject to retaliation, does he
have a first amendment claim, or not?
MS. LEE: It's our view that he does not.
I'd like to reserve the remainder of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you --
MS. LEE: -- my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- Ms. Lee.
Mr. Himmelfarb.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAN HIMMELFARB
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING PETITIONERS
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: What's your answer to that
last question, Mr. Himmelfarb?
MR. HIMMELFARB: A Brady obligation is an
obligation of a prosecutor in his capacity as a
prosecutor; and a Brady disclosure, like a recommendation
to a superior that there should be a Brady disclosure,
constitutes the exercise of the prosecutorial function by
a prosecutor. It is employee speech, and that speech, if
it engenders an employment action, should not be
sufficient for the employee to get past the first step of
the Pickering balancing. If there is --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: So, no free-speech protection
under Pickering.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That's exactly right, Justice
O'Connor.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And how about this case?
Could it not be resolved under a proper handling of
Pickering?
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, we think a proper
handling of Pickering is that respondents should not get
past step one of the balancing, because the speech is
expressed in his capacity as an employee.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Now, what about retaliation
claims that the employee may have? What about
whistleblower-type claims by an employer? Are they -- are
they separate from the first-amendment concerns?
MR. HIMMELFARB: We don't think they are,
Justice O'Connor, if the whistle-blowing is required by
the employee's speech. If an investigator in an inspector
general's office, whose job it is to investigate and
report government misconduct, reports misconduct, and an
action is taken as a result -- an employment action is
taken against them as a result -- he is demoted or
transferred, because it's the view of his superior that he
didn't perform his job properly in speaking on that issue
-- that should not enable the investigator to get past the
first step.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if the reason -- what if
the reason for the -- for firing him is that he's a
Democrat and it's a Republican Administration, and the
speech is used as the pretext?
MR. HIMMELFARB: Justice Scalia, I think that
case would be covered by this Court's patronage cases,
which would absolutely prohibit that sort of employment
action. But in a case where it's not party affiliation
that motivates the employment action, if the speech is
expressed in carrying out the employee's duties, he may
have a civil-service remedy -- indeed, that's precisely
what the civil-service laws were designed to deal with, a
situation where the employee is just doing his job, an
action is taken again him, and there's a dispute as to
whether he was doing his job properly, about whether he
was insubordinate, or simply about whether he was --
JUSTICE BREYER: Suppose that we have an
instance where it is job related. He is not speaking as a
private citizen, and it's also a public concern. Now, in
such an instance, could we say that, at least if the
matter of public concern rise to the level where it's
related to an independent constitutional protection --
say, founded in the due-process clause -- under those
circumstances, the employer cannot unreasonably -- though
we give him an area of discretion, he cannot unreasonably
retaliate.
MR. HIMMELFARB: I don't think so, Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not?
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not? And here is an
independent obligation.
MR. HIMMELFARB: To --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's very unusual --
MR. HIMMELFARB: To --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- but it's there.
MR. HIMMELFARB: To use the example of this
case, if respondent advised his supervisor that, in his
professional judgment, a Brady disclosure should be made,
and if the supervisor disagreed with him, and if
reasonable minds could differ as to whether the disclosure
should be made, and he made it, nonetheless, he would be
insubordinate. And we don't think that that is the --
JUSTICE BREYER: You'd only lose -- the
Government would lose, only where you can conclude that
they could -- "they," the Government -- could not -- could
not reasonably conclude that he'd been insubordinate.
MR. HIMMELFARB: Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, we covered the case of the
Democrat, Republican, et cetera. In other words, we'd
give him -- should we give him total discretion? Can't we
limit that discretion of the supervisor?
MR. HIMMELFARB: If it's -- if it's a situation
where reasonable minds cannot differ, and the superior
directs him not to make the disclosure, in clear
contravention of the due-process clause as interpreted in
Brady, that is a situation --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But, Mr. Himmelfarb, in that
case he could also be fired if he made the statement in a
speech, could he not?
MR. HIMMELFARB: If he made the statement in a
public speech --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- or in a letter to the editor
of a newspaper, we think that speech would be
presumptively protected by the first amendment.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But could he not be fired if
the scenario you just described as --
MR. HIMMELFARB: Maybe he could, Justice
Stevens, but that would be subject to balancing, and it
would be the employer's duty to justify the firing, based
on workplace disruption.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It seems to me odd that the
employee has greater protection if he goes outside the
regular channels and makes a speech than if he does -- he
--
goes right to his superior and says, "I think this is
what's wrong and should be remedied."
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, it's not that odd,
Justice Stevens, because if you have an obligation to
report misconduct -- take, again, the example of the
investigator in the inspector general's office -- you will
ordinarily be better off by reporting it through the
ordinary channels.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. HIMMELFARB: Because, ordinarily, you have
JUSTICE STEVENS: You may have no constitutional
protection. But if you go ahead and make a speech, you
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, you have presumptive
first-amendment protection. If you work in the inspector
general's office, and there is a prohibition on disclosing
pending investigations, and you hold a press conference,
there is a very good chance you're going to lose at step
two of Pickering, which is why it's in your interest to
disclose it through appropriate channels, because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And it's going to be
clear that that's violating your job, and it has an
adverse impact on your job-related duties, because you're
going public, instead of going through the channels.
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, that's right. If you
have an -- if it's a part of your job, you have an
incentive to do it, just like any other job requirement.
And it's ordinarily not the case that public employees are
punished for doing their jobs. They're more often
punished for not doing their jobs. So, in that situation,
the employee is going to likely be better off by making
the disclosure through appropriate channels.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But he has less constitutional
protection.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That's true, Justice Stevens,
but civil -- it's our view that civil service laws are the
mechanism for dealing with a situation where you're doing
your job and there's a dispute as to whether you're doing
it properly or not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How comfortable are you
that this line you're trying to draw is one that's going
to be workable in practice? I mean, suppose the employee
writes a memo, and the boss comes and says, "If you don't
promise me you're not going to talk about this publicly,
you're fired." And he says, "Well, I'm not going to
promise that." And so, he's fired. Now, is that
internal, or is that external?
MR. HIMMELFARB: If the -- if the memo is
required by his job, it's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- a recommendation about what
policy the agency --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's --
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- should take --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- required by his job.
But "promise that he's not going to talk about it" is not
required by his job. And this case, kind of, raises the
question, because the only reason it's squarely presented
on the memo is because the Court didn't reach the Brady
disclosure or the talk to the bar association that were
related to the memo.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That's right. In answer to
your question of how difficult it's going to be to draw
the line, I think in most cases it won't be difficult to
draw the line. I don't think it was difficult in this
case. I'm not aware of any cases that applied principle
we advocate where it has been. There may be some cases
where it will be difficult to draw the line, but --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I suppose you have the rule
which distinguishes between employment-related and outside
speech, under the hypothetical -- difficult hypothetical
posed by the Chief Justice, it would be an -- the promise
would be an unconstitutional condition, or something like
that.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That may --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I --
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- that may -- that may be,
Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I suppose it's a hard case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And I suppose that what
constitutes a matter of public interest is not the
clearest line in the world either, is it?
MR. HIMMELFARB: That's absolutely right,
Justice Scalia. This Court has already decided that it's
important to draw a line at step one in distinguishing
between speech on a matter of public concern and speech on
a matter of private concern, even though it will often be
hard to draw that line. And the reason that line has to
be drawn is that the alternative is, in effect, to
constitutionalize the law of public employment.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Do you -- let me ask you this
-- do you propose drawing the line -- or at least drawing
a line in some circumstances this way: That, at step one,
if it can be concluded that a private communication
between the employer and the employee would have
constituted the discharge of the employee's assigned work
-- so that it would have been within the scope of his
employment, and, therefore, not subject to Pickering
balancing, if he had made the statement to the employer --
that, therefore, the statement cannot be regarded as a
statement of public interest, even if he had disclosed it
publicly, or if he took a further step and went to the bar
association and whatnot?
MR. HIMMELFARB: Justice Souter, we see these as
two separate requirements to get past step one. The
speech has to be on a matter of public concern, but it
also has to be speech in the speaker's capacity as a
citizen.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if it is within -- I'm
sorry, but if it -- if it is within the speaker's assigned
duties as an employee, does that preclude a conclusion,
later on, that he was speaking as a citizen, even if he
goes public with it?
MR. HIMMELFARB: I don't think it does, Justice
Souter. If --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So, we do have, then, the
problem that Justice Stevens has raised.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That's right. I don't -- I
don't see it as much of a problem, for the reasons I tried
to give in responding to Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the hearing at
which this office had testified? I thought that part of
the complaint was, "When I spoke at the hearing, I was
speaking in a public forum, and they fired me for it."
MR. HIMMELFARB: May I answer the question?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. HIMMELFARB: My understanding is that that's
not part of the complaint, Justice Ginsburg. And my
understanding also is that, in the district court,
respondent took the position that his testimony at the
hearing was in his capacity as an employee.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Himmelfarb.
Ms. Robin-Vergeer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BONNIE L. ROBIN-VERGEER
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Ever since Pickering, it has been the law that
the first amendment protects public employees from being
fired or punished for expressing views on matters of
public importance where, as here, there is no harm or
disruption to their employers. Petitioners in -- the
United States asked this Court to scrap that. It is not
just the Ninth Circuit.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm not sure that that
was clear from the decisions of this Court. Certainly,
that wasn't what was involved in Pickering. That was
outside speech.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's correct. But it's
been the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And the same -- and the same
with Connick. So, I'm -- if you're saying that this is
what the circuits have understood, fine, but that's not
this -- that's why we took this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And I think all the cases did
say "expressing views as a citizen on a matter of public
concern." Wasn't that qualifier always used?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The qualifier has always
been used in conjunction with the phase "on matters of
public concern."
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, what does it mean? What is
-- what is your explanation for that qualifier,
"expressing views as a citizen"? Why do we --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- continually say that?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- it was used descriptively
to explain, and especially to look at the context in which
the phrase first appears, in Pickering, that public
employees, like all citizens, have an interest --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, let's assume that --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- on matters --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- I think that that's an open
question under Pickering, and that this case presents it.
Do you -- do you concede -- and maybe you don't -- that
there is any category of first amendment speech, as a
matter of public concern, which an employee cannot direct
to the employer? Are there -- are there some matters as
to which the employer can protect its own interests and
stifle the employee's speech?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Speaking on a matter of
public concern only gets the employee presumptive first-
amendment protection.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, there's always Pickering
balance.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There would be a Pickering
balance, yes. And the Pickering balancing test is quite
deferential to the employer. The Court observed, in the
Pickering case, that it's proper to look -- that a court
should look at the proper performance of the employee's
daily duties. In Rankin, the Court talked about the
questions whether the speech interferes with work,
personnel relationships, or the speaker's job performance.
The bar is already quite high for the employee,
coupled with causation burdens, qualified immunity, and so
on. And so, it is not the case that just because a -- an
employee speaks on a matter of public concern, that that
employee is necessarily going to win a first-amendment
--
case. Also --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Ms. Lee -- Ms. Lee told us
that the Ninth Circuit weighed the capacity of the
plaintiff as an employee, rather than a member of the
public, in favor of the employee and against the employer.
Is that how you read the Ninth Circuit's decision?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: No, I think -- it's not
quite right. I think the Ninth Circuit just looked at
whether his speech which was reporting Government misconduct,
a type of speech that the circuit said uniformly recognized
was of paramount public importance.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- any comment that an
employee makes regarding how the office is working is a
matter of public concern. I would concede that. I mean
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: With --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that has to be.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- with respect, I don't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And the consequence of your
view is to have the first amendment being used for courts
to monitor the discussions that take place in every public
agency -- local, State, and Federal -- in the United
States. It's -- you are advocating a sweeping rule. Now,
you'll say, "Oh, well, Pickering balance will protect it."
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: With --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I still think the
intrusive consequences of your -- of your rule are
sweeping.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: With respect, the public-
concern threshold is not so easily met. the Court has
said --
JUSTICE BREYER: I guess our law clerks would
meet it every day.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Maybe. Maybe not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, maybe, maybe not. I
don't --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But the Court has --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- anything that goes on in my
chamber that isn't a matter of public concern, and I would
think everything at OSHA and everything at -- look, I'll
-- let me put my question to you, because you're going to
make an argument that I don't think is too widely shared;
namely, that Pickering decides this case. If that's your
argument, I'd like to ask you a question based on the
assumption Pickering does not decide this case. And it
seems to me that Pickering involves a case in which it's
both a matter of public concern and outside the scope of
employment.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And here we have a case that is
a matter of public concern, but inside.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Right. I --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, in those circumstances, I
want to know how you believe the first amendment requires
us to decide this case. And as I read this case, in the
record, we have one individual, your client, who looked at
an affidavit. The affidavit said that the deputy sheriffs
were trying to locate where a vehicle that was chocked up
came from. They saw tire tracks. The tire tracks went
back to a fence at the end of a long driveway.
So, I looked in the record. I couldn't find the
affidavit. So, I assume that's what it says. And I
wanted to know what the deputy sheriff said. What they
said is that your client agreed that there were tire
tracks. There were tire tracks that did not go the whole
length of the driveway, but, rather, tire tracks near the
house, where they got the search warrant for. And, they
added, that -- the deputies -- that there was rocks broken
All right. So, we have two sides to this
argument: the deputies, who might reasonably contend that
they did nothing wrong; your client, who thinks they were
lying. And we also have a letter that your client wrote,
where he said that these deputies are grossly inaccurate
and clearly misleading.
Suppose his supervisor goes to him and says, "I
think that that letter is not the right tone. Maybe
you're right, maybe you're wrong; maybe they're in good
faith, maybe they're not. And so, if you don't change
that tone, I'm going to discipline you." All right?
Now, that's my hypothetical, which seemed to me,
perhaps, very much like this case. How, in your opinion,
does the first amendment handle such a matter?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: If the supervisor told Mr.
Ceballos that there was something wrong in the manner in
which he conveyed his speech, and told him to revise the
memo, that would have been -- he would have been well
within his rights to do so. Bear in mind that there's
never been an argument here that there was anything
inappropriate about Mr. Ceballos's speech, that he
exercised poor judgment, that there was anything
disruptive about the manner in which he communicated. The
head of the office --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I don't under- --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- actually said --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- I understand the ultimate
answer you gave the hypothetical. I don't understand the
principle you're following. I mean, it's a matter of --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- you would agree this is a
matter of public concern.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Which is what I'm looking --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- for. I'm looking for --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It is --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- a standard.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But we don't have a standard.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The principle is that an
employer -- we agree with the position of the United
States, that the employer has the ability to dictate how
an employee carries out his duties. In a case where the
employee --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But in Justice --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- is insubordinate --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- in Justice Breyer's
hypothetical, if the employee filed a lawsuit claiming a
violation of his first-amendment rights, you would say
that could not be thrown out, on summary judgment, on the
ground that the speech was within the scope of his
employment.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It would be not on that
ground.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The reason it would be
thrown out in summary judgment would be because the
employer had a different reason for taking retaliatory
action --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no there is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that would --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- against the employee.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- be a dispute of fact,
so it probably wouldn't -- so it wouldn't be thrown at
summary judgment at all.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Virtually all of these cases
are able to be disposed of at summary judgment. And you
have, basically, 20 years of litigation in the circuit
courts to look at where --
JUSTICE BREYER: Look --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- the problems that are
being posited haven't materialized.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not making my question too
clear. I imagine the district judge. I get just the
facts I described to you. Your client, who's very upset,
says, "This is the most unreasonable thing that ever
happened. They were trying to prevent me from
communicating with the judge. I'm the one who saw the
sheriffs. They didn't." The other side says, "We think
it's reasonable what we did."
My question to you is, What standard does that
judge apply under the first amendment? What does he do?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The judge looks first at
whether the speech is on a matter of public concern. And
if it's a dispute over Government misconduct, it would
meet that threshold. Second, the Court would proceed to a
Pickering balance and would say the employer's actual
reason for retaliating or taking action would be because
of the -- you know, the tone or the message or because it
was a disagreement, and the supervisor's views ultimately
prevail. And so, that's how it would be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, the Federal --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- analyzed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- Federal courts supervise
the constant dialogue that is the everyday routine
practice in every governmental agency, local and Federal,
in the United States.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: With respect, no. These
cases are not that hard to dispose of at summary judgment.
Most actions that employers take against the employees
are not because of the employees' speech anyway, it's
because of how they carry out their job functions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that would be something
that would have to go to trial, to prove that the -- that
the employee was incompetent.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Respectfully, I don't -- I
don't think that most of these cases -- they don't go to
trial, most of them. They're -- of course, there are some
trials, but that is not the way most of these cases are
handled. And, besides that, adding an extra test, another
preliminary hurdle, wouldn't change the litigation burden.
Instead of it being the Connick-Pickering test, it would
be Connick-Pickering-Ceballos test. And then the question
would be, Was the person doing their job? How do you
decide that? Is it in his job description? Is it a
matter of custom and practice? What if he's doing extra-
credit work to build up goodwill with his employer, but
it's something that's not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, in --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- ordinarily required?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- in this case, the
supervisor said, "There can't be -- can't be tracks on
asphalt, so you're probably right." Then he finds out
that it's a tire rim, and of course the rim makes a -- so
we have to find out this at discovery -- at the discovery
stage of a lawsuit?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: As long as he's made an --
as long as he's made allegations or spoken in good faith
in their -- and it isn't demonstrably false, then he would
clear that initial hurdle. And there certainly was
nothing suggesting that he spoke in bad faith or was
obviously false, whether or not he was correct in his
assessment.
And it wasn't just an argument over a tire rim.
He accused these -- the deputy sheriff here of perjury.
It was a quite serious allegation of Government misconduct
that was made here, and not, sort of, a mundane dispute
over --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why doesn't --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- whether or not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- why doesn't Rust
answer this question? I mean, there, it was really --
this issue was just outsourced by the Government. They
paid for the speech there, and we said that if you pay the
piper, you get to call the tune. And this is just an
insourced -- the same question.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Ceballos was not speaking on
behalf of the Government when he went to his supervisor.
That was an internal communication to his supervisor
reporting --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He was writing a memo
about why the case should be dismissed. Wasn't --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- that part of his job?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It was part of his job,
although I -- I'd quibble with the idea that it was
required by his job. But it was part of his job. And, in
doing so, he spoke to the Government, not as the
Government.
A better analogy with respect to Rust would be
if the doctor in Rust -- let's say it's a doctor at a
public university hospital, and the doctor was told that
the policy is not to engage in abortion counseling. And
he wrote a memo to the supervisor saying, "This is a
terribly policy. This is inhibiting our ability to
counsel my patients and for me to do my job correctly."
That memo would not be the Government's message. And
Ceballos's memo here to his supervisor was also not the
Government's message.
But I want to -- I want to get --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why is that? In
the -- in your hypothetical, the doctor is -- it's not his
job to challenge the restriction on the Government grant,
but that's what he's doing, so that's not part of his job.
Here, it's part of Ceballos's job to explain why the case
should be dismissed, and that's what he wrote in his memo.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But this is a very malleable
and manipulable concept, what's part of a job. I mean,
for a doctor to talk to his supervisor about a restriction
that he feels is inhibiting his ability to counsel his
patients is as much part of his job as a prosecutor going
to his supervisor and saying, "There's government
misconduct in this case, and we need to do something about
it." Just like a teacher in the Givhan case, going to her
principal, a conference between a teacher and her
principal about whether there's racial -- racially
discriminatory practices in the school would be part of a
teacher's job, complaining about something that affects
her students.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do you do with your
friend's response to that, that in Connick the Court
characterized Givhan as involving a case of a citizen
complaining about a particular practice?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, I think that
underscores the point, that the employee in Givhan was
speaking both as an employee and as a citizen, and these
roles are not mutually exclusive. You can be both.
There's no artificial distinction that the Court has drawn
here. And where a Government employee comes forward and
reports misconduct and puts himself at risk, he is doing
just that, speaking in both capacities. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We just shouldn't have said "as
a citizen" in all of these cases. We were just padding
our opinion with unnecessary words.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: the Court -- the Court
always views the "as a citizen" language in conjunction
with the -- speaking on a matter of public concern. And
it seems to me that the Court equated the two concepts.
But I want to get to why it is unwise and
unjustified to draw the per se rule that petitioners are
urging here. For one, it essentially means that a public
employee such as Ceballos has to go public in order to
have presumptive first-amendment protection.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then he would be
violating the internal rules of the workplace.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where as giving his candid
views -- the search warrant -- he's giving his own
opinion. But if he goes outside, he is violating a rule
of the workplace. And it would seem to me that there are
certainly measures could be taken against him for that.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Correct. It's a trap. They
don't tell you about what happened in the second case. If
Ceballos had taken suspicions of police misconduct and
gone to the Los Angeles Times, they would have fired him.
And had he brought a case challenging that termination
under the first amendment, he would have lost on under the
Pickering balance. The circuit --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you think he should
have lost under the Pickering balance, in that case, if he
went public right away?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes. If he had evaded
proper internal channels of communication, then the
employer would be well within his rights to fire him for
taking an action that's so disruptive in bringing --
discrediting the office without even letting his own
employer try to address the situation internally first.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if he does let the
employer try first, and the employer does nothing, then he
goes public? Where does the Pickering balance come out
then?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Closer question. I think he
probably still loses, but it's a closer question. I
think, at some point, if the magnitude of this -- of the
problem is so large -- I mean, imagine in the Ramparts
scandal situation if -- which has been discussed in the
briefs -- if a prosecutor tried to deal with that within
the DA's office, and failed to get any response, and then
went public with the Ramparts scandal, something of such
magnitude, a court perhaps would find their way. But in
the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- individual --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- what you're saying is, is
that the first amendment has an office and a function
within the confines of a Government agency that it doesn't
have outside. That's a curious calculus. It seems to me
that the first amendment has its most application when you
talk to newspapers, when you talk outside. That's what
the first amendment's about. The first amendment isn't
about policing the workplace.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: the Court held, in both
Givhan and Rankin, that private communications on matters
of public concern are still protected. And it's -- and
there's very good reasons for that to be. I mean, imagine
an employee at FEMA who thinks that FEMA is not ready to
handle the next hurricane, that it has problems in its
disaster preparedness, and so that FEMA employee goes to
his supervisor and says, "We have problems here. Here are
the four areas in which we're not ready to handle the next
hurricane." He gets fired, because the supervisor doesn't
want to hear that. It's critically important that public
employees who have information, who know what ails the
agencies that they work for, be able to find an avenue to
communicate issues of public importance. If that FEMA
employee had gone --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is any -- is any duty of an
employee in a -- an agency devoted to service of the
public -- is any of his functions not a matter of public
concern?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes. The standard isn't
anything of public interest, it's something of legitimate
news interest. the Court reiterated that recently in the
Roe case. The standard does -- it's not a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's news. This is a press --
a press kind of a test.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Newsworthy. And it's the
same test --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Newsworthy.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- the Court has applied in
invasion-of-privacy contexts. It's -- although it's a
broad standard, but it's also a well-known and well-
established standard that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that's --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- courts are using --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- what Connick was about,
that there are things that are said in the workplace that
are of no public interest. They're personal gripes.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Correct. The line the Court
was drawing in Connick was between the personal and the
public. the Court said that, had the prosecutor in that
case come forward had -- to bring to light actual
potential wrongdoing, a breach of public trust, the Court
suggested strongly that that would have been a matter of
public concern, and that the Court would then --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- have proceeded to the
Pickering balance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- so if an employee -- I
really don't understand it -- an employee comes forward
with some scurrilous information about a family member of
his boss, who is a public figure, and his whole families
are public figures, which would be picked up by the press,
that would be a matter of public concern?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: If he's talking --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Gee, I never understood that
that's what the test was. I thought this was a matter
that deals with the welfare of the public, rather than --
rather than the welfare of the press.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Two things. One is that if
the public employee is basically reporting something
corrupt in the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that I understand.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- in the workplace.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's the welfare of the
public.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Correct. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, he's --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- in Government --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- he's just saying, you know,
his boss's wife, a mayor of a big city, is running around
with somebody. Okay? And that's picked up by the press.
It's there on the gossip pages. She's a public figure.
You say that would be covered by this.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The test the Court
enunciated in Connick is public, social, or -- excuse me
-- political, social, or other concerns is up to the
community. If it's something that would be of legitimate
news and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Anything that would get in the
press. That's it.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Then potentially --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wow.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But it has to be legitimate
news interest. And the Court -- the Courts have not
usually taken idle gossip to meet that test.
JUSTICE BREYER: We live in a world where people
are leaking things all the time. And there are thousands
of things that are in the public interest every day. But
what's bothering me is, while I see the Government's rule
as protecting the interests of the employer, it's very
hard for me to believe that never is there an instance
where the first amendment offers protection. But the only
choice you've given me is a rule that says every dispute
of the public interest is going to go right into
constitutional litigation. And I don't like that either.
So, am I hopelessly --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- forced to choose which is
the lesser of the evils, or is there some middle approach
that gives discretion to the Government, but doesn't allow
them to exceed that discretion in a certain category of
cases? If so, what? And --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Certainly --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- how would you phrase it?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- at a minimum, a report of
Government misconduct by an employee to his supervisor, at
a minimum, should be treated as meeting whatever threshold
the Court establishes. And there's something that all the
all circuits that have addressed this point agree, that
whistleblower-types of speech is of paramount public --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, we do this --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- concern.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- so we do this as a -- so we
do this as a matter of what is sound management principles
for a Government agency? How does that relate to the
first amendment?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Because Government
misconduct goes to the very heart of Government
--
accountability and the public's ability to hold officials
accountable when there is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But Government
misconduct -- if I get a memo from a law clerk that says,
"Justice So-and-So's jurisprudence is wacky," that goes to
[Laughter.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- that goes to
Government misconduct, under your theory, right? And I
fire them, because I think that's not appropriate to put
in a memo.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But if --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: They have a first-
amendment claim, right?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, they have a first-
amendment interest in their speech, but they have no
claim, because if the -- if you fired them just because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Nobody's wacko here. I mean,
it's plainly --
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- plainly false.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: You know, it would depend
why -- it would depend why you fired them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they disagree with
it. They think it's -- whatever -- unprincipled, wrong.
They write me a memo, and I say, "Don't write me a memo
like that." And they write me another one, and then I
fire them.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: All right. But if you're
firing them because you think they've exercised poor
judgment in the -- in the way that they've communicated,
then it's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And they think it's
Government misconduct because of the way cases are
decided, and that they have a first amendment interest.
What could be more important than how the Court decides
cases? And that violates their first-amendment rights.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: In the hypothetical you gave
me, it doesn't -- I mean, it doesn't sound like a serious
claim of Government misconduct. It sounds like more like
an offhand remark with -- which, if you thought it was
inappropriate, you might be able to take action against
that employee. Here, we have a very grave allegation to
public -- of Government misconduct, not casually made. I
mean, the -- Mr. Ceballos talked to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But there was --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- other people --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- a dispute about that
in this case, too. I mean, it -- under the supervisor's
view, it may come down to simply whether there were tire
tracks or tire rim tracks. And that's not as serious, in
one view, as your client thinks it's serious.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: My client carefully
considered what the -- what the allegations were in the
case, and they talked to people in this office. So
seriously did the supervisors take it that they actually
released somebody who pleaded guilty, who was in custody
for seven months, and let them out on their own
recognizance, because that's how seriously -- what a
problem they thought, in his office, they had with this --
the affidavit. It was only after the meeting with the
sheriff's department where they, kind of, launched into
him exactly like a public defender, did the tide turn.
So, we're not -- it's not a casual dispute over tire
tracks, or not tire tracks, in this case.
But getting back to Justice Breyer's question
about drawing lines, I think that's just --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Your answer to Justice Breyer's
-- I was just going to jump in there -- your answer to
Justice Breyer's question is, look at -- if you want to be
sure that, in every case, you know, the good cases fall on
this side, the bad cases fall on -- he should buy your
position that every case should go to a balancing test.
That will give you the perfection of first-amendment
application. The absolute perfection. Now, it'll cost a
lot of money, and it'll, you know, interfere with a lot of
employment things, but it will give you first-amendment
perfection. Right? I mean, that's the answer.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There's an -- with respect,
I think there's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that your answer?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I'm not sure I can answer
that.
[Laughter.]
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I'll take that as a
rhetorical question.
But, to get back to Justice Breyer's question,
there's also -- I think this came up in -- when my
opposing counsel was talking, that there's this extra element
present here, which is that there is an independent
constitutional problem here, in that when you have a --
police misconduct, you have someone whose right to fair
trial are at stake, and you have a prosecutor who's trying
to fulfill his individual ethical and constitutional
obligation --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- on top of it.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There would -- in this case,
unlike any other case I've seen in the employment area,
there is a hearing in -- before a court of general
jurisdiction, who goes into this. That's what the
criminal trial is for. And he did. There was also a
grievance proceeding.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Had Ceballos remained
silent, however, then this speech would never have been
aired, and police misconduct --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- would go unchecked.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- I've got -- you've got me
part of the way. Now, I'm not saying I -- I have to think
this through, but you got part of the way. You say here,
there's an independent constitutional basis for the speech
being permitted. But, now, still within that, the
Government agency has to have some authority to discipline
a person, even there, because, after all, he might have
been accusing these sheriffs of things that were really
not justified by what they, in fact, did. Or maybe he was
right. What about that part of the standard? Do you want
to say that the Government wins, as long as it behaved
reasonably? Do you want to say that the Government loses
only if there was an abuse of ordinary employer
discretion? Do you want to say the Government -- et
cetera. What do you want to say?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: If the Government takes
action because the employee has exercised -- has done --
carried out his job in an inappropriate way that reflects
a lack of fitness or poor judgment and what have you, the
employer's within his rights to do so. The Court
acknowledged that in Pickering, it acknowledged that in
Rankin. That has never really been an issue in the
Court's cases. And it's not --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Suppose --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- our position --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- we were to write this,
hypothetically. Indeed, the employer has broad discretion
to discipline the employee for the manner -- or whatever
he does -- even in such an area, but that discretion can
be abused. And, therefore, it is up to the judge to
determine whether a jury could find such abuse of
discretion here.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Correct. I agree with that
standard.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that does --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that does mean that
potentially -- as the Government says, potentially every
case is at least going to get as far as summary judgment
in court.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's already the case.
Almost all these cases go to summary judgment. It's
almost impossible to dismiss one of these cases on the
pleadings. That's true even in the Fourth Circuit.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you -- it wouldn't be
that way if the rule was that if it's employee speech on
the job, it's not protected at all.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Respectfully, that's not
correct. Even in the fourth circuit --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No, that's the argument
that's being made here by both the --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I understand that, but that
argument is unfounded. Even in the fourth circuit, which
has come closest to adopting the per-se rule the
petitioners are asking for, district courts -- and there's
a case we cited in our brief, Echtenkamp -- it's from the
eastern district of Virginia -- where the Court said, in
trying to decide, "Did the employee speak as a citizen or
as an employee?" this is going to take factual
development. We can't decide this on the pleadings. It's
going to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay, do --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- have to go to summary
judgment.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- do we know how many cases of
this sort there are?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I can only say based looking
at published cases --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yeah.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- on Westlaw.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yeah.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There seem to be around 60
or 70 court-of-appeals cases --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Over what --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- a year.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- period of time?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Each year, for the least
five years, about --
JUSTICE SOUTER: In --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- 60 or 70 court-of-appeals
cases.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- in all of the circuits --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: In all of the circuits.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that follow a ninth-circuit
kind of rule?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes, in all of the circuits.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's court of appeals. You
really don't know how many district-court judgments there
may have been that didn't go up to the court.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There's around a hundred a
year in the district courts that appear on Westlaw, each
year for the last five years.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There's one aspect of this
case that no one has touched on. The concurring judge,
Judge O'Scannlain, said, this is what whistleblower
statutes are supposed to handle, and that if we accepted
your view of the first-amendment coverage, the
whistleblower statutes would be superfluous.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's incorrect. The
whistleblower statutes, which are sort of a patchwork
nationwide, protect, or at least they have the ability to
protect, speech beyond what the first amendment does. If
you take the Federal whistleblower protection statute, for
example, if an employee makes a protected disclosure, and
an employer takes a prohibited action in response, there's
no balancing. The employee wins. The causation burden is
also lower. The agency's on the hook for paying the
money. There's no immunity, and so on.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: California does have a
whistleblower statute. Is that right?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It does.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And there was a claim made
under it, but we're not told how it came out.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There wasn't a claim made
under it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was not.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There was not a --
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I'm --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- did not bring a claim
under California whistle-blowing --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: He did -- he --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure you've answered
Justice Ginsburg's question. Her question was, Don't
whistleblower statutes cover this? And your answer, if I
understood it correctly, is, whistleblower statutes cover
this, and a lot more. That doesn't prove --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Oh, I'm sorry, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that doesn't prove--
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- understood the question
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that they don't take care of
this problem.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: No, I understood her
question to be whether they're rendered superfluous.
Whistleblower statutes are patchwork across the country.
Some would cover this kind of speech, some would not.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Some would not cover it.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Not all whistleblower
statutes cover internal communications. Some do --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Some are quite narrow --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- some don't
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- of what they cover.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Some of the whistleblower
statutes are very specific and narrow --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- of what they cover.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Some of them --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- in fact, don't cover
disclosures that are job related. If it's the employee's
job to blow the whistle on this type of thing, it's
usually not covered by a whistleblower statute.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, no, that's not --
that's not correct. I mean, in -- many of the statutes do
cover internal, and some don't. In some, you have to go
to a legislature, or you have to go -- take it to a
certain outside organization or entity in order to cover
it, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess I'm --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- some internal --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- thinking of the
Federal law, where the idea is, if it's part of your job,
you have the normal civil-service job protections if
you're being retaliated or discriminated against for doing
your job, so you don't get the extra protections of the
whistleblower law. The only people who get it are the
people who -- it is not part of their job.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The Federal circuit has
interpreted the Federal whistleblower statute to narrow
the protection, so if it's within your normal duties of
employment, then it would excluded.
But if I could -- if I can -- just for a moment,
I want to return -- I've hinted -- I've hinted at this
somewhat, but I haven't -- oh, I see my time's up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yeah. Thank you, Ms.
Robin-Vergeer.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Lee, you have one
minute left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CINDY S. LEE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MS. LEE: Under our approach, we believe that
many cases won't even be filed, because they won't be able
to make a colorable claim that it is citizen speech. This
case, in its essence, is about whether a public employee
has a constitutional right to perform his assigned job
duties in such a way that is to the dissatisfaction of the
employer. In Pickering and in Connick, this Court
contemplated first-amendment litigation in a public-
employment context in the relatively rare circumstances in
which adverse employment action was taken as a result of
an employee's extracurricular activities. Under the Ninth
Circuit and the respondent's approach, the exception would
become the rule.
It is our view that the Ninth Circuit has simply
gone too far in giving a broad sweep for first-amendment
protection for any public employee speech, simply because
it happens to be a matter of public concern. As Judge
O'Scannlain stated in his special concurring opinion, "The
time is right for this Court to steer the drifting first-
amendment jurisprudence back to its proper moorings."
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms. Lee.
The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 11:02 a.m., the case in the
