IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
GIL GARCETTI, ET AL.,
Petitioners,
: No. 04-473
RICHARD CEBALLOS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, March 21, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 1:00 p.m.
APPEARANCES:
CINDY S. LEE, ESQ., Glendale, California; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for the
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting the
Petitioners.
BONNIE I. ROBIN-VERGEER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CINDY S. LEE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ.
For the United States, as amicus curiae,
Supporting the Petitioners 20
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
BONNIE I. ROBIN-VERGEER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 30
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CINDY S. LEE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 60
P R O C E E D I N G S
[1:00 p.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in 04-473, Garcetti versus Ceballos.
Ms. Lee.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CINDY S. LEE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MS. LEE: Thank you. Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
At its core, the First Amendment is about
free and open debate on matters of public importance.
It's about citizens' rights to participate in public
debate and contribute their personal opinions and views
whether they are mainstream or not. The first
amendment is not, however, about policing the
workplace. It is not about constitutionalizing the law
of public employment. Nor should it be. Yet, if the
Ninth Circuit's approach is accepted or adopted, this
is what it will do.
In this section 1983 action, a deputy
district attorney prepared a disposition memorandum,
First Amendmentpursuant to his prosecutorial duties,
setting forth the reasons why, in his prosecutorial
judgment, the criminal case that he was supervising was
likely to be dismissed. The fact that the supervisor
did not agree with the content of that memorandum should
not give the plaintiff a constitutional right to
challenge adverse employment decisions that he claims
were in response to the product of that memorandum.
There are no First Amendment interests that
are served when public employees are allowed to perform
assigned job duties in such a way as to the
disagreement of the public employer. Essentially, what
the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I --
MS. LEE: -- Ninth Circuit --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- I suppose the public
might have an interest in knowing about this debate. I
don't know if you can say there are no public interest
served. It might be that there are other
counterbalancing first -- interests, but I don't think
you could say we have no interest in speech. This was
-- this is a -- on its face, a rather interesting -- a
rather interesting argument that they're -- that
they're having.
MS. LEE: When --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: They're interested in
criminal law, criminal procedure, et cetera, et cetera.
MS. LEE: Well, it's our position that when
speech by public employees cannot fairly be said to be
speech as a citizen, then the Government should have a
presumptive right to manage its personnel affairs and
internal --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that -- yes, that's
something different. But your statement, that there's
just no First Amendment interest --
MS. LEE: Well, there's no core First
Amendment values that are furthered when public
employers have to justify employment decisions that
they make on a routine basis.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, why wasn't that
equally true in Connick?
MS. LEE: Well, the difference in Connick is
that the employee -- the prosecutor in that actions
spoke more closely with a citizen, and the Government -
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but I mean that's --
MS. LEE: -- had --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that's a fine
characterization, but I'm not sure that that helps us.
In Connick, the one subject of the speech that was
held to be protected was the speech questioning
political pressure to help in campaigns and so on. The
issue here that would arguably favor protection is the
issue of calling public attention to lying by police
officers in criminal cases. And it seems to me that
the -- that if there's a public interest in political
pressure, there's a public interest in mendacity in law
enforcement.
MS. LEE: Well, if the employee is required
to investigate or report that kind of conduct pursuant
to their normal duties of employment, then that is
speech that the employer should absolutely or
presumptively have an ability to monitor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, yes, but why?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's the difference,
not the lack of public interest --
MS. LEE: That's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that you're --
MS. LEE: -- absolutely right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- pointing to, is that in
one case he is making this statement as an employee;
and you say the employer, if it's a stupid statement,
ought to be able to fire him for it. In --
MS. LEE: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the other case, he's
making the statement as a member of the public. And
what the First Amendment is all about is that we allow
stupid statements to be made. Right?
MS. LEE: If it's not part of -- if it's --
if it's not part of your core job duties that you --
that employers should evaluate.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but it may well -- I
guess the point that I'm trying to get at -- and it
goes back to your original public-interest issue -- is,
let's assume -- as Justice Scalia's hypo had it, let's
assume that the statement made by the employee on the
subject within job duties -- case like this one -- is,
in fact, a "stupid statement." Let's assume it's
wrong, it's inaccurate, whatnot. The issue is not
whether an employer, it seems to me, should, if that
turns out to be the case, be able to fire. The issue,
it seems to me, is whether, if it is not stupid, it
should be totally unprotected, so that the employer
could do anything, even if it's an accurate statement.
And my understanding is that your argument on public
interest was an argument that says, even if it's
accurate and they were lying and so on, that there
should be no protection. Am I -- and do I understand
you correctly?
MS. LEE: Well, our position is, whether or
not the prosecutor in this case made an accurate
statement during the performance of his job -- so, in
other words, if his disposition memorandum -- if the
employer accepted it and agreed with it, and the case
didn't go any further, there wouldn't be a basis of
First Amendment, because normally he is acting pursuant
to his job duties and it's up to the employer to
evaluate whether or not he's adequately performing
those job --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Sure, but take --
MS. LEE: -- duties.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- take the case in which
the employee says, "It was accurate." The employer
says, "No, it was stupid. You got everything wrong."
I take it, in -- your position is that regardless of
whether the employee got it right or not, there
shouldn't be protection, because it's within job
duties. Is --
MS. LEE: Right. It --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that correct?
MS. LEE: -- should not be protected under
the First Amendment.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MS. LEE: That's not to say that the public
employer is free from being challenged with regards to
the employment decision. It may be a matter for the
employee to seek, through the grievance procedure, that
-- like Mr. Ceballos did initially, or even pursue it
to civil service remedies. And those are the type of
decisions that the personnel in those departments are
more ably, I think, to decide.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or he could go public, I
assume. He could say, "I got fired for saying this.
And this was true." Right? Take it to the press. The
press would love it.
MS. LEE: If his job --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right?
MS. LEE: -- is not -- if that speech was not
required to be kept --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm assuming it was --
MS. LEE: -- internally.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- not required to be kept
confidential.
JUSTICE ALITO: But if he -- if it's part of
his job to speak publicly, then he has no -- things
that are said publicly in the performance of official
responsibilities have no First Amendment protection?
MS. LEE: In our view, no. If it's a job --
if the public employee's assigned job duties is to, on
behalf of the Government or the employer, speak to the
public about certain things that are going on in the
office, and he happens to get disciplined for it, that
wouldn't pass our step.
--
JUSTICE ALITO: So, what if the employer
tells the employee to go out and lie? There's no First
Amendment protection if the employee, instead, tells
the truth?
MS. LEE: Well, I don't know if that's a --
if that's a detailed enough hypothetical. I mean, if
the employee's core job duties are to report X, Y, and
Z, and that employee goes out to the public and reports
X, Y, Z, E, and F --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, no, that's not --
MS. LEE: -- I think that's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that's not -- that's not
the hypothetical. So, suppose that a supervising
district attorney tells the deputy district attorney,
"Go in and make a misrepresentation to the court, or
conceal evidence," or whatever --
MS. LEE: Well, the question would be if he's
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- and he refuses to do
that, or he goes in and he says the opposite, he tells
the truth, and he's fired. What result?
MS. LEE: Well, I think the plaintiff could
argue that, "That's not my core job duties. My job
duties is to" -- if it's a prosecutor, "is to make
statements" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Oh, so --
MS. LEE: -- "pursuant to" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- so you're saying that
there's an exception to your rule, so that if, in this
case, he has a -- he has a defense if he said, "Well,
it's my duty to call it as I see it"?
MS. LEE: Absolutely --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then --
MS. LEE: -- not.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, then, if that's so,
you ought to remand this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, sure you'd agree with
that, if it's his duty to call it or -- just as it's
the duty of a -- of a lawyer not to lie to the court.
If there was a similarly clear legal duty for him to
say something, you'd say that was part of his job
description, right?
MS. LEE: That would be the required
assignments of his job.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And -- and I suppose, in
this case, in the hypothetical we propose, that the
California courts and the California bar would have
disciplinary mechanisms against the senior attorney who
hypothetically told the junior attorney to mislead.
MS. LEE: Well, that would be an issue of
fact.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does California have, or
have not, disciplinary procedures in the hypothetical
case where a senior attorney who tells a junior
attorney lie to the court --
MS. LEE: They do.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What is the --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what is it?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What is the California
remedy? Let's say his boss says, "Don't turn over
Brady materials."
MS. LEE: And the employer goes ahead and
turns it over?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MS. LEE: If the boss makes a determination
that, "This is not Brady materials. I don't want that
disclosed," and the employee goes ahead and discloses
it, our position is, that would not be protected First
Amendment speech.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about -- you were
talking about public speaking. There was, as I
remember, a talk that was given to the Mexican-American
Bar Association, and that was not something that his
employer required him to do, but he --
MS. LEE: No, it wasn't. And it's not part
of this lawsuit, because there's no dispute that the
communication at issue in this case is that disposition
memorandum that he prepared purely pursuant to his
prosecutorial duties.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But would have a 1983 case
if he were disciplined or disadvantaged in the
workplace because of the talk that he gave to the
Mexican-American Bar Association in which he criticized
DA office policies?
MS. LEE: Then our position is, it gets past
step one, because it's not normally something that a
prosecutor is required to do, and it would be subject
to a balancing --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Pickering balancing, I take
MS. LEE: Correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I thought -- correct me
if I'm wrong, just as a matter of fact -- I thought his
83 claim listed the speech to the Mexican-American
Bar Association as one of the reasons that he was
demoted, or whatever it was, transferred.
MS. LEE: It was initially alleged, but,
through the course of discovery, the focus of it was a
disposition memorandum, because by the time he went to
the Mexican-American Bar Association, he had already
been disciplined, so there is no causation between his
public speech to the Mexican Bar Association and the
disciplinary actions that were --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, the --
MS. LEE: -- are at issue.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- the focus may have
changed, but, I mean, he hadn't dropped the -- he
hadn't dropped the claim that that was one of the
causes --
MS. LEE: Well, in --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- of the --
MS. LEE: -- in essence, he did, when we --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Did he?
MS. LEE: -- when we went to the summary
judgment motion. And that's why the district court was
very clear that the issue --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MS. LEE: -- in this case was a
communication in the disposition memorandum. And that
was -- it was undisputed that that was purely pursuant
to his prosecutorial duties --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The court --
MS. LEE: -- and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- the court of
Appeals did --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- the court of
Appeals specifically did not address the Mexican-
American Bar Association speech. It focused only on
the memorandum, correct?
MS. LEE: Correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And you concede that's
Pickering balancing, anyway.
MS. LEE: Well, in -- to the extent that he's
alleging that if that's -- "I went to the Mexican-
American Bar Association, and I alleged -- or I made
statements that there were some improprieties in the
district attorney's office," that would probably get
past step one and the matter of public concern, and
then the question would be whether or not his interest
in speaking as a citizen outweighed the interests of
the Government.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But let me -- let me raise
this question. If, in this case, he gets past step one
because of the Mexican Bar Association speech, and if,
as you suggested in answer to a question a little while
ago, that anybody could go public and get at least past
step one of Pickering, what is to be gained by the
extremely -- well, strike the "extremely" -- what is to
be gained by the restrictive view that you take that if
he doesn't go to the Bar Association, or doesn't go
public, there's no protection at all? In other words,
it seems to me that the public is being protected in a
way subject to an immediate end run.
MS. LEE: Well, I think what Your Honor is
really asking is, if the plaintiff in this case had
taken his disposition memorandum, and, rather than give
it to his supervisor, which what he -- what he was
required to do, he went to the public and gave it to
them on a pending case, I don't necessarily think that
would be protected under Pickering, as well.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But what if he simply goes
to the public and says, "Look, there's Brady material
here, and it should be turned over, and, instead, my
boss is telling me to suppress it." That wouldn't be
turning over his work product. And I took it, from
what you said earlier, that, in that case, you would
say at least he gets pasts step one of Pickering for
the --
MS. LEE: Well, he certainly --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- newspapers --
MS. LEE: -- wouldn't be speaking in his
capacity as a prosecutor, but that doesn't necessarily
mean that his interests would be outweighed by the
employer's interest. In --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, he might -- he might
ultimately lose, just the way, on all issues but one,
the employee in Connick lost. That's quite true. But
at least --
MS. LEE: And --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- there would be a claim to
go through the balancing --
MS. LEE: Well, in --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- exercise.
MS. LEE: -- in some respects, if you're
talking about job-required speech that you are -- part
of those duties, and the function, is to keep it
internally until at least there's some decision by the
supervisor, and, rather than do that, you send it to
the press or leak that information out, I think a
governmental disruption in efficiency can be presumed
there. So, I don't think it's as -- I don't think it's
as clear that that -- that Mr. Ceballos would have
ultimately prevailed under the balancing. I mean, if
he had taken the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MS. LEE: -- the speech externally, I think
there -- that he ultimately would have lost, as well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, I understand your point.
MS. LEE: -- because there is --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You're not saying he would
win on Pickering balancing, but he would at least get
to the point of going through the balancing exercise.
MS. LEE: And ultimately the result would be,
there's no protected --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Maybe.
MS. LEE: -- First Amendment speech.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: How do you go about
determining whether something falls within somebody's
job duties? How specifically does that have to be set
out?
MS. LEE: If it's a function of the person's
job -- assigned job duties. So, the -- you look at the
speech at issue. And here is -- it's a disposition
memorandum that was purely pursuant to what the -- what
his duties required. He's -- it's normally a function
that the employer would take into consideration for
things like promotions --
JUSTICE ALITO: And you have to look at --
MS. LEE: -- or demotions.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- you have to look at a job
description? And does it have to be listed
specifically in a job description? Could there ever be
things that it's understood that are things that any
employee ought to be concerned about, such as very
serious wrongdoing within the office?
MS. LEE: I mean, there could be situations
where there's a general code of conduct by all
employees; you know, employees who feel that they've
been, you know, harassed, sexually harassed, or feel
that others are, should report that. But that may not
be that person's assigned job duties. In other words,
that person is not assigned to investigate and report
those type of things.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, if --
MS. LEE: And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- if you adopt a principle
that every employee ought to -- ought to report to his
superiors known wrongdoing by his co-workers, and that
that's part of his job duties, you -- then you always
cut off the ability of that employee to go public,
right? I mean, that's a -- sort of an expanding
category, "job duties."
MS. LEE: Well, it would be assigned job
duties, things that normally the employer would take
into consideration for things like terminating or
promoting.
I'd like to reserve the remainder of my time
for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms. Lee.
Mr. Kneedler.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF EDWIN S. KNEEDLER
FOR THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONERS
MR. KNEEDLER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Much of the work of public employees is
performed by speaking or writing, and much of that work
concerns matters of public interest. Under the Ninth
Circuit's decision, public employees engaged in such
work have at least a presumptive First Amendment right
to perform their jobs as they see fit.
That conclusion rests on a fundamentally
mistaken view of the First Amendment. When the
Government pays for somebody to do its work, it has an
absolute right to control and direct the manner in
which that work is performed. That is a basic rule of
agency law, and insofar as Federal employees are
concerned, it's a basic rule of our constitutional
structure. Article II of the Constitution gives the
President the power and responsibility to take care
that the laws be faithfully executed. Effectuation of
that power, and effectuation of the principle of
accountability that it embodies, requires that
supervisors in the executive branch be able to control
and direct the work of their subordinates. The First
Amendment, which was adopted just a few years after the
Constitution, was not meant to interpose the First
Amendment in that relationship between supervisor and
subordinate or otherwise to regulate the internal
affairs of the executive branch. That is the function
of civil service laws adopted by the legislature and
internal executive branch directives taking into
account the relative costs and benefits of certain
types of regulation. And finally --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, you take the position,
then, that -- going to the earlier hypothetical that
somebody brought up, that, say, in a Brady case, if the
--if the Federal prosecutor believes there was Brady
material that -- and let's assume he's correct, just to
make it a simple case -- that there's Brady material to
be turned over, and the U.S. attorney says, "Do not
turn the Brady material over," that if the -- if the
U.S. -- if the -- if the prosecutor tells this to a
court, that he can be disciplined?
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, there would, no doubt,
be other restrictions. Justice Kennedy mentioned
ethical rules. Under the Federal whistle-blower
statute --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, I'm sure --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- there would --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that's so --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- be a restriction.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- but what about, you know,
the basic First Amendment --
MR. KNEEDLER: The First Amendment would not
be the -- would not be the source of protection.
Whether there would be some argument that, if the
employee could not be fired, it would be an
unconstitutional condition to require him to put his
job at peril for committing a due process violation or
something like that, whether there would be a claim
like that, that would be a different matter. But the
First Amendment --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But why would you recognize
a due process violation if you wouldn't recognize a
First Amendment violation?
MR. KNEEDLER: Because the First Amendment
does not address speech that an employee undertakes in
the performance of his duties.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, neither does due
process.
MR. KNEEDLER: No. No, I was just suggesting
there would have to be some unconstitutional condition.
Well, the due process --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but to get to the
unconstitutional condition, wouldn't you normally look
to the First Amendment?
MR. KNEEDLER: My point is that the due
process -- due process clause does address the conduct
at question, which is the requirement that exculpatory
material be turned over to the defendant. And so, the
question is that the employee would be put in a
position where he would -- where he would be instructed
not to perform what he understood to be a
constitutional violation. I think most civil service
laws, most ethical rules, would take care of it. And,
as I mentioned, the Federal whistle-blower statute, in
02(b)(9), I think it is, has a provision that
protects employees who refuse --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- to obey an order --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- perhaps, 1983, if you go
the unconstitutional condition argument, and certainly
in 1983 -- or arguably a civil rights prosecution
against the senior who ordered --
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes, there would be -- there
would be those sorts of restrictions. My only point is
that the First Amendment is not addressed to speech or
writing that an employee undertakes in the -- in the --
in the course of his official duties. This --
JUSTICE ALITO: But isn't there this -- isn't
there this anomaly in the position that you're
advocating? It would seem to me that categories of
employee speech that are most likely to be disruptive
would be public speech that's outside of the employee's
duties, or internal speech that is outside of the
employee's duties. How much of a -- of a problem is it
that employees are bringing First Amendment claims
based on largely internal speech that falls within
their own job duties?
MR. KNEEDLER: I think that would be a huge
problem, because it would effectively constitutionalize
the day-to-day interactions between supervisors and
subordinates within the Government, and put the Federal
Courts in charge of overseeing that. Even if these
cases might ultimately be disposed of on summary
judgment, there would be discovery, there would be the
burdens of the litigation. And in a case like this,
where the -- where the Government is taking the
position that the -- these actions were not even taken
against the employee because of this disposition
memorandum -- they say they had perfectly valid other
reasons -- but this case exemplifies what the problem
would be, is that the employee could identify something
that he said or did in the course of his duties that
involved speech and say, "That's the reason that I was
disciplined."
JUSTICE ALITO: But are these going to be
difficult cases under Pickering balancing? You have
the case like this, where the employee, let's say, says
to the prosecutor, "I think the case should be
dismissed." The prosecutor says, "Well, I'm the
supervisor, and I disagree. We're not going to dismiss
the case." Typically, the employee wouldn't be
disciplined for doing something like that. Now, if the
employee persists and, you know, is insubordinate,
there would be another basis for taking disciplinary
action.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, but in this case, if we
look at what the Ninth Circuit said, for example, when
it got to step two, it said that the employee could
only be disciplined if the -- if the agency could show
that there was disruption or reckless disregard for the
truth. But when somebody is actually carrying out his
job duties --not engaged in outside activities that may
reflect back and be disruptive, but engaged in the job
duties themselves, the employer has a right to insist
on more than that the employee not be disruptive or
reckless; he has a right to insist that -- the employer
has a right to insist that the employee affirmatively
contribute to the work of the office and exercise good
judgment. And the -- and the supervisor has to be in a
position to make judgments about whether that judgment
was good or not.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, is this going to lead
to difficult problems in determining what falls within
the job duties of a particular employee?
MR. KNEEDLER: I don't -- I don't think it --
I don't think it will, and certainly no more problems
than the -- than this Court has wrestled with, and the
lower courts have, in terms of what's a matter of
public concern. I think it's a common inquiry to
determine what a person's job duties are. And I think
it's a very important place to have a clear line, just
as there is a clear line with respect to matters of
public concern.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose, in the memo here,
the assistant district attorney had said, "I think that
this deputy lied, and I think the deputy should be
fired." Now, whether the deputy should be fired or not
probably isn't within the job duties of this -- of this
employee. So, would that be outside of your rule?
MR. KNEEDLER: No, I think it would probably
be inside the rule. I think -- I would think,
particularly for a -- for an assistant DA to make a
recommendation about the consequences of illegal
conduct would be within his -- within his job duties.
I also want to say that this Court's decision
in Pickering, and in that line of cases, I think, fully
support this, because, as this Court pointed out in
Connick, this Court has repeatedly stated that the
protection afforded by Pickering is for action taken as
a citizen on matters of public concern. That "as a
citizen" phrase was reiterated in virtually all of this
Court's cases in the area. And the underlying
principle is that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But does the Givhan case
fall within that?
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes. Yes, it does. But all
the Court addressed in Givhan was the question of
whether, if you take your concerns not publicly to the
newspaper, but express them to the -- in that case, the
principal, that you don't lose First Amendment
protection. But the Court did not address the question
of whether those comments were within the scope of the
employee's duties. And I think a reading of lower
court's decision in Givhan indicates that they were
not. She was an English teacher, and she was
commenting to the principal about employment practices
at the school. That would not have been within the
scope of her employment. And then --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if she was the vice
principal, that would be -- then it would come --
MR. KNEEDLER: I'm --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- within your --
MR. KNEEDLER: It might be -- it might be
closer to that, yes. I think, again, it would depend
if she was -- if she was vice principal for
administration or something, I think -- I think it
clearly would.
But the purpose of the Pickering line of
cases is to protect employees when they go outside of
their -- of their job, that they shouldn't be penalized
for having taken a job to be able to participate in
public affairs, as the Court put it in Pickering. That
does not suggest that the -- that the employee brings
the First Amendment into the job workplace and can use
it as a shield or a sword in the day-to-day
interactions with his supervisors, and to do so would
constitutionalize, as I said, the day-to-day
operations of employment. And this is a classic
example, where somebody wrote a disposition memorandum
in the course of --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And you're suggesting --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- in the course of those
activities.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- that a remark made
internally could not provide the basis for discipline,
but saying exactly the same thing publicly could. I
mean -- or vice versa.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, if it's made publicly in
the capacity as a citizen, assuming the public -- it
isn't a speech that he's making in the course of his
duties -- if he writes something to the press, he's
speaking in his capacity as a citizen. That doesn't
mean that it would be constitutionally protected; it
simply means that you get to step two of the Pickering
balancing, because he's not carrying --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I'm assuming --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- out the job duties.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- a case in which it would
be constitutionally protected. But you're saying if he
says it publicly -- assuming we pass the balancing test
-- but if he said the same thing to his boss directly
internally, no protection.
MR. KNEEDLER: No, that -- at least not if
it's part of his job duties. And I would think --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Which is a --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- ordinarily in that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- rule that would sort of
encourage people to go public rather than --
MR. KNEEDLER: No, I mean --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- exhaust their internal
remedies.
MR. KNEEDLER: Two things about that. When
he's saying it internally, he's doing his job. When
he's going externally, he may be violating office
policies.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Kneedler.
Ms. Robin-Vergeer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BONNIE I. ROBIN-VERGEER
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
Petitioners contend that the First Amendment
provides no protection when the Government silences or
punishes a public employee for speaking up on a matter
of vital public importance in the course of performing
his job, even if the Government has no legitimate
employment reason for doing so. Such a sweeping rule
would stifle speech that lies at the very core of the
First Amendment. Recognizing Richard Ceballos's claim
in this case would not convert every public employment
dispute into a constitutional case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think it's probably
a bit much to say that the core of the First Amendment
is internal employee grievances or speech. And I think
the concern on the other side is that you may -- as a
lawyer, you may have a view of what the -- what Brady
requires. Your superior may have a different view.
And just because that disagreement exists doesn't mean
that you have a constitutional right to continue to
voice your view when your superior has reached a
different decision.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I agree with that. The
First Amendment doesn't bar the Government from
disciplining employees for insubordination or poor job
performance or for continuing or persisting in a matter
once their supervisor's told them to stop. Where an
adverse employment action's motivated by such
legitimate employment reasons, there's no First
Amendment violation. But the Petitioners here have not
claimed any legitimate interest in punishing Ceballos
for what he said, nor have they made the case --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, their -- the interest
they claim that of supervising their employees.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That is not correct. In
this case, the Petitioners --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, that's the interest
that we're concerned with, is of having the Government
have the capacity to be able to control the speech of
its employees so they could have a consistent policy
and so that it can explain to the people what it's
doing.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: They've articulated that
as an abstract principle that has no application on the
facts of this case, because on the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, why --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- facts of -- sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Go on. I'll let --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: On the facts of this --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- let's hear your --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- case, they never claim
that Ceballos did anything improper, that he exercised
poor judgment, that he was insubordinate. They just
said, "We didn't retaliate." That was their defense of
this case. And that presents a fact question for the
jury.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you're the one that's
asking us to adopt a rule. And I'm suggesting to you
that there is an interest that's sacrificed by the rule
that you request, and that is the Government's interest
in regularity and consistency of its speech. They
don't have to claim it on a case-by-case basis. You're
the ones that are asking us to make this rule.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: With respect, I disagree
with the characterization, because -- well, there are
three reasons why Petitioners proposed per se rule,
which would be unwise. And it is they who are asking
for a per se exclusion where the Court has not
previously adopted a per se exclusion. And the reason
why it's unwise is that it will chill speech of
paramount public importance by prosecutors and many
other public employees. It will force many public
employees to go public if they want any chance of
constitutional protection, and it will lead to
arbitrary and unworkable linedrawing regarding whether
an employee's speech falls --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- within his job duties.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Because public employee
unions are so weak? They're the only strong unions
left in the country. I mean, really.
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE SCALIA: You need the Constitution to
protect employees against things of this sort?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Absolutely. The Court
has recognized, in Pickering and in other cases, that
the threat of dismissal from public employment is a
potent means of inhibiting speech. Public employees
who speak up within their workplaces about police
brutality, falsification of evidence, disaster
preparedness, and so on, should not be compelled to
shade the reports and the recommendations and tell
their superiors only what they want to hear or else
face reprisal for their candor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but neither should a
superior be required to get a report from a subordinate
that he thinks is way off base, just a result of poor
judgment, thinking that there -- that there was a
violation here, when there -- when there obviously
wasn't, or using facts that were not sufficiently
established in order to claim such a violation.
Surely, the employer is entitled to say, "On the basis
of this report, which you gave me, you're fired."
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's absolutely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or -- you know, or --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's absolutely
correct. And if, in this case, that judgment had been
made by Ceballos's employer, that he had exercised poor
judgment, that he was rash or reckless in his
conclusions, then the employer would have had a valid
basis for taking an adverse employment action against
him. But that is not what happened in this case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but you're just
hiding behind the fact that they claimed that it wasn't
in retaliation. Your assertion still puts them in the
position of having to defend a constitutional claim on
a case-by-case basis every time there's a disagreement
between a subordinate and a superior about, as in this
case, what Brady requires.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, actually, the
disagreement -- there wasn't any disagreement. He came
forward and exposed police misconduct. And his
supervisors were on his side.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: There was a
disagreement about whether or not his memorandum
accurately reflected, in an appropriate way, what was
at issue there. There was a disagreement about the
content of the allegations.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I don't think it's
important, for, maybe, purposes of this, to iron this
out, but I -- respectfully, I don't agree with that
characterization, because, even in the resolution of
the grievance internally, the -- what they found in the
grievance was that they took no adverse action against
him because of what he said --
JUSTICE BREYER: That doesn't --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- in connection with
this case.
JUSTICE BREYER: That isn't the point. I
think the point is, at least for -- I think point is
who is going to decide whether there was some
justification here. And I read this memo. I thought
that the DA had a pretty good claim, that the police
didn't do anything wrong. And there's also an argument
they did. All right. So, who decides that kind of
thing? A constitutional court or a State, under its
protection laws or whistle-blower statutes?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: No --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the argument that you
have to face, I think, is that it will be very
disruptive to have constitutional judges dive into
this, when there are so many other remedies, and where
the very act of their doing it, allowing discovery,
allowing court cases, allowing juries, itself, will
disrupt the Government. Now, if you say they give you
no protection at all, I want to hear what you have to
say as to what the standard is to separate the sheep
from the goats.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Okay. There are a few
points embedded in the question, and I'd like to take
them one by one.
With respect to the standard, the standard
is, if the employer makes a judgment that the public
employee has not performed his or her job properly or
has been insubordinate, so long as that judgment isn't
based on a censorial type motive, like, "We don't
tolerate criticism of the sheriff's department,"
something like that, then the employer's judgment
prevails. And I'm not suggesting that a district --
Federal district Court has license to second-guess that
judgment, so long as that judgment's actually the
judgment that was made. I mean, there's a pretext
analysis that might be made in this case --
JUSTICE BREYER: The only cases that would go
into court are cases where the employer says, "I have
no reason at all for firing him"?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, in a case like
this, the county never came forward --
JUSTICE BREYER: But that's because --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- and said that --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- they think they have a
better claim on the other part. I mean, if -- even if
you're right in this one, I promise you, the next one
will come along, and they'll say, "Of course we had a
good reason for firing him. One, we didn't fire him
for that reason. Two, if we did, we would have been
justified," or whatever. So --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- if your standard is, the
only cases that go into court under the First Amendment
are cases where the employer says, "I had no basis for
doing anything to him whatsoever," then I think there
will be few such cases, though you might convince me
that that standard --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- wouldn't do any harm.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- that's why I said that
it would be subject to a pretext analysis. The
employer, of course, might come back and -- and, post
hoc, come up with a rationale for --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that'll --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- why they did --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- always be --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- what they did.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the claim. That'll
always be the claim. They'll always say, "Oh, yes,
you said you did it because of that, but you did it
because you're retaliating" --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: You know --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- "for this or that." I
mean --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- we're not operating in
uncharted territory here. The rule that the Ninth
Circuit has adopted has been the prevailing rule in the
Circuits for years. And I just want to clarify
something that came up in the last argument, where I
cited some very rough statistics about the numbers of
cases. There's a rough -- a rough cut at the universe
of public employee free-speech cases, of which this
type of case, where the speech is part of the job, is
only a tiny subset. These cases are not dominating the
courts, and you don't have all the litigation that is
being --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that because --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- claimed would occur.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- they're addressed
-- is it -- they're addressed under State and Federal
whistle-blower laws, or --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: No, that's -- actually
gets me back to the second part of Justice Breyer's
question, which is protection. And it's a complete
hit-or-miss situation across the country. And just to
respond to something that was said about the Federal
Whistle-blower Protection Act, that statute has a
gaping hole in it, as construed by the Federal Circuit,
because the Federal Circuit has construed it to exclude
protection for speech that is part of the employee's
normal duties. So, in any case that would come up with
a Federal employee, leaving aside what judicial
remedies are even available for a Federal employee in
this area, the Federal employee would be largely
unprotected by the Federal Whistle-blower statute. And
with respect to what the state of law is across the
country, it's complete patchwork. Different types of
speech are protected, there's huge holes in coverage.
There is no --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about California,
which was the State where this episode occurred? Was -
- I think you mentioned that he did not make a claim
under the State statute.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's correct. And it's
sort of interesting that neither the Petitioners, the
United States, or any of the amici have cited a
California whistle-blower statute that would have been
applicable to this claim. I -- frankly, I think that there
was one that potentially might have been applicable,
not cited by any of the parties, but the law was in
flux, and it really wasn't all that clear. And that's
-- and California's probably one of the better States,
in terms of whistle-blower protections, compared to --
and we're talking about a local government employee,
and the odds of protection -- it's just hit or miss
across the country.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are you saying --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are you -- are you saying
the California courts would tolerate a situation where
a member of the bar told one of his employees to
misrepresent to the court?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: If you're --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The California courts --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- referring back to
hypothetical --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The California courts are
certainly not tolerating -- and, in fact, this case was
heard by a California court, and the -- and the judge,
as I read the record -- it's not altogether clear --
seemed to agree with the -- with the police officers.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: The motion to reverse
that was heard by a State Court judge was not run --
that hearing was not run by Ceballos. It was run by
the defense lawyers in that case. And Ceballos's
testimony was limited by the prosecution's own
objection. So, you can't judge anything from how that
disposition came out, whether the State Court judge
thought it was -- the police had lied or not lied. And
you can't judge anything by the way that hearing was
conducted.
But I want to return to why it's so important
that the Court not shrink First Amendment activity in
the workplace. It is of the utmost importance that
public employees, who internally report matters of
public concern, enjoy First Amendment protection, and
for two basic reasons. First, the public needs to have
a Government of public servants who do their jobs
honestly and with integrity, and not yes-men afraid to
tell public officials the bad news. A per se exclusion
of First Amendment protection creates a powerful
disincentive for deliberation within Government. The
last time, I cited an example of a FEMA employee who
was punished for saying to a supervisor that FEMA
wasn't ready to handle the next hurricane. But the
facts of this case are just as compelling, denying a
First Amendment protection for prosecutors who expose
police misconduct. And his disposition memo wasn't
just a prediction about whether -- how a judge would
rule on a motion; he exposed police misconduct and it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- was so --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that's not -- that's not
established. That's not established at all. His
supervisor obviously thought he didn't --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I'm sorry, I didn't mean
to suggest that -- the truth of that allegation may be
open to question, but what is not open to question --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but it's a very serious
allegation for somebody who's in the position that this
employee was to make against police officers. And as I
understood the case, the supervisor said, "Wow, I don't
want loose cannons around down there who are accusing
perfectly honest and respectable police officers of
violating the law." Now, that --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- hasn't been proven,
either. But --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Right. I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that is certainly a
possibility. And I do not want to exclude the ability
of a supervisor to fire somebody, if that possibility
exists, without having to go through extensive
litigation.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: With -- regardless of
whether he was ultimately correct or not, there's no
question, and there's no serious argument here, that he
had a legitimate basis for believing that police
misconduct had occurred. He conferred with his
supervisors and his colleagues before writing the memo.
Everyone agreed that there was a problem with the
warrant. And they took his allegations so seriously
that they released a defendant who had plead guilty.
JUSTICE BREYER: Say it's a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But if --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: And went to Jail
JUSTICE BREYER: -- borderline case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- none of that were
true -- if none of that were true, he could still file
his complaint. Presumably it survives a motion to
dismiss, and it goes at least to summary judgment. And
that's true in every case of a disagreement between a
subordinate and a superior.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's true of every
public employee government -- excuse me -- public
employee speech case, period. Almost all of these
cases go to summary judgment. They can't be dismissed
at the pleading stage, by and large, because they
require factual development. So, all that -- all that
this per se rule does is add complexity and a need
for greater factual development. It's not the magic
bullet that the Petitioners seem to think it is. The
Givhan case suggests the unworkability of drawing the
First Amendment line as what's part of an employee's
job. Conferences between a teacher and her principal
take in the same level of generality as writing a
disposition memorandum --
JUSTICE ALITO: But what about the cases --
putting aside the clear-cut case where the employee's
statement is either clearly correct or clearly
incorrect, but what about the case where the objection
to what the employee is doing is the manner of the
speech? It's on the matter -- it's on the matter of
concern, but the supervisor just thinks that it's being
handled in a way that's ham-handed or indiscrete.
Aren't they going to -- aren't these cases going to
cause terrible litigation problems?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: No, they won't, and they
haven't. If the employee -- employer has a concern
about the manner in which it's communicated, that is a
valid employment concern. I mean, suppose Ceballos had
gone a had a big meeting with --
JUSTICE ALITO: But under --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- the sheriff's department -
JUSTICE ALITO: -- then under Pickering --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- and embarrassed them?
JUSTICE ALITO: -- the test is going to be
whether the manner, which may be difficult to recreate,
caused -- how much of a disruption it caused to the
operations of the office.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: These -- you'd think that
if there was that type of disruption and hindrance of
the way public agencies were carrying out their
missions by these kinds of cases, which have been
around for a long time, that you'd see citations to
them in the Petitioner's brief, in the United States
brief. And their silence on this point is both
deafening and telling, because, in fact, it has not
been the problem that is being posited here, and this
is not a new approach that we're talking about.
But getting back to the Givhan case,
conferences between teachers and principals are a part
of the teacher's job, and it's pure formalism to make
the protected status of the Givhan teacher's speech
turn on whether the employee manual says a teacher has
to work to root out race discrimination. Or what if
she was a part-time ombudsman who is charged to improve
race relations in the school? Under their approach,
you know, boom, it's not protected speech anymore, even
though the underlying First Amendment value is exactly
the same. It also makes it completely subject to
manipulation by the employer in making everything a
part of an employer -- employee's job, in terms of
reporting duties, which --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The First Amendment value
may be the same, but it -- but what is present is
another value. And unless the person is willing to go
public, in which case the balancing occurs, and
assuming there's no prohibition of it, that other value
is a very significant one, the ability of public
officials to run their offices.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But here's the problem
with going public. It's perverse to create an incentive
for employees to go public, especially employees in
sensitive position -- in a sensitive position. The
First Amendment consequences here are especially grave,
because Ceballos had no realistic alternative channel
for communication open to him. Had he gone to a blog,
Web site, podcast, and so on, as Petitioners say in
their reply brief, or held a press conference, or gone
to Los Angeles Times, and so on, he'd be fired, and
he'd lose any First Amendment case that he brought.
So, what avenue does a prosecutor who wants --
JUSTICE BREYER: But what he has --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- to bring --
JUSTICE BREYER: But the argument that I
think people are worried about, against you, is, you
have a case -- it's actually a wonderful example. Your
client thinks that, in the affidavit that the sheriffs
gave supporting the warrant, they didn't tell the
truth, because they said that whoever was looking into
it, you know, said there was a private driveway and
that there were tire tracks, and there were no tire
tracks, and it wasn't a private driveway. The other
side says, "Yes, it was a long road, but sort of like a
driveway, and the edge of the -- of the driveway was
broken down, and that's what the sheriff's deputies
were referring to." I found it a dispute on both
sides.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, you know --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, if, in fact, he's being
disciplined for that, the other side is telling you he
has a lot of remedies, he has a variety of remedies.
Go to the bar associations. Many States have laws, the
statutes that protect people under these situations.
And why suddenly go to a constitutional court to get
the same relief which will short circuit all the other
remedies? And if you do, there are going to be
thousands of cases less good than yours, and they'll
all run to -- to the constitutional court. All right.
So, now, what's your reply?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: There is no baseline
level of protection that is available by statute or
civil service protections. If the Court recognizes
that the speech involved here, exposing Government
misconduct and so on, is important for First Amendment
purposes, as it has previously recognized, then it's --
then it needs to be a baseline level of First Amendment
protection. And then if whistle-blower statutes are
passed that protect it beyond the baseline level,
that's fine. I'm not maligning whistle-blower
statutes. But there is no such level of protection
that is guaranteed. For someone in his position, if
the First Amendment does not protect his speech, it's
just not protected.
And I want to get back to -- I started to say
why it's so important that the speech be protected.
It's not just that the public needs to have a
Government of public servants, but the Government needs
to know how it's operating. How can Government
function efficiently and effectively if it does not
possess the information it needs to make responsible
choices? When an employment decision is actually made
because the employee has made a bad judgment and he
reached an unwarranted conclusion in his memo, or the
manner in which he conveyed it was terribly indiscrete,
he publicized in front of the whole sheriff's
department, and embarrassed them, when that's an issue,
then the employment can respond, and the courts will
make quick -- short shrift of those cases, as they do
now.
JUSTICE ALITO: When --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
JUSTICE ALITO: It --
Well, that --
earlier.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- was my point
They can't make short shrift of those cases,
because they're not going to be thrown out at the
pleading stage. They're going to have to progress at
least to summary judgment, probably in every case in
which an employee is terminated, because now one of his
defenses against termination is, "You're violating my
First Amendment rights."
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But, I mean, the Court
needs to appreciate that for the universe of public
employee free-speech cases, they're mostly decided at
summary judgment; they aren't decided on the pleadings.
That's already the case. And all that adding a job-
duty element to it is, adds complexity and requires
more factual development. It -- there's a number of
issues here. First of all, what counts as part of an
employee's job? Does the speech have to be required by
--
the job, or merely related to the job? How do you
judge if the speech meets the test? Do you go by the
job description? Common practice? What if the
employee's speech is not required by the job, but some
independent ethical duty compelled him to come forward
JUSTICE ALITO: If Pickering --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- as is the case here?
And, also, what if the employee --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Cases involving those
questions would have to go to the courts, I assume.
But they'd be a small percentage of all the cases that
would go to the courts if we adopt your position. I
agree, there will still be some cases left that'll have
to go to the courts to sort out these questions that
you mentioned. But that's going to be a small
percentage of the totality.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, it's already a
small percentage of the totality, because cases of this
type, which involve speech by a public employee while
they're doing their job, however that is formulated,
are already a small subset of the universe of public
employee --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Perhaps --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- cases.
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- because it's been
unclear, until this Court has spoken to the subject,
and especially in light of the dicta in our prior
cases, which says that he has to be speaking publicly.
The reason for the -- for the -- for the paucity of
cases can be, simply, that the law was not clear, and
most people thought the way -- the way your opponent in
this case thinks.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: That's incorrect. I
mean, most of the Circuits have addressed this
question, and virtually all of them are -- have sided
with the Ninth Circuit and has -- have refused to draw
a bright-line rule when speech has come up as part of
the job.
And the -- and as -- Justice Scalia, you seem
to be referring to the "as a citizen" phrase the Court
has used in its opinions. And I want to address that.
No decision by this Court has ever turned on the "as a
citizen" phrase, and it's always been used in
conjunction with "matter of public concern." The most
that can be said is the phrase characterizes the facts
of the cases in which the Court used it. The Court
hasn't addressed whether speech that's part of the job
JUSTICE SCALIA: 	 Yes, but the Court didn't
say this guy had blue eyes.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Speech --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It said he was speaking as a
-- that seemed to the Court to be important to its
decision.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Speech -- and I don't
mean to suggest it has no meaning, but "speech as a
citizen" means speech that one can readily imagine a
concerned citizen engaging in. You can imagine a
concerned citizen coming forward to report race
discrimination --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that's not --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- in a school.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- the context in
which this law developed. It developed, originally --
if you were a public employee, you did not have free-
speech rights as a citizen. As Justice Holmes said,
you know, you might have the right to speak, but you
don't have the right to be a policeman. So, the "as a
citizen" part didn't come out of happenstance.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It was recognizing
that when you are speaking "as a citizen,"
juxtaposition to "as an employee," then you do have
First Amendment rights.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: But if you look at the
way it was used in Pickering, which, of course, is a
different case -- but, in Pickering, the Court was
emphasizing that public employees, like all citizens,
have an interest in speaking on a matter of public
concern. The Court, in Connick, suggested that if the
prosecutor there had spoken to bring to light actual or
potential wrongdoing or breach of public trust, her
speech would have presumptively been protected. If she
had done that, she'd be speaking in the same capacity
that Ceballos spoke here. One can readily imagine a
concerned citizen stepping forward to expose Government
misconduct. And it can be difficult to sort out in
which capacity an employee is speaking. And sometimes
an employee can speak in more than one capacity at
once.
JUSTICE ALITO: If Pickering balancing is
done, is there anything special about the situation
where the employee's speech is part of the employee's
job duties? Is the test applied differently in that
situation?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: It does, because if the
employer makes a judgment -- as I said before, if the
employer makes a judgment that the employee has carried
his job duties poorly, incompetently, insubordinately,
and so on, that interest is -- it's either dispositive
of the balance, or it's nearly so. And it -- so, from
that standpoint, the Court could put a gloss on the
Pickering balance that explains or emphasizes that the
employer's interests are controlling how the jobs are
performed, prevails.
But to get back, for a moment, to the --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, I'm not sure I understood
that answer. So, in this situation, if the employer
said that Mr. Ceballos was performing his job poorly,
that would be enough to tip the balance in the
employer's favor --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: If that was --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- under Pickering here?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: If that were really the
case. In a case like this, it would be clearly
pretextual, because not only -- not only was that not
the basis that was actually offered, but the employer
sided with him initially and released the defendant and
said he had a legitimate basis for speaking, and called
a meeting with the sheriff's department, and took all
these steps to show that they actually sided with him.
And only when the sheriff's department accused him of
-- as acting like a public defender and said, "We're
going to get sued if you don't back us up," then the
office changed its position and went against Ceballos.
So, in a case like this, it would clearly be
pretextual. In another case, however, it would not --
presumably there are cases where it would not be
pretextual.
JUSTICE ALITO: So, basically, the test --
the Pickering balancing is the same in this situation
as it is in, let's say, the Givhan situation.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Well, this case is almost
identical to Givhan. The only -- the only thing is
that the Court, in Givhan, didn't expressly opine on
what capacity in which she was speaking. But it clear
that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but I --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- a teacher speaking --
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- in both capacities --
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I interrupt you? I
thought you said that, in this case, as distinct from
Givhan, there would be cognizable employer interests in
incompetence, the truth of what was said, the capacity
to do the job without roiling the waters unduly, and so
on. And that, I take it, is not necessarily so in a
Givhan situation. Or is it?
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: In --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Maybe the employer has the
same interest in each. I --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: I think --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- I have --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- the employer had the
same interest in both cases. The question in Givhan
was the fact that it was an internal report to the
employer: Did that matter? Did that reduce its
protection? The Court said no. So, the only thing
that it would take to make Givhan exactly like this is
to put it in the employee manual or make her an
ombudsman so it's -- so there's not even room for
argument that it was part --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but in --
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- of her job.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- in Givhan, if the
employee's assigned duties were all done competently,
but she had just gone off the deep end on racial
balance or something, the employer would not have had -
- if -- so long as it was the -- a private
communication like that, I don't know that the employer
would have had an interest in saying, "Well, you're
incompetent on the subject of racial balance, and
therefore I -- you know, I'm going to demote you or
fire you." But in the case in which the employee is
talking on the subject within the job description, then
the employer has got -- I thought you were saying he's
got a direct interest in competence, truth, and so on.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Yes, that's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: -- that's correct.
That's right.
Let me turn, just for a second, to -- getting
back to the complexity here, and the linedrawing that
has to be done. The Petitioner's own hypotheticals
underscore the arbitrariness and unworkability of their
approach. In -- if you look in the reply brief, at
page 13, note 11, they cite, as an example, a county
emergency-room doctor who -- and then they put "is not
part of their normal duties," to sort of build it into
the hypothetical -- would have a right, a First
Amendment right, to come forward and talk about
inefficiencies in a county emergency room. Whereas,
the State health inspector, who finds health code
violations in nursing homes do not. The First
Amendment value in those situations are the same. And,
if anything, it's greater for the county emergency --
for the -- for the -- I've said this backwards -- the
county emergency-room doctor who's talking about how
the -- how the county hospital is operating. There's
no difference there. And it's a completely arbitrary
linedrawing.
Suppose Ceballos had gone outside the chain
of command, suppose he had reported to Garcetti that
there was police misconduct. It's not clear where that
position would -- where their position would lead them.
Now it's not part of his normal job duty to go talk to
the DA. He's bypassed the chain of command. But it
seems that they would say that, "Well, because it was
not part of his normal job duty, it -- then it would be
protected." And, if so, what message is that sending
public employees about whether they should follow their
employer's own rules about how you communicate in the
workplace and what the chain of command is? It doesn't
make any sense to force public employees to go public,
as that does more to increase disharmony and disruption
in the workplace than having an employee like Ceballos,
who followed every rule and every order and instruction
regarding how to handle the case and how to communicate
within the workplace.
Connick said that the First Amendment's
primary aim is the full protection of speech upon
issues of public concern, as well as the practical
realities involved in the administration of a
Government office. The proposed rule is inconsistent
with that primary aim. It doesn't do anyone any good
to have U.S. attorneys and DAs blind-sided by coverups
in their office because their employees were afraid to
come forward and tell their supervisors the bad news.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, for that reason,
they're -- for that reason, they're not likely to --
in most instances, they would not be hostile to
receiving that kind of information, if it was provided
to them.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: May I answer?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sure.
MS. ROBIN-VERGEER: Unfortunately, there's
too much evidence, there's too much water under the
bridge, that shows that public employees who deliver
bad news, and are the unwelcome messenger, do face
retaliation in their workplaces. And here, Ceballos
told his workplace, his supervisors, that police
misconduct had occurred, and that was an unwelcome
message, and he was retaliated against for that reason.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms. Robin-
Vergeer.
Ms. Lee, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CINDY S. LEE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MS. LEE: Thank you, Your Honor.
I think that's an important point, Justice
Alito. I mean, in this case, it's exactly what
happened. The supervisors took Mr. Ceballos's
assessment seriously. And the difference was, after
they further thought about it, they didn't think --
they didn't agree with the proper course of action for
the district attorney's office, especially since there
was a motion pending, "Let's let the courts decide
that." So, if -- where -- I think Plaintiff's
suggesting that, but for protecting speech that's
required by the duties of employment, employees really
would not have much of a right or a remedy if it turns
out that the employer believed that maybe they weren't
performing their jobs correctly, or, in our case, if
the supervisor had considered the speech and said, "You
know what? You made a bad judgment call, and we don't
think it's entitled to a promotion," that shouldn't
give the Plaintiff a constitutional right to challenge
that decision. If that -- if the -- if Mr. Ceballos
was, in fact, doing his job, that was required of his
job, and he was doing it competently, his remedy is not
the First Amendment. His remedy is not even -- he
doesn't even need a whistle-blower statute for that.
He could go through civil service, he could go through
a formal grievance procedure, and though -- although
State statutes on whistle-blowers do vary, there is no
State statute, in my understanding, that covers broadly
than what the Ninth Circuit does here --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ms. Lee --
MS. LEE: -- which is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- what do you respond to
the argument that this has been the law in a number of
Circuits and the sky has not fallen?
MS. LEE: Well, the reason that job-required
speech may not be -- may not be filed, or basis for
First Amendment retaliation, or the reason why we may
not have seen that, may simply be because public
employees understandably do not believe they're
exercising their First Amendment rights when they are
simply performing their duties of employment, when
they're speaking pursuant to their job duties or
writing reports or memorandums pursuant to their job
duties. Just because there may not be the significant
increase of First Amendment litigation in the public
employment context for purely job-required speech does
not mean that this Court should not consider this
issue.
And I disagree with the representation that
the facts in this case are identical to Givhan. This
Court commented in that decision that Givhan was
citizen speech. And I don't necessarily think that --
and it -- what -- that -- where our proposal -- our
approach would add further complexity to First
Amendment litigation in an employment context. It's
certainly not a difficult decision -- analysis in this
case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
MS. LEE: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
Thank you --
-- Ms. Lee.
The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 2:00 p.m., the case in the
