IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JOSE ERNESTO MEDELLIN, :
Petitioner, :
v. : No. 04-5928
DOUG DRETKE, DIRECTOR, TEXAS DEPARTMENT:
OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE, CORRECTIONAL :
INSTITUTIONS DIVISION. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, March 28, 2005
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DONALD F. DONOVAN, ESQ., New York, New York; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
R. TED CRUZ, ESQ., Solicitor General, Austin, Texas; on
behalf of the Respondent.
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, DEPUTY SOLICITOR GENERAL,
DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE, WASHINGTON, D.C.; on behalf of the
United
States, as amicus curiae, supporting Respondent.
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DONALD F. DONOVAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
R. TED CRUZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 27
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ.
On behalf of United States,
as amicus curiae, supporting respondent. 44
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD F. DONOVAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 52
005
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
P R O C E E D I N G S
[11:01 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: We'll hear argument
now in number 04-5928, Jose Medellin versus Doug
Dretke.
Mr. Donovan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD F. DONOVAN
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. DONOVAN: Mr. Chief Justice, may it please
the Court:
This case was exceptionally important when the
Court granted it, and it's even more important now. It
belongs in this Court. At the same time, Mr. Medellin
requests that the Court hold the case while he goes
back to Texas. I'd like to explain why, before I turn
to the merits.
Under its decision last year in ex parte, so
far, Texas has modified its longstanding two-forums
rule. Court of Criminal Appeals will now entertain a
subsequent application for habeas writ, even if there
are proceedings pending before a Federal Court, so long
as the Federal Court stays its proceedings. The Court
designed that procedure so that a habeas petitioner
could return to state court to exhaust an unexhausted
claim without compromising his right to federal habeas
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Ordinarily do not
think of that as covered in this Court.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the Court of Criminal
Appeals did not specify; but we find, of course,
ourselves in an unusual posture, in the sense that the
sequence of events here are such that even -- the Court
of Appeals has decided the Avena judgement claim, the
Court has --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But has this Court ever
just said, "Fine, we'll hold it in abeyance and come
back next term"? I can't recall that we've done that.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it's an -- it is, in fact,
an unusual posture. And it --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: I mean, it would be more
likely that we would dismiss this, improvidently
granted.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the case, though, has not
been improvidently granted, with the greatest respect
to the Court. Of course, the case was important when
the Court granted it. The question, whether or not the
United States will comply with an international
obligation that every actor here -- the United States,
Texas, and the Petitioner -- all recognize as binding,
is an important question. The President has now come
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
in and said that it's even more important, by saying
that, in fact, the United States will comply.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, it's so odd, because
usually what happens, if there is something that could
occur at the state court level, is the state court
itself would hold off until this Court had resolved
whatever the case was. So, this is a very unusual
request.
MR. DONOVAN: We recognize that it's an
unusual request, because of the unusual circumstances.
And, of course, the alternative, if the Court is not
prepared to stay, or, for example, vacate, in light of
the presidential determination, remand to the Court of
Appeals --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Well, I think -- I
think granting a stay could be seen as validating the
position of the government without ever having an
opinion on it.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, actually, I think that a
stay would actually show respect to each of the
relevant actors here. And so --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, why shouldn't we just
go ahead and decide the case, if we can?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, we believe that there are,
in fact, firm grounds on which this Court could grant -
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
- could decide the question presented, because, in
fact, for the reasons -- there are really three points
here -- for the reasons we've laid out, the Court,
under the direct command of the Supremacy Clause, has -
- can give effect to the Avena judgement as the rule of
decision. The President's determination, in fact,
eliminates the -- even setting aside its independent
force, eliminates the basic objection of Texas to that
course of action. And then, of course, there's the
basic independent full force of the Supremacy Clause.
So if I may move to that, the Court, as I
said, has recognized the importance of the United
States complying with an international obligation
reflected in treaties entered into by the
democratically elected representatives of the American
people.
I want to address the question presented
first, because, I -- before -- setting aside the
presidential determination -- and just take a look at
where we stand after the briefing by the parties as a -
- on the question whether or not the Avena judgement
provides the rule of decision.
First of all, there's an extraordinary amount
of agreement between petitioner and respondent.
Respondent agrees that the Vienna Convention is a
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
binding legal commitment of the United States. The
Respondent agrees that the Convention is self-
executing. The Respondent agrees that the United
States agreed to submit disputes concerning the
application and interpretation of the Convention to the
ICJ. He agrees that the United States agreed that any
determination by the International Court of Justice
would be binding.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: How about the
creation of a private right of action?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, there is a -- there is a
-- there are basically three objections that the
Respondents made. One of them is the cause of action.
But the Respondent confuses the creation of a cause of
action with what the -- a treaty will typically do.
The treaty here lays out the rights, and the
treaty lays out an individual right, as determinated by
the ICJ. The treaty will not customarily create the
cause of action. For how the United States will abide
by its legal obligations -- that is, how the United
States will give effect to the international obligation
-- we look to domestic law.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Well, the courts --
the courts usually do that, don't they?
MR. DONOVAN: That's exactly right. But we
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
would look -- we would look to how the United States
has provided for the implication of that international
obligation. Here, in the first instance, we have a
direct command of the Supremacy Clause, a very
fundamental choice made by the Framers --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: That doesn't speak
to the private right of --
MR. DONOVAN: The private right of action is
found here in the habeas statute itself, which provides
that a person in custody in violation of laws,
treaties, or the Constitution of the United States can
seek --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: So, presumably, that could
provide some cause of action, quite irrespective of the
ICJ decision.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it could -- it -- the
cause of action is, itself, provided by --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Yeah, I mean, you don't --
MR. DONOVAN: -- the rest of the --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- you don't really have to
get into whether that judgement is enforceable here. I
mean --
MR. DONOVAN: Well --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- we could look at -- look
at it from the perspective of the habeas statute.
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's right. I mean,
there are three -- there are three basic questions that
need to be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But is it right -- I mean,
you couldn't -- you could not -- unless the ICJ
decision gave a right to an individual, and you had no
claim under the federal habeas statute -- and it is
unusual, is it not, for a judgement of the
International Court of Justice to recognize the right
of an individual, as opposed to being just a judgement
between nations?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it may be that, because of
the character of the typical dispute that the
International Court of Justice hears, that it does not
typically address such a question. But, plainly it has
jurisdiction to do so when the underlying treaty
confers a right. And that's exactly one of the
questions that was litigated between Mexico and the
United States in the Avena judgement. And the Court
held that, in fact, this treaty does provide individual
rights. So --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How many -- how many times
has the ICJ held that, that a treaty, apart from being
contract between the signers, confers individual
rights?
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it has, of course, held,
in -- first, in LaGrand and then here in Avena. In
most of the cases the ICJ has held, however -- it has
dealt previously, for example, with rights in this
situation. For example, rights in the nature of
diplomatic protection. For example, when the United
States went to the ICJ in the Tehran hostages case, it
went, not only in its own behalf, but in the exercise
of diplomatic protection. And in that posture, the ICJ
--
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there was no individual
in that case. That was a case of one nation against
another. There was no individual, like the Plaintiff
here.
MR. DONOVAN: But, in fact, in that case the
United States did assert the rights of its nationals
who were held hostage. It didn't -- the case didn't
come down on that point. But, likewise, the famous
Barcelona --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, that's what I asked,
if this -- I know that, certainly in the context of the
Vienna Convention, there have been the series of
decisions you mentioned; but I was wondering whether,
outside the Vienna Convention, there has been any
similar judgement of the ICJ that operates directly on
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
individuals.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, for example, in the
Barcelona Traction case, which is another case where,
again, there were rights of a particular company and a
particular national decided with -- under the guise of
diplomatic protection. And that's the posture which
this case went forward. Mexico asserted rights not
only on its own behalf, but on behalf of its nationals.
And, therefore, if we think of the -- the three
objections that was -- the Respondent has made to
whether this Court can give us back the Avena
judgement, they come down -- they include the two we've
just discussed, and one more.
First, they've said there are no individual
rights here. But, of course, the treaty, as this Court
suggested in Breard, talks specifically about rights --
quote/unquote, "rights." And that, of course, is what
the ICJ held. If the Avena judgement is binding, if
the Avena judgement informs the Vienna Convention with
binding effect, then that question is not the question
this Court needs to answer.
The second point --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you think -- do you think
that the President can enter into a treaty, with the
approval of Congress, that would provide that, in a
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
particular combat, the Commander in Chief will be
somebody other than the President of the United States?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the Court has recognized
that the only limitations of the treaty-making power
are affirmative litigations -- affirmative limitations
within the Constitution, itself.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. DONOVAN: And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you think that the
Constitution provides the President shall be Commander
in Chief, and, therefore, that can't be given away.
MR. DONOVAN: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right?
MR. DONOVAN: -- no, the -- obviously, a
treaty would not be able to amend the Constitution.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. Well, what if I think
that the Constitution provides that all questions of
federal law -- statutory, treaty, constitutional -- are
to be decided, ultimately, by the Supreme Court of the
United States. Can a treaty give that away?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, a treaty would not be --
this treaty does not do that. When the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It does if we're bound by the
determination of Avena. It does if I have to believe
that individual rights were created here, without
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
reexamining the question on my own.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, but the -- but the Court
has -- it -- the Court has regularly -- and it has
never been an objection to Article III power to give
effect to a judgement that has been rendered in another
sphere by another adjudicatory authority. That happens
all the time with respect to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not a question concerning
United States law.
MR. DONOVAN: But this is a question --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're talking here about a
question of United States law, What is the meaning of
this treaty that the United States has entered into?
Do you know another case where we have -- we have been
bound by a judgement of a foreign court or an
international court concerning the meaning of United
States law?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, what the Court would be
giving effect to is the determination by the political
branches themselves to enter into the treaty.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, I have a question
that is much along the same lines, whether this Court
must apply Avena as the rule of decision, or perhaps
say, "No, it does not have to do that." Then you're
left with looking at the treaty itself. And does that
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
-- can that take effect as American law?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the treaty does take
effect as American law. And --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And, can --
MR. DONOVAN: -- in fact --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- is it open in this case
to -- for this Court to apply that, not Avena?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the Court could, in fact,
apply the treaty. It could reach its own
interpretation of the treaty, in accord with the Avena
judgement. But we think --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Is that open in this case?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it surely would be open in
this case, but it would not be open at this point.
We've suggested alternative bases by which the Court
could conform with Avena. But we do believe that
Avena, in fact, controls the decision, for this reason,
that, in the first instance, the political branches
have agreed to the substantive obligations under the
treaty; in the second place --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, suppose we think it
can't control? Now, then what's open to us?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, if the -- if the Court
decided that the Avena judgement did not control, then
it would obviously go to the terms of the treaty
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
itself. But our argument is that, in fact, by virtue
of the political branches' decision and in operation of
the treaty -- of the Supremacy Clause, the Court must
be -- must give effect if the Court reached a decision
--
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, can the President give
an interpretation of the treaty unilaterally that is
binding on us? Can the President sign a treaty and
then, a year later, give an interpretation of that
treaty that's binding on us, insofar as what the treaty
means?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the Court has --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can he do that?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, no, the treaty -- the
Court has traditionally accorded deference to the
Executive's determination, but has not -- has not given
that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Right. I would say that
that, ultimately, is for this Court. Then, if that's
so, how can he agree with the -- to confer jurisdiction
on the World Court, which would do the same thing?
MR. DONOVAN: Because it's not just the
President that's done that; it's the treaty-makers,
it's the President acting with the advice and consent
of the Senate in a context in which they are empowered
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
to authorize a treaty -- enter into a treaty. And
they've done --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, is the
constitutionality of the President's action here before
the Court in this case?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Only peripherally. Is that
an issue for us to decide in this case?
MR. DONOVAN: The question that we'd ask --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: I hadn't thought so. Do
you think it is?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the -- we've asked that
the Court take account of the President's determination
in this respect. The Vienna Convention sets out a --
sets out substantive obligations. The ICJ -- we've
agreed to go to the ICJ for the interpretation
obligation of those obligations. The ICJ has now
ruled. The only objections, in effect, that the
Respondent has made is to say, "This Court can't decide
that question," because it's within the power of the
political branches. In effect, it said, "This Court
should step back and await the permission of the
Executive." And in Mr. Medellin's view, this Court
does not need to do that. But if you did need to do
that, which is the Respondent's essential objection,
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
the President has now said, not only should -- not only
can the Court give effect to the Avena a judgement, but
that it's in the paramount interest of the United
States that it do so, and that it do so promptly, and
that, therefore, any question about the -- about the
effectiveness of the Avena judgement has, on Texas' own
terms --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What's the case --
MR. DONOVAN: -- on Respondent's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- what's the case that
you're citing for this proposition, that the President
and the Senate can, in effect, confer on an
international tribunal the obligation to bind this
Court with reference to an interpretation of a treaty?
What's the best case you've got for that?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it goes to the Supremacy
Clause itself, Justice Kennedy. It's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you're telling me you
don't have a case.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, I'm not suggesting that
there is direct precedent in this Court for this
circumstance. We recognize that the circumstances
presented in these particular --
JUSTICE BREYER: Were you saying "binding," or
are you saying that we "show deference to" the
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
President's own interpretation of the treaty, as
applied to this 51-case set? In respect to that
deference, I suppose, he interprets the treaty in such
a way that the Avena decision, in his opinion, as
applied to this 51-set --
-case set is what the treaty means.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, he has, in fact, come --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that right, or not?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's right. He has --
he has, in fact, endorsed the notion that the United
States should comply.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if it is -- what I'm
wondering is if this is similar to that insurance case
out of California, where, in fact, we gave considerable
deference to Mr. Eisenstat's interpretation of the
relationship of the treaty to the insurance laws of
California.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it -- that is true. And
the Garamendi --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That was not an
interpretation that ousted this Court of jurisdiction
over the matter, though, was it?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't you think that's a
little bit different?
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DONOVAN: But the Garamendi case did, in
fact, endorse the President's power. It's similar to
the Dames & Moore case --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Yes, but in that
case it was overseeing arrangements that were made by
our government, not -- they didn't have that much local
authority.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's -- that is a
distinction in the cases, but they still come down to a
notion that -- both Garamendi and Dames & Moore -- to
the President's authority to give effect to
international obligations.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Well, but --
MR. DONOVAN: And here we have --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: -- doesn't the
President, in Dames & Moore, enter into an agreement
with Iran?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's right. But that's
-- that situation doesn't really distinguish the cases,
because in Dames & Moore v. Regan there was, in fact,
an agreement, and the President acted pursuant to that
agreement. But here we have --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: But we decided, in
Dames & Moore, that he was acting pursuant to the
agreement.
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DONOVAN: Well, they did act pursuant to
the agreement, and that's what the Court decided, but
that's precisely what the President is doing here. The
President is giving effect to commitments made by the
United States in the Vienna Convention, in the Optional
Protocol, in the ICJ statute and in the United Nations
charter.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: But we didn't --
MR. DONOVAN: So if --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: -- we didn't decide
it on the basis that President Reagan says, "This is
what in particular the agreement affected." We
examined it for ourselves.
MR. DONOVAN: That's true, but -- and the
Court looked at the -- the Court did not reexamine the
terms of the agreement. What the Court decided in that
case was that it was within the President's foreign-
affairs authority to enter into an agreement that would
essentially required American claimants to go to the
Iranian-United States Claims Tribunal.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That doesn't -- that doesn't
involve an interpretation of the treaty that is
rendered by somebody else and that is binding upon this
Court. I mean, it's just a matter of different
magnitude. To say that there can be private claims,
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
fine; but that doesn't say that the interpretation of a
treaty entered into the by the United States is subject
to a court, other than this Court.
MR. DONOVAN: The treaty itself is what the
United States has committed itself to. It's the treaty
in addition --
JUSTICE BREYER: We have to look beyond the
President's interpretation of the treaty. It happens
that the President is interpreting it, for reasons
related to what the ICJ said. But that doesn't make us
have to look beyond the reason for the President
interpreting it the way he wants. I mean, do we have
to defer to the ICJ, or do you -- is it not sufficient
to defer to the President, who is operating within his
foreign-affairs power for whatever set of reasons he
deems sufficient?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's precisely why we've
said, in fact, what -- there are two independent
sources of authority here, because, by operation of the
Supremacy Clause, the ICJ, the interpretation and
application of the Avena judgement would be given
effect. Now we have an independent source of right in
the form of the President's determination.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Except that the President
doesn't think that the remedy is in federal habeas.
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
The President thinks that the remedy is within the
states.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the President has said
that it should be given effect, and hasn't -- and
hasn't said that it shouldn't be in federal habeas. To
the contrary, the President has indicated that, in
fact, habeas would be available.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, your position, I take
it, is that if somehow we follow your suggestion so
that the President's suggestion may be put into effect
in the state courts, that there would still be a habeas
jurisdiction, ultimately, over the result if you're
dissatisfied with what happens in Texas. Do I
understand you correctly?
MR. DONOVAN: That's right, there would be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now, that --
MR. DONOVAN: -- there would surely be habeas
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that's an interesting
question. Let's turn from the more cosmic questions
into how you overcome the impediment that in order to
get a Certificate of Appealability here, you have to
show that there was -- you have to make a substantial
showing of the denial of a constitutional right. What
constitutional right has been denied here?
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DONOVAN: Well, at this point, of course,
the Court need not address that question on this -- on
this petition. The question that the Court granted
was, Will the United States abide by the Avena
judgement? And that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, I take --
MR. DONOVAN: -- question would be answered --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that question to be a
jurisdictional question, as far as the lower court is
concerned; and, therefore, I think it's a
jurisdictional question for us.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, of course, for the reasons
we've laid out in our brief, we do not regard it as
jurisdictional for this Court. The Court clearly has
jurisdiction under the petition to decide the questions
on the basis that they should decide the question
presented.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no.
MR. DONOVAN: But even if it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No. No. We can't forego
limits on our jurisdiction simply by granting the
question.
MR. DONOVAN: No, but --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You don't say, "Oh, you've
granted a question; therefore, you have to decide
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
whether you have jurisdiction or not."
MR. DONOVAN: But this --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: See? And, as Justice Scalia
indicates, the COA is a jurisdictional requirement.
MR. DONOVAN: But the COA is a jurisdictional
requirement for an appeal in the Court of Appeals.
This comes to this Court as -- on the denial of a
Certificate of Appealability --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but --
MR. DONOVAN: -- and on a petition from that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you know of any --
MR. DONOVAN: And so, the question raised by -
-
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- do you know of any case in
which a lower court did not have jurisdiction, but we
do have jurisdiction on appeal from in a -- from a
court that didn't have jurisdiction?
MR. DONOVAN: But the Court -- the Court of
Appeals had jurisdiction to entertain an application
for Certificate of Appealability. And this Court, in
turn, has jurisdiction to grant a petition from the
denial of the Certificate of Appealability.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, if the --
MR. DONOVAN: And in that posture --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- had jurisdiction to --
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DONOVAN: -- the Court can decide the
question presented.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You're simply saying that any
court has jurisdiction to determine its jurisdiction.
We grant you that. But, granted that, if we reach it,
what is your answer to the claim that the COA requires
a showing of substantial infringement of
constitutional, as distinct from other sources of,
rights?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, first of all, we believe
that in the posture that this case comes to this Court,
there has been a substantial denial of a constitutional
right, even in the terms that Texas defines the
statute, because what we have here is a claim based on
the Avena judgement -- I mean, the ICJ's interpretation
and application of the Avena judgement that the Court
of Appeals held in effect that had been defaulted prior
to its coming into existence. Because the effect of
the Court of Appeals judgement that the Avena --
dismissing the -- or denying the Avena -- deciding the
Avena judgement claim -- was to say -- was to give
effect to a procedural default of the Avena judgement
when it had not yet --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So you're saying the --
MR. DONOVAN: That is --
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- the constitutional
violation is the violation of the Supremacy Clause.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, in that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is that what you're saying?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it's a violation here of
both the Due Process Clause and the Supremacy Clause.
Due process --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Due Process Clause because?
MR. DONOVAN: Because it was an arbitrary
denial of a forum in which to hear the Avena judgement
claim, not simply the -- a different source of right.
In other words, although the Avena judgement claim
comes up on Texas as a proposition as a -- under a
treaty, the action of the Court of Appeals was to deny
that claim without giving it a forum. That is to say,
without -- that -- before it had been raised itself,
before it even existed -- because the effect of the
Court of Appeals was to give effect to a procedural
default of a right that hadn't come into effect. And,
therefore, in that context, it's effectively a due
process claim.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How do you answer --
MR. DONOVAN: In addition --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the related -- the
related question that -- well, assuming the Vienna
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
Convention is certainly law, and treaty stands on the
same footing as law, but I believe that the -- Texas
and the Government have said the AEDPA statute is the
later-in-time provision, and when you have two
provisions with a statute treaty, the later-in-time
prevails. So why did -- why isn't the AEDPA
controlling, and not the Vienna Convention?
MR. DONOVAN: With respect to this claim,
AEDPA itself would be, in our view, ousted by The
Charming Betsey Principle. But in the particular
context here, you don't have -- you don't have a
conflict with respect to the constitutional claims
themselves; you have a constitutional claim based on a
denial a right that did not exist, and you also have a
constitutional claim based on the Supremacy Clause
itself.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: And you're talking
about denial of a right that didn't exist. That seems
perfectly rational, the way you put it.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: If the right didn't
exist, it should have been denied.
MR. DONOVAN: And perhaps -- but the effect of
that -- and perhaps a more prudent way to put it is
that the effect of that is to deny Mr. Medellin a
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
forum, an -- arbitrarily deny him a forum on the effect
of the Avena judgement, because the effect was to deny
the Avena judgement claim based on a procedural default
before the Avena judgement had been rendered.
If I may save the remaining -- my remaining
time for rebuttal?
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Very well, Mr.
Donovan.
Mr. Cruz, we'll hear from you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF R. TED CRUZ
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. CRUZ: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
At the outset, two issues bear emphasis.
First, the Court need not, and should not, address the
many interesting issues of international law and
constitutional law that swirl about this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They really are interesting,
you know.
[Laughter.]
MR. CRUZ: They are, indeed. And this may
launch a thousand law-review articles. But with
respect to the question before the Court, there is a
simple and straightforward statutory basis to resolve
this case; namely, that Section 2253 of the AEDPA does
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
not allow a Certificate of Appealability for
nonconstitutional claims.
JUSTICE BREYER: Before we --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Can that --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- before we --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- be waived? Can that be
waived? And did Texas raise that issue in the Fifth
Circuit at all?
MR. CRUZ: Justice O'Connor, Texas did not
explicitly waive this ground before the Fifth Circuit -
-
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But it wasn't raised in the
Fifth Circuit by Texas, was it?
MR. CRUZ: That's correct, it was not. But --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And I assume, although we
haven't so decided, that that can just be waived.
MR. CRUZ: Well, this Court has characterized
the standards for a COA as jurisdictional in a
threshold inquiry.
JUSTICE BREYER: But this is also a
jurisdictional. They decided it on a jurisdictional
ground. They decided that no COA lay, for the reason
that they said. Now, I guess, though we wouldn't
necessarily have to, we could simply say they're either
right on that or they're wrong on that. And if they're
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
wrong on it, send it back, and then you can argue
whether there are other grounds; in which case, they
could go into waiver, they could go into whether
"constitutional" means to embrace "treaty," and all
those other interesting arguments that we could write
law-review articles about that were not, in fact --
they swirl around in this case, and you would not, in
fact, be able to -- you wouldn't, in fact, have to
pronounce on them now, here, when they really haven't
been thoroughly gone into, below.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Breyer, there are
alternative jurisdictional grounds this Court could
address, but the COA ground is straightforward. It
flows from the direct text. And Petitioner has given
this Court no reason to disagree with every Court of
Appeals that has looked at this question, all of whom
have determined that "constitutional" means
"constitutional." It doesn't mean "treaty," it doesn't
mean "statute." And that's every Court of Appeals
that's looked at that. Given that that ground is
direct and straightforward, there is no need for this
Court to venture into the difficult constitutional
areas, the difficult questions of international law,
when there is a straightforward statutory --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, of course, we wouldn't
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
even have to venture into -- possibly have to venture
into this issue of law if Texas were interested in
following the determination of the President. I take
it that the suggestion that your brother has made,
that, in fact, we take no action at this point so that
they may return to Texas with the President's
determination, is not appealing to you.
MR. CRUZ: We do not believe the Court should
stay this action, because whatever the resolution of
the subsequent proceedings that are now filed in Texas,
the resolution of that question will not control the
federal-law questions here.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but does Texas have a
position in response to the President's determination?
MR. CRUZ: Our first position would be, as
Justice O'Connor said, that that question is not
presented in this case. That will surely be litigated
in the Texas state courts.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You said -- you said that
something has started in the Texas courts. We have the
motion to stay this case, and your response that it
shouldn't be stayed, that we should decide this case.
But what is going on, at this moment, in the Texas
courts?
MR. CRUZ: Justice Ginsburg, this weekend,
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
Medellin filed a subsequent state habeas application
with the Court of Criminal Appeals, in which he asked
the Court of Criminal Appeals to stay its hand, pending
this Court's decision whether this Court should stay
its hand, pending the Court of Criminal Appeals --
[Laughter.]
MR. CRUZ: And so, that is a 50-page filing
that they just filed this weekend in which --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And after the Texas court
stays its hand, then what action is asked?
MR. CRUZ: Well, what it asks for is to
authorize a subsequent state habeas proceeding based
upon the President's determination, which he
characterizes as the predicate for a new claim. And if
that is correct, then there is yet another problem to
his getting relief here, which is that he has failed to
exhaust what he claims is now the predicate.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but we don't -- we may
not reach that, if Texas says, "Well, yes, you're
right, it is a claim, and we'll entertain it." Does
Texas have a position on that question yet?
MR. CRUZ: With respect to whether the
presidential determination is authorized, any -- that
matter will be resolved in subsequent state court
litigation. Any responsible state attorney --
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I'm sure it will be,
but does Texas have a position on that, at this point?
MR. CRUZ: We would respectfully submit, as
would any responsible state attorney general, that
there are significant constitutional problems with a
unilateral Executive determination displacing generally
applicable criminal laws. But whatever the resolution
of that question, that would ultimately be reviewable
by this Court, on certiorari review.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that was my next -- my
question, and it follows on the question Justice Souter
asked. Does the attorney general concede, or do you
not, or acknowledge that there are Texas procedures in
which these questions can be litigated?
MR. CRUZ: There absolutely are Texas
procedures in which the question of the validity of the
President's determination can be litigated. And we
would anticipate that that would be litigated --
JUSTICE BREYER: But that --
MR. CRUZ: -- and resolved --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, that's what I'm trying
-- I'm trying to get to, which is, What is actually the
practical thing to do now? Should we stay it, with a
short per curiam, which says, "Texas, go ahead," or
should we do something else? Suppose we just dismiss
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
this, as you say, on the alternative ground. Well,
then what happens if Texas objects to the President's
order and turns out to be right, legally? See, if that
were true and then the review showed that it was true -
- I don't know that it is true, but if it were, then we
should turn to the Fifth Circuit claim, and there are
51 cases that depend on it. But if we've dismissed it,
by that time it's gotten mixed up in the very issue you
raise. The question is, Does "constitutional" embrace
"treaty"? And I think there is one case that says it
does, actually; or a treatise, anyway. So that's an
issue. And then they might refuse a COA on that
ground. And then there might -- and we'll never get
this basic question decided. I'm trying out on you the
argument for actually staying it, rather than digging
it.
MR. CRUZ: Whatever the resolution --
JUSTICE BREYER: What do you think? What do
you --
MR. CRUZ: I do not believe the Court should
stay it. Digging it would be an option. I also
believe -- I believe the most correct --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, why do you believe we
shouldn't stay it? I mean --
MR. CRUZ: I don't believe the Court should --
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- as an opinion, it's
based on what?
MR. CRUZ: Because whatever the resolution in
the State Court litigation, the resolution of that
question will not impact the legal question before this
Court now, which is, on first federal habeas, a claim
that was filed that did not rely on Avena when it was
filed, did not rely on the presidential determination -
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but is it not true that
it's entirely possible that the Texas proceeding would
make this issue moot --
MR. CRUZ: That is true.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- and, therefore, avoid the
necessity for deciding a lot of very difficult
questions?
MR. CRUZ: That is true. That is frequently
the case, that in a -- in a case that is being
litigated, there are other proceedings that have the
potential to make something moot.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And is it also true that, in
the Texas proceedings, they necessarily would involve a
federal question on which this Court could, if it
chose, grant certiorari on direct review?
MR. CRUZ: Absolutely. And the difficult
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
questions about the constitutional authority for the
Executive determination may come back to this Court,
but they're not presented by the case right now before
the Court.
The most direct avenue, I would submit, for
this Court is to resolve this decision by affirming the
Fifth Circuit judgement, and by affirming it on the
grounds that a COA could not issue because this was not
a constitutional claim.  And that would necessarily
entail affirming Breard to the extent that Breard noted
that a subsequently enacted statute, the AEDPA, to the
extent of a conflict, superceded the Vienna Convention.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is the question -- how
difficult is the question? The President of the United
States has issued a document where he says, "Exercising
my foreign-affairs power, in my opinion the treaty, as
I -- I accept the meaning of the treaty as set forth by
the ICJ and apply it to these 51 cases." So he's
deciding that. And why doesn't he have the authority
to decide what that treaty means in these
circumstances? That's his decision. And Texas is
bound by the Constitution.
MR. CRUZ: We would agree that the fact that
the President has acted underscores the point made by
both Texas and the United States, that the
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
responsibility for determining the remedy to the Avena
judgement is found in the political branches. And the
fact that the President is acting underscores this,
that there is no precedent for an ICJ judgement being
judicially enforceable. Indeed, Respondent is aware of
no country in the world that accords binding effect to
ICJ judgements in their own domestic courts. And --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, Mr. Cruz, maybe the
treaty becomes part of federal law if it's properly
ratified and signed, as this one was. Now, it's
possible that the treaty itself gives certain
individually enforceable rights to Mr. Medellin. And
we can disregard the question of whether the Avena
judgement is enforceable.
MR. CRUZ: Justice O'Connor, that's --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Isn't that right?
MR. CRUZ: -- that's absolutely correct, that
this Court --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: I mean, it would be open to
this Court, presumably, to say, that treaty became part
of federal law when it was ratified, and Congress can
enact subsequent laws. But, in any event, the treaty
could give rise to individual enforceable rights. Is
that correct?
MR. CRUZ: To be sure, this Court could
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
certainly determine that the Vienna Convention gives
rises to the individual rights. That interpretation,
however, would conflict with the express language of
the preamble to the treaty, and would also conflict
with the consistent position of the Executive Branch
since 1969, when this treaty was ratified. For those
36 years, the State Department has consistently
answered the question, that the Vienna Convention does
not give rise to individual rights. And, indeed --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did the Breard case speak
to that issue?
MR. CRUZ: The Breard case simply made
reference to -- that there was, arguably, individual
rights. It didn't purport to resolve that. It said,
even if there were, it is barred by AEDPA. So I don't
believe the Breard case answers it, one way or the
other; but, given the United States' consistent
position -- and, indeed, it uses very similar language
in later treaties, such as the two terrorism treaties
that are cited in the United States' brief.
It is worth underscoring that on every
question currently before this Court in this
proceeding, the United States agrees entirely with
Texas, that this Court's resolution of this case should
be to affirm the judgement of the Fifth Circuit because
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
a COA should not have issued.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Well, if we came to
the conclusion that the treaty, by its own force, did
not create enforceable individual rights, then we would
have to get to the question of whether the President's
proclamation changes that result.
MR. CRUZ: Only in the most threshold sense;
because, on its face, the President's proclamation, or
determination, is focused only on state courts, and
what the President says is that he has determined that
the Avena decision will have binding effect in state
courts. So, according to the Executive determination,
that does not have a binding effect on this proceeding;
but, rather, on a subsequent -
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: But that seems to be
topsy-turvy, that a treaty would have effect in state
courts but not in federal court.
MR. CRUZ: We don't disagree that the
Executive could have chosen other avenues.
Nevertheless, Medellin's argument that, given the
Executive has said, "This should have effect in some
other proceeding," we should disregard what the
Executive has said about this proceeding and apply it
here, notwithstanding the President's express
determination it wouldn't apply here.
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But isn't what the
President's memorandum says exactly what the Avena
judgement said? That is, the President said, "Well,
the ICJ said that these people are entitled to review
and reconsideration of their guilt and of their
punishment. And so, I think that's what should happen.
I agree with the judgement, or at least I think it
should be enforced, and the only place it can be
enforced is in the state court that rendered the
judgement, because the ICJ said what the United States
has to implement is, they have to give a review and
reconsideration."
Now, I suppose, as far as the ICJ is
concerned, they don't care if it's done by some federal
tribunal, or state, but within our system, it must be
the state, mustn't it?
MR. CRUZ: Well, certainly under the terms of
the President's order, where the President said that
he's determined it shall -- should be given effect,
quote, "By having state courts give effect," by the
express terms of the order, particularly as explained
in the United States' brief, where that is conjoined
with the position of the United States, that in this
proceeding, on appeal from the first federal habeas
proceeding, that there is no effect to the Avena
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
judgement. That's the position the United States has
articulated. And so, to the extent this Court gives
deference to the Executive's position -- and in matters
of foreign affairs, this Court has historically given
great deference to that position -- that position
states that that should have no effect upon this
proceeding.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But, Mr. Cruz, let me just
make a suggestion. Assume you lose -- I'm not
suggesting you will, but assume you do -- the net
result of the proceeding, in your adversary's favor,
would be that they would get a hearing in the state
court, which is what -- the President's order says,
"Let them have that right away." So the whole purpose
of having a lot of federal litigation to decide what
you can address right away by honoring the President's
request, at least litigating it in the state court
right away, we may be engaged in a lot of useless
activity.
MR. CRUZ: Respectfully, if we were to lose,
and if Medellin were to prevail, his position could
potentially open the door to the reconsideration of the
over 100 foreign nationals that are on death row across
this country, and, beyond that, to thousands --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, so could the
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
President's order, the same thing.
MR. CRUZ: But the President's order is, by
its term, confined to the 51 Mexican nationals.
Medellin's theory is not. Medellin's theory is not
even confined to those on death row; but, rather, would
potentially extend to the thousands of foreign
nationals --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that can't be, in light
of the United States' most recent action. I mean, we
have a judgement. The judgement concerns how many
people? Fifty-one? Forty-nine?
MR. CRUZ: Fifty-one.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Okay. There is no
judgement concerning anybody else.
MR. CRUZ: That's true with respect to the
Executive determination. But the ICJ's decision went
beyond its authorizing statute and explicitly -- even
though its authorizing statute says the ICJ has
jurisdiction only to speak to the matter directly
before it, in paragraph 151 the ICJ said it wasn't
speaking just to the matter before it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But this -- but if there's
a claim here based on the Avena judgement, it is that
the United States agreed to the ICJ's jurisdiction in
Vienna Convention cases. And so, pursuant to that
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
agreement, there was an adjudication. The United
States is no longer agreeing, so there will never be
another adjudication. This adjudication concerns 51
people or -- and there are no others.
MR. CRUZ: But Medellin's theory that Avena
should be applied as a binding rule of judgement, even
without subsequent proceedings before the ICJ, could be
taken to support granting habeas relief in other
proceedings for individuals whose cases weren't
litigated, particularly given that the ICJ in Avena
purports --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you have to -- you
have to recognize that there is a distinction between
this case, which is, in large part, based on a
judgement of the ICJ, and other cases that would not
have the benefit of that judgement.
MR. CRUZ: Surely. Although the terms of the
ICJ decision purport to apply more broadly than to
these 51, and they explicitly say that this cannot be
taken to imply that this does not apply to other
foreign nationals, notwithstanding its jurisdictional
statute that prevents it from doing that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why isn't this -- the
United States did consent to the jurisdiction of the
ICJ in these Vienna Convention cases, and that tribunal
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
issued a judgement. Why doesn't it get the same
recognition and enforcement of any judgement of any
court with jurisdiction?
MR. CRUZ: Under the terms of the applicable
treaties, the ICJ has jurisdiction to determine, as a
matter of international law, if there is a treaty
breach. But those treaties also specify the remedy for
any judgement of the ICJ, and that remedy, under
Article 94 of the U.N. charter, is recourse to the
Security Council. That was explicitly adopted as a
political remedy, because it is the prerogative of the
President and the political branches to determine how
to respond.
One of the responses open to the political
branch, as the United States has articulated, is to
decline to respond. And with respect to the Nicaragua
case, that's exactly what the United States did. In
that situation -- and that matter was ultimately
litigated; Judge Mikva, for the D.C. Circuit, wrote a
compelling opinion laying out that decisions of the ICJ
are not judicially enforceable in U.S. courts; they
are, rather, matters sovereign-to-sovereign. That same
reasoning applies here. It is a matter for the
Executive to determine how to apply.
I would note that Medellin also presents an
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
argument -- two arguments as to why he's presented
constitutional claims. One, a due-process claim. Due
process was not in the questions presented, as he
authored. It was not in the brief that he wrote to the
Fifth Circuit asking for a COA. The words "due
process" do not appear in his merits briefs. And,
indeed, under the sections -- the constitutional
sections cited, he does not include the Due Process
Clause.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, what difference does
that make, since this -- the issue to which it is
addressed has not been raised either? I mean, it's a
new issue, and I presume, to the extent that it may be
considered at all, his response -- he can make a
response to it.
MR. CRUZ: He might conceivably have brought a
due-process claim. And if he had brought a due-process
claim, the Court of Appeals could have considered if
that due-process claim met the substantive standards of
the AEDPA. He didn't bring a due-process claim. He
brought a treaty claim. And that's the question upon
which he sought certiorari review by this Court.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I can understand the
argument, that he shouldn't be allowed to raise due
process here if the argument also goes to your -- the
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
permissibility of your raising 2253.
MR. CRUZ: But 225- --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's sauce for the goose --
MR. CRUZ: -- but 2253 is a jurisdictional bar
to this Court.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. Then I don't see why
it isn't also a jurisdictional gate for him to make a
response to it.
MR. CRUZ: Because he didn't bring that case.
Sure, there are dozens of constitutional claims he
could have brought that would have satisfied 2253. He
didn't bring those claims. So that's not presented by
that proceeding. He's not entitled, in his reply
brief, to say, "Well, you know, we could have brought
this constitutional claim," given that he did not, in
fact, bring that -- this constitutional claim.
If Medellin's theory is adopted, it would
embrace a standard beyond Fay versus Noia.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Thank you, Mr. Cruz.
Mr. Dreeben, we'll hear from you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL R. DREEBEN
ON BEHALF OF UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING RESPONDENT
MR. DREEBEN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
please the Court:
For the reasons articulated in the brief for
the United States and by the State of Texas, this Court
should conclude that there was no jurisdiction in the
lower court to issue of Certificate of Appealability;
and, therefore, the Court should not reach the many
questions that Petitioner has raised in this case about
the effect of the Avena judgement.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Have there been any cases in
the Circuits holding that the state can waive the
jurisdictional limitation on COA?
MR. DREEBEN: There have been cases in the
Circuits, Justice Kennedy, that have held that once a
COA has issued, the Court of Appeals may consider a
claim that would otherwise be beyond the jurisdiction
of the courts. But this is a case where a COA has not
been issued, and there is a plain procedural obstacle
to its issuance that this Court can determine and,
therefore, obviate the need to consider the very
sensitive and delicate questions that Petitioner has
raised.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But is their whole question
of the COA waivable?
MR. DREEBEN: I don't think so, Justice
O'Connor, because a COA is a jurisdictional
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
requirement. And just as a notice of appeal is a
jurisdictional requirement and the prerequisites for
proper notice of appeal have to be satisfied, the
prerequisites for a proper Certificate of Appealability
should be satisfied before this Court goes on to reach
the merits of a question, which, as Justice Stevens has
pointed out, may never need to be reached at all if the
Texas courts recognize the President's determination
with respect to the Avena decision or apply the Avena
decision itself.
And I think it's very noteworthy that the
filing that Petitioner made at the end of last week in
the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals seeking a
successive petition for a writ of habeas corpus under
Texas law specifically, at page 25, says that
Petitioner is relying on the Avena judgement and he's
relying on the President's determination, which are two
new sources of law that were not available at the time
the Texas courts previously addressed the matter and
that now are available, which constitutes a ground for
a second petition under Texas law, and that,
accordingly, the Texas courts should allow this claim
to be developed in the state courts and to be litigated
there.
To me, those statements are almost an
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
admission that the claims that Petitioner has brought
here are barred by failure to exhaust available state
remedies.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Dreeben, could this
question of the effect of the Avena Treaty be brought
before the Court? Mr. Donovan raised, I think, the All
Writs Act, and he also raised original writs in this
court. If the COA doesn't work, then treat this -- I
think that's what he's saying -- treat it as though it
were an application under the All Writs Act or an
original writ.
MR. DREEBEN: I do think that the Court would
have the option of availing itself of extraordinary
jurisdiction, but, as the Court made clear in the
Felker case, its exercise of extraordinary original
writs would be informed by the limitations that the
AEDPA imposes upon the grant of habeas corpus relief;
and, therefore, the Court should look to at least the
additional jurisdictional obstacle that the United
States and Texas has raised; and, namely, that is that
the decision that the Texas courts raised -- issued in
this case is not contrary to any Supreme Court decision
or a misapplication of any clearly established federal
law.
JUSTICE BREYER: So all those are -- there are
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
a lot of reasons.  Does that counsel in favor of our
holding this? Here we have a case that went on a
jurisdictional ground. And if we affirm or reverse
that jurisdictional ground from the Court of Appeals,
we'll decide a lot of issues that will create guidance.
We might not have to decide it, because Texas may deal
with it; or we may decide, if they come out the other
way, they're wrong. But we might. And that's why I
was thinking perhaps we should hold it rather than dig
it, particularly because that other issue does have
some authority the other way.
I take it there's a treatise in the Fifth
Circuit case which does say that the word
"constitutional" here encompasses "treaty."
MR. DREEBEN: Justice Breyer, I do not think
that the Court should hold the case, pending the
outcome of the Texas proceedings.
JUSTICE BREYER: Because?
MR. DREEBEN: The Texas proceedings can
consider the Avena claim and the claim in reliance --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, but suppose you lose --
see, I'm thinking, suppose you lose in the Texas
proceeding, it comes here, and, for whatever reason,
suppose you lost again -- you might not, but you might
-- in which case, then what do we do?
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
MR. DREEBEN: Well, the Supreme Court would
have the option of granting cert to review whatever the
Texas courts --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, but suppose we
thought they were right? See, suppose you lost across
the board? That would be the argument for holding it -
- holding it because then you'd have another vehicle to
get to these questions.
MR. DREEBEN: I think it would be close to
issuing an advisory opinion for the Court to decide an
important issue of federal law in which there is a
clear jurisdictional bar to the issuance of a
Certificate of Appealability, and I don't think that a
treatise creates enough of a doubt that
"constitutional" in the AEDPA, means "constitutional"
for this Court to embark on a wide-ranging exploration
of potentially very significant issues with
constitutional overtones.
The Avena decision is not a freestanding
source of law that can be administered by this Court
wholly apart from the President's determination. What
the President did was to determine not that the treaty
has a particular meaning that favors Petitioner's case,
but that, as a matter of compliance with the obligation
of the United States, under international law, to
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
comply with a judgement of the International Court of
Justice -- or to determine not to -- but that, in the
interest of the rule of law and the obligations that
were taken on, the President would create a new source
of law, in effect, that would enable the enforcement of
that particular judgement, without respect to the
validity of the underlying merits determination that
the ICJ made.
But if this Court were to treat the ICJ
judgement as a freestanding source of law, it would
frustrate the Executive's ability to determine, in a
particular case, this determination by an international
tribunal should not be enforced and it should not be
given effect; rather, that the President might, in a
particular case, choose to -- not to comply with that
determination. And it would rob the President of that
freedom in international affairs were this Court to
treat a determination by the International Court of
Justice as a freestanding --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, is, though, a treaty
that's been duly ratified and signed enforceable as
part of our federal law, as this one is drafted?
MR. DREEBEN: It is, Justice O'Connor, but it
should -- properly construed as not conferring
privately-enforceable rights on a criminal defendant in
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
a criminal case.  It has not one word about private
enforceability in a criminal case in its language. The
backdrop of the Vienna Convention was that no country
had ever provided notice of rights to a criminal
defendant that would then form a basis, in the event of
a violation, of an attack on a criminal conviction.
State practice since the Vienna Convention has not
recognized, here or abroad, a privately-enforceable
right --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Dreeben, how many -- how
many states are we talking about for these 51
individuals involved in the case? How many different
states?
MR. DREEBEN: I'm not sure of the exact
number, Justice Scalia. I think it's five or six
states that have defendants that are at issue in those
proceedings.
And what the President determined was, with
respect to those 51 individuals, observance of the ICJ
judgement was warranted, as a matter of United States
foreign policy, not because the United States agrees
with the ICJ's rulings.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's conceivable that those
five or six states could say, "The President has no
authority to do this," ground one. Ground two, "Even
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
if he did, on the merits, we reexamine." So the whole
thing could go away.
MR. DREEBEN: That is absolutely correct. And
I think that's an additional reason why this Court
should not rush ahead and overlook jurisdictional
obstacles that may not have been apparent to it at the
time that it granted certiorari, and certainly the
Court did not have the benefit of the fact that the
President would make a determination that state courts
should provide the review and reconsideration that the
ICJ had determined was appropriate. And the Court, of
course, didn't know that Petitioner would then file a
petition for successive writ in the Texas courts that
could provide him the review and reconsideration that
he now seeks this Court to announce in a ruling that
would have extraordinarily broad and detrimental
foreign-policy consequences for the United States'
freedom to respond to the decisions of international
tribunals in a manner that the President sees fit in
accordance with his foreign-policy judgement.
If the Court has no further questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Thank you, Mr.
Dreeben.
Mr. Donovan, you have five minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD F. DONOVAN
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. DONOVAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
The Respondent came to this Court saying that
he agrees with Mr. Medellin that America could keep her
-- should keep her word. Here's the situation we have.
Everybody agrees that these treaties are binding.
Everybody agrees now that the President has determined
that Mr. Medellin should get exactly what he came to
this Court asking for, which is review and
reconsideration from the state courts.
The -- as Mr. Dreeben has pointed out, and as
we advised the Court last week, in order to protect
against any statute of limitations bar, we have, in
fact, filed in Texas, in order to make these claims,
pending the disposition here. And Mr. Medellin is
prepared to go forward in state court, making exactly
these claims, which the state courts have never had an
opportunity to occasion.
The question here is, How does this Court
fulfill its function of ensuring that the United States
complies with its international obligations that the
President has now confirmed he will comply with? And,
of course, the question here is not whether this --
whatever this Court does with respect to the question
presented here -- that is, Does the Avena judgement
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
having binding effect under the Supremacy Clause? -- in
this case, would no in any way constrain the
President's determination at some future point, because
here we have a situation where the President has said
"comply."
And so, this case does not raise questions --
if it operated directly under the Supremacy Clause --
does not raise a question about what would happen if,
in some future case, the political branches made a
different determination once an ICJ judgement came to
this country. Here, we have the President saying, "You
should do exactly what -- the United States -- what the
ICJ said to do."
So the question is, How does one proceed? We
have proposed a means of going forward that, in our
view, is respectful to the authority of this Court,
that is respectful to the Texas courts, and that's
respectful to the President; and that is, to go forward
on the subsequent application in the Texas courts,
giving them two issues that they've never had a chance
to address, the Avena judgement claim and the claim
under the President's determination.
What should not happen is, that application
should not be compromised by any adverse action on this
Court, and the suggestion of a dismissal might have
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
compromising effects. At a minimum, it might be
perceived as leaving in place a judgement that this
Court has already said warranted review and is now, in
our view, fatally undermined by the President's
determination, as it has been previously fatally
undermined by the plain command of the Supremacy
Clause.
In addition, we would, no doubt -- we're
already hearing arguments from the opposition to the
motion to stay -- we would no doubt hear arguments
that, on some subsequence habeas which the United
States says is -- would be available, that that would
be a second or successor habeas, even though Mr.
Medellin has never had a chance to bring the --
otherwise, to bring these claims to the Court. And,
therefore, the Court might, at some point -- at this
point, the best thing to do, if we are going to achieve
expeditious compliance with the President's
determination -- is, in fact, to stay; not to deal with
any of the questions that have been raised here, but to
let the Texas courts deal with them in the first
instance. If it comes back to this Court in the
posture of a direct -- for example, request for
certiorari review from a judgement of the Texas courts
-- there should be no adverse impact from anything this
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
Court did at this posture, simply because Mr. Medellin
came here. And, indeed, it was Mr. Medellin's case
that presumably prompted the President to act. That
would be unfair, and it would complicated the Court's
own disposition.
What do we have Texas saying before this
Court? Effectively, Texas has come into this courtroom
and said neither the President nor this Court can
effect -- can give effect of the Avena judgement,
because Texas has opposed the Court's authority under
the direct operation of the Supremacy Clause, and now
Texas has told the Court that the President can't do
this either. And in the face of that suggestion, Mr.
Medellin has every hope and expectation that the Texas
courts will see their obligations under the Supremacy
Clause in a form of both the Avena judgement
interpreting and applying the Vienna Convention and the
President's determination, differently than the Texas
authorities have so far announced. But if it does not,
this Court should have the full complement of means at
its disposal in order to ensure that the United States
complies with its international obligations.
Mr. Dreeben has, himself, just suggested that
there may be circumstances if it were not otherwise
achievable. It's hard to think of a more important
a34bda65-a6f1-42d8-83ec-09cfb6aa8dc6
case for the exercise of this Court's extraordinary
writs. But none of that should be in any way
compromised by a dismissal, at this point, simply
because the President came in in the midst -- in fact,
concurrently -- into Mr. Medellin's own case before
this Court and made this determination. Instead, as
we'd suggest, the appropriate thing would be -- to do
is to stay the case, to allow it to go forward in the
Texas courts. But if the Court does not wish to stay,
we would respectfully suggest that, at this point,
under direct command of the Supremacy Clause endorsed
by the President's determination, as well as the
President's determination itself, the Court should give
effect to the United States' promises.
Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST: Thank you, Mr.
Donovan. The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., the case in the
