IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
UNITED STATES,
Petitioner,
: No. 04-759
JOSEPH OLSON, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 12, 2005
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the Petitioner.
THOMAS G. COTTER, ESQ., Tucson, Arizona; on behalf of the
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
THOMAS G. COTTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 24
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 46
P R O C E E D I N G S
[11:03 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll now hear argument,
United States v. Olson.
Ms. Maynard.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DEANNE E. MAYNARD
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MS. MAYNARD: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Federal Tort Claims Act waives the sovereign
immunity of the United States for the torts of Federal
employees when private persons in like circumstances would
be liable. But instead of applying private-person
principles of liability, the Ninth Circuit looked to the
State and governmental-entity principles of liability. It
concluded that the United States could be liable here,
because Arizona has decided to hold its governmental
entities liable when State employees are negligent.
That decision is wrong, for two reasons. First,
it is contrary to the plain text of the Federal Tort
Claims Act. The Federal Tort Claims Act makes clear that
the liability of the United States is to be judged by the
principles of private-person liability in the place where
the tort occurred. In section 1346(b)(1), the Federal
Tort Claims Act allows jurisdiction and waives the
sovereign immunity of the United States under
circumstances where the United States, if a private
person, would be liable to the claimant in accordance with
the law of the place where the act or omission occurred.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do I understand that you would
accept the rule that if Arizona held a private inspector
liable to third persons for their injuries, then the
Government of the United States would be liable? It's not
quite the Good Samaritan -- not quite the Good Samaritan
type, but you would accept that as the proper measure of
your liability in a case like this?
MS. MAYNARD: As long as Arizona applied that
principle of liability to private persons in Arizona.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
MS. MAYNARD: Yes, Justice Kennedy. So, it will
depend on what the particular State's law is. Here, the
only private-person law that was argued below was the Good
Samaritan doctrine, and -- as a possible analogy to the
conduct of the mine inspectors here. But it might --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It gets ahead of the argument
just a little bit, but you had a footnote about police
officers. You have a park ranger, Federal employer. Is
the analog there that we look to -- what the duties of a
private security guard would be -- what do you do with
those cases?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, those cases, as we note, do
present, often, special circumstances not present in this
case, Justice Kennedy. But the answer to the question
that's presented here is the same. You still would look
to whether or not there is private -- a private-person
analog. And, if there is, then you would look to the
liability of private persons in that circumstance.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, even with the police
officer, I have to find a private analog.
MS. MAYNARD: Yes, you do. For example, if
someone brought a trespass action against a Federal law
enforcement officer for entering upon their land, you
would apply the same State law as it relates to trespass
claims against private persons. Those claims may, for
example, have a defense of lawful authority to enter.
When looking at whether or not a police officer had -- a
Federal officer had lawful authority to enter, one might
then look to Federal law to determine whether or not the
officer had authority to enter, but you would still be
applying the principles of private-person liability.
If one concluded that there was no private-
person analog, then the only answer under the Federal Tort
Claims Act would be that the United States cannot be
liable.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I mean, that's
kind of a $64,000 question here. Give me an example where
you think there's no private-person analog.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, we think
it's often rare that there is no private-person analog,
given this Court's decision in Indian Towing, which
stresses --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MS. MAYNARD: -- that one should look to a
private person in like circumstances. I think this Court,
in Feres, although that decision has been -- has been
limited -- did determine that there was, in that
situation, no private-party analog --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Isn't there always a
private -- I mean, we're talking about tort law -- isn't
there always a private analog, which is, you know,
exercising reasonable care under the circumstances toward
people to whom you owe some duty, and you just apply that
general principle?
MS. MAYNARD: To the extent you're suggesting
that we just look to general theories of tort law, I think
that would be incorrect. The -- because the Tort Claims
Act -- the language of the Tort Claims Act makes the
United States liable only where a private party in like
circumstances would be liable. And in Indian Towing, this
Court defines "in like circumstances" as looking to the
same character of conduct of the -- of the person. So,
you would have to find a private person who's engaged in
the same character of conduct, and then ask the question,
What principles of liability does the State apply to those
persons? Here, the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, all right, so if
it's a police officer stopping somebody on a highway, it's
the same as a private security guard stopping somebody at
a -- you know, the driveway at a plant or something.
MS. MAYNARD: That may be the closest private-
person analog. In that situation, however, when one goes
to apply the defense, it's just as one would if talking
about a private security guard. One would ask the
questions whether the guard had the requisite authority.
And the State would look to what that guard's authority
was. And often States would look -- if the guard happened
to be a Federal officer, would look to Federal law. And
that can be appropriate, I think, for -- under,
potentially, three different -- for, potentially, three
different reasons. One, the language of the defense in
80(a), which provides the United States with a defense
to liability in circumstances where , with due care, you're
carrying out a Federal statute or regulation. It --
another source of authority might be the State-law
principles simply look to what the authority of the person
doing the conduct is, and then you would look to Federal
law for the source of that authority. And that could be
right, under this Court's suggestion in Muniz, that
Federal regulations -- once an actionable duty is
established under State tort principles, one can look to
Federal regulations to determine whether or not -- what
the applicable standard of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you back --
MS. MAYNARD: -- care was.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- up in Muniz a little bit?
Because that was a prison administration. And so, what
is the private-party analog to that?
MS. MAYNARD: I think this Court suggested, in
Muniz, that perhaps there could be private persons
operating prisons, or one would look --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't recall --
MS. MAYNARD: -- in that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- that in the decision. The
phrase from the Tort Claims Act about "as a private party"
was repeated, but I don't remember any discussion of what
that private party would be, in Muniz.
MS. MAYNARD: You may be right, Justice
Ginsburg. I think the important point to take away from
Muniz is that the Court stressed that, whatever the
measure of the United States' liability would be for the
claims at issue in that case, it could not be the State
law as it related to governmental entities; that one would
have to, as the text requires, look to State law as it
relates to private persons. The point that I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because in those days the
Government was arguing it should be like State officials.
MS. MAYNARD: For purposes of obtaining
immunity, we were arguing that -- which I think is a
different argument than we're making here today -- we were
arguing that the Federal Tort Claims Act was not meant to
waive our sovereign immunity at all with respect to
certain types of governmental activities. But that's not
the argument that we're making today. Today, we are
arguing simply that one must, as the Court held in Indian
Towing and Rayonier, one should look to the -- to the --
to the text of the statute, and that that must be the
measure of our liability.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you, what would you
do if Arizona had a statute that said that any company
that contracts privately to do mine inspections must obey
the standards in the Federal guidelines? What would the
standard be?
MS. MAYNARD: That presents a difficult
question, Justice Stevens, as I'm sure you know.
[Laughter.]
MS. MAYNARD: And that would, obviously, be a
harder case than the one that we have here, and -- which I
would like to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you say --
MS. MAYNARD: -- address how you apply it here.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- and I think you're probably
right --
MS. MAYNARD: If --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- that you can't just make a
Federal -- implied Federal cause of action under the
Federal standards, from what we know. But then I was
wondering, What if the Arizona statute said that's what
the private firm should do?
MS. MAYNARD: If a State statute looked to
Federal law as the source -- I think one has to be careful
when one talks about "negligence per se" type principles,
which is what you're suggesting -- some States look to
statutes and regulations solely to establish a standard of
care once a separate duty has been established. And some
States, as respondents claim Arizona does, look to it
establish both duty and a standard of care.
But, putting that aside, if -- to respond
directly to your question -- if a State adopted a Federal
statute and used it to apply to private persons, you would
be most of the way home in getting Federal Tort Claims Act
-- at least the creation of potential liability against
the United States. However, I think in that instance,
there would still be a question as to the intent of
Congress, in the Federal statute itself that was used, as
to whether Congress intended to foreclose any private
action, any private enforcement, such that the States --
if the State has misinterpreted, in other words, a Federal
law, that presents, I think, a Federal question.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I'm assuming they just did
it independently. They said, "We want a regulation on the
private mine inspectors, and let's just adopt the -- a
standard that shall, in all respects, be the same as the
Federal standard."
MS. MAYNARD: If they're just simply borrowing
it, and don't feel compelled to borrow it, and are,
indeed, applying it to private persons who perform safety
inspections, then the United States could potentially be
liable under the Federal Tort Claims Act. As I mentioned
here, though, that is definitely not this case, because --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but it seems to me that
that's quite a foreseeable possibility. If there is such
a thing as private safety inspectors in Arizona -- I'm not
sure, but if there are, I assume that what they do is,
when they go into a particular industrial area, they look
at the safety standards for that industry, including
Federal and State regulations. So, if you have a mine
inspector, then it seems to me that his liability might
very well be measured by whether or not he's inspected the
mine in accordance to Federal safety standards.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, I have several answers to
that question, Justice Kennedy. First, your use of
"standards" there appears not to be one to create an
actual duty in the first instance, which is really the
question before this Court. Is there any duty between the
United States and the private miners? Secondly --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but I thought we said,
at the outset -- and correct me if I'm wrong -- if Arizona
imposes liability on private safety inspectors for
injuries to third persons, then the United States would be
liable here.
MS. MAYNARD: Oh, I'm sorry. I didn't realize
you were still operating --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That was the --
MS. MAYNARD: -- under Justice --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- hypothetical.
MS. MAYNARD: -- Stevens' hypothetical. If
Arizona has created an actionable tort duty that it
imposed -- that it's willing to impose upon its private
citizens who perform safety inspections, to all persons
who work at places where they perform safety inspections,
that would be a different case. Then that would be
applying the law as it relates to private persons in like
circumstances.
Here, though, it's clear from the cases we
discuss in our brief, including Easter and Papastathis,
that Arizona -- when private parties perform safety
inspections on the property of another, Arizona applies
its Good Samaritan doctrine. That is not -- in order to
determine, at the outset, whether there's any actionable
duty between the inspectors and the injured party. That's
the step that the Ninth Circuit did not engage in here.
The Ninth Circuit, instead, decided --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I understand.
MS. MAYNARD: Okay. So, the -- and the reason
that you can't, in this case, follow Justice Stevens'
reasoning is because the only provisions of law to which
the respondents point to set the negligence per se
principles are policy manuals and procedures of the coal
-- Federal Mine Act that apply only to Federal employees.
So, they point to no case or law where these provisions,
upon which they rely, would impose either a duty or a
standard of care upon private persons in Arizona. Now,
in that -- to distinguish it -- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE STEVENS: In your view -- even though
the Federal standard would not be controlling, in your
view, if you applied a general reasonable-person test,
would the Federal standards be admissible so that the
plaintiff could argue that there was a failure here which
is evidence of negligence?
MS. MAYNARD: In many States, one would look to
Federal standards for setting the standard of care. And
we think that it could be relevant here what the -- but
you must get over the duty hurdle. And that, respondents
cannot do by looking to State and governmental-entity
liability.
JUSTICE SOUTER: When you say that it may be
relevant, are you thinking of 2680(a)? Because 2680(a)
says, you know, if you exercise due care, any act that you
take in the -- in -- well, let's use the exact language --
"any act or omission in the execution of a statute or
regulation will not be a ground of liability," with -- at
least leaving open the door that any failure to take steps
that would have been reasonable in executing it might be.
Is that why you answered Justice Stevens as you did?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, just to take your question,
and then maybe clarify what you mean by what --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Let me -- let me --
MS. MAYNARD: I can --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- ask it --
MS. MAYNARD: -- I can -- I can answer it the
- --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Look, I don't have to cross-
reference --
MS. MAYNARD: Good.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- it to Justice Stevens.
MS. MAYNARD: Okay.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Give me an example of the -- of
the function of 2680(a). When would there be liability,
but for that provision?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, I think -- obviously, you
don't get to 2680(a) unless you've gotten through the
first part and established --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right.
MS. MAYNARD: -- that there's some actionable
duty on private persons in like circumstances and that we
might be liable. If you do get over that hurdle -- say,
for example, the State standard of care with -- in
relation to private parties is higher than that required
by Federal statute -- imagine a Federal regulation that
requires VA doctors to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, I could -- I could --
MS. MAYNARD: -- take care of their patients
once a day.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- I could understand that if
they -- it would be an easier question for me if the
statute said, "Even if you violate the statute, if you
otherwise use reasonable care, no liability." But here,
it talks about reasonable care when you are -- when you
are, in the statutory phrase, in the execution of the
statute, which suggests to me you're not violating the
statute, you're not violating any standard. So, what
function does it serve?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, it can serve functions in
other instances; for example, if someone alleges that you
were following the statute, but the statute was invalid.
But I think in terms of a -- because it goes on to say
whether or not the -- the regulation --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So, it's really --
MS. MAYNARD: -- is valid.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- the validity is the -- is
the nub of the provision.
MS. MAYNARD: No, Your Honor. I was just saying
it has that other function. I think, here, the short
answer to your question is, if this -- if, when you're
talking about the -- what's an appropriate standard of
care once one's established an actionable duty -- if the
State law, as it relates to private persons, set a more
stringent standard of care than the Federal regulation,
for example, and the Federal employee were complying with
the standard of care set forth in the Federal regulation
--
JUSTICE SOUTER: Of the Federal -- I -- okay.
MS. MAYNARD: -- this could potentially provide
a defense, even though, once you went through the first
part of the statute --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I really don't understand the
-- are you sure that a failure to execute a statute does
not come within the language, "an act or omission," in the
execution of a statute? I would think a total failure
to execute is an omission in the execution of the statute.
MS. MAYNARD: I'm not sure I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You mean if you executed 90
percent and omit 10 percent of what you're supposed to do,
it comes within that language, but if you don't execute at
all, it doesn't? That seems to me most unlikely. I mean
it seems to me --
JUSTICE SOUTER: She's saying "execution" is not
synonymous with "performance," which may well be correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. Well, you --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I had assumed that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you accepted, it seemed to
me, the premise of --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- Justice Souter's question,
which is that (a) -- 2680(a) only applies to a failed
execution. There has to be at least an attempted
execution. I'm not sure that's true. It says "an act or
omission" in the execution. And I think a total -- I just
don't do the thing at all. I think that's an omission in
the execution.
MS. MAYNARD: I must be missing the thread of
the question somewhere. I was just --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I --
MS. MAYNARD: -- I was trying to make just --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but you've --
MS. MAYNARD: -- a simple, modest point that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- you've still answered my
question. I mean, you're -- you have said, "Assuming that
the individual is executing the statute, there is no
deficiency in the performance of executing the statute.
There is still this function." And I think I understand
your answer. But, I mean, I think Justice Scalia's point
is correct, it may apply in cases in which you are
purporting to act under the statute, but you omit actions
that you should take. In other words, your performance is
deficient. And there, the answer is easier, because it
says as long as you're exercising due care, no liability.
MS. MAYNARD: We may still have a defense in --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MS. MAYNARD: -- that situation. I think --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MS. MAYNARD: -- that's correct. It's an
important point --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was an argument that
was made in your brief, and I didn't fully grasp the
thrust of it, in the -- that is, you said that the Mine
Safety and Health Administration has a duty to the
Secretary of Labor, but not to the mine operator and not
to the miner. If that were true, then would there be --
you wouldn't even get to the Good Samaritan doctrine,
would you, if the only duty is to the Secretary of Labor?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, I think that, in fact, would
be an application of the Good Samaritan doctrine, Justice
Ginsburg. In other words, I think you're referring to the
first part of the -- we have an -- we believe we have an
argument. And the Daggett case, which we cite, addresses
whether -- I think this is an open question in Arizona law
under their interpretation of the Good Samaritan doctrine
-- whether someone in the position of the United States
here is -- has undertaken to render services to another.
Because that's the argument to which you're referring, I
believe. And we think there is an argument that we are
not rendering services to another. But that is not the
same as saying that the Good Samaritan doctrine -- that is
an application of the Good Samaritan doctrine. In other
words, courts, when they -- these are all factors that
take into account whether someone will have a duty,
pursuant to the Good Samaritan doctrine -- one of the
factors is that you must have undertaken to render
services to another. Another factor, which we think is
also relevant here, is whether or not the injured party
justifiably and detrimentally relied. And we don't think
-- you know, they have asked you to decide this question
-- we think this is more appropriate a question for
remand, but the United States does not believe that the
respondents can make out either of those elements of the
Good Samaritan doctrine, and that the United States,
therefore, cannot ultimately be liable only -- under the
only available private-person analogy.
But the important point is, you -- that is an
application of the Good Samaritan doctrine.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You're not sure that the
Good Samaritan doctrine is the -- is necessarily what the
Arizona law would be -- what the analog would be.
MS. MAYNARD: In our view, it's the only
private-person law that respondents argued to the Ninth
Circuit. Respondents have submitted a new argument to
this court contending that governmental-entity law and
private-party law in Arizona is equivalent in this
situation. But that is wrong. It is clear that the State
of Arizona, as a public-policy matter, has decided to
create broader, actionable tort duties on its own
governmental employees, and to expose itself and open its
own coffers to -- when -- to claims when its employees
have injured its citizens. But that is not the same law
that they apply to private persons, and we know that from
the Daggett case, which we discuss -- I believe it's on
page 6 of our reply brief.
In the Daggett case, that was a case involving
an inspection by a county of a swimming recreation area,
pursuant to mandatory State and county regulations that
required such inspections. The Arizona Court of Appeals
there held that there was a duty by the county to a person
who had -- who dove into the swimming pool and was injured
as a result of hitting the bottom, that there was an
actionable duty running against the county there as a
matter of the State of Arizona's decision to create tort
duties when its employees and governmental entities violate
mandatory obligations or perform them negligently.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Ms. Maynard, may I interrupt
and just ask this? Do we have to decide what the Arizona
rule is in order to decide the main question presented --
namely, whether the analogy to Arizona public officials is
sufficient?
MS. MAYNARD: Not necessarily, Justice Stevens.
We think it's perfectly clear, from the text of the
statute and the language of the Ninth Circuit's decision,
that what they did is improper.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But I'm just wondering if
you're not discussing a State-law issue that has not been
decided by either court below or really fully argued here.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, it has not -- the -- whether
or not there's an equivalency, whether or not private
persons are liable in the same instances as State and
governmental entities, was not argued by the respondents
below.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MS. MAYNARD: And, therefore, it was not
decided. We do not think -- it is a question of State
law, but we think the answer is very clear, because
respondent -- the only thing respondents point to here to
assert that there is an equivalent are cases making State
and county and governmental entities liable. They point
to nothing, as they concede, cases involving private
persons.
So, there -- if -- we don't think the Court
should remand, which would be an invitation to the Ninth
Circuit to essentially do, under another guise, what it
has already done, which is essentially apply governmental-
entity liability to the United States, in contradiction to
the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I wouldn't do that.
MS. MAYNARD: -- text of the statute.
If I can finish my Daggett answer, though,
Justice Stevens, I think that'll make clear why the two
are distinct and why it isn't a difficult question of
Arizona law.
The Daggett court went on to decide that the
county, although it had a duty to the injured party
pursuant to governmental entity law, similar to what the
Ninth Circuit applied to us here, there would be no
actionable duty if one applied the Good Samaritan
doctrine. It found that none of the second three prongs
of the Good Samaritan doctrine were met, and it also
raised the question as to whether or not someone in the
position of the county would even be rendering services
into another sufficient to meet that part of the Good
Samaritan doctrine.
So, we think it is very clear that the two are
not the same. The -- so, we would ask that the Court not
remand, and leave that question open, Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's just a background
question. I'm curious, was ASARCO sued here, or -- and is
its liability capped by workmen's comp laws, or?
MS. MAYNARD: I do not know whether they were
actually sued. There are -- their -- I do believe their
liability, though, is that workers' comp is an exclusive
remedy here. And, although it's not in the record in this
case, the State of Arizona was also sued, and, according
to news reports, settled for substantial sums with both of
the respondents.
If there are no further questions at this time,
I would like to reserve my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms. Maynard.
Mr. Cotter.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THOMAS G. COTTER
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MR. COTTER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court:
I'd like to begin by addressing the last point
made by the Office of the Solicitor General, which is the
Daggett case. And I address that merely to highlight that
this is a State law issue. It -- the Daggett case did not hold,
as the Solicitor General maintains, that under Arizona law
there would be no duty under the restatement sections 323
or 324. In fact, what the Court says in remanding the
case because they found a duty under the county
regulations, is, "We assume, without deciding, that there
is a claim under 324 and -- 323 and 324, and note simply
that there are no allegations in the plaintiff's complaint
that would satisfy those issues." So, they simply say,
because there's additional litigation coming, they were
giving heads up to the party that he needs to amend the
complain to assert the Good Samaritan elements.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May I ask you a question that
Justice Kennedy just brought up? Did this -- did Mr.
Olson collect, under the State workers' compensation
statute, from the mine operators?
MR. COTTER: Your Honor, Mr. Olson did collect,
under the State workers' compensation statute, from the
mine operator, that is correct, as did Mr. Vargas. And,
in fact, the State of Arizona was sued -- the State mine
inspector -- alleging that they were negligent, and that
case was resolved. That -- a point of interest in that
case is that in that case, the State -- because Arizona is
a pure comparative-negligence State -- alleged that the
Federal mine inspector was partially at fault and that,
therefore, Mr. Olson and Mr. Vargas' damages should be
reduced, just as, in our case, if we had proceeded beyond
the motion-to-dismiss phase, we could have anticipated, as
is common, that the Federal Government would have
identified the State of Arizona and the mine operator to
be non-parties at fault, as well, so that those
individuals -- the negligence of those individuals would
reduce the plaintiff's damages against the Federal
Government.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the -- but the mine
operator -- the Compensation Act is the exclusive remedy
under Arizona law, so the -- nobody could get anything
more from the mine operator. Is that so?
MR. COTTER: That is correct. In the interest
of candor, I have to tell Your Honor that we sued the
parent company to the mine operator, which is Grupo
Mexico, in an attempt to assert a claim, and that case was
resolved only by some -- by making some concessions on the
workers' compensation lien issues that the workers'
compensation carrier had back against the claimants for
their recovery from the State of Arizona.
I hope that's clear. But, generally, workers'
compensation carriers have a right to get repaid if
there's some private settlement, and concessions were made
on that right, because of the -- suing the parent company,
and that case was never resolved on the merits.
To begin, Your Honor, this came to the Ninth
Circuit from a motion to dismiss. And that has
significance to this -- to this question, because the
plaintiffs were not able to develop the factual record
which goes to the issues of whether or not there would be
liability under the State law -- the Good Samaritan law or
under -- issues about assumption of duty under State law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that goes to the remand
question raised --
MR. COTTER: It --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- earlier.
MR. COTTER: -- it does --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't -- it doesn't go to
whether the Ninth Circuit was correct here.
MR. COTTER: Well, in a roundabout way, it does,
Justice Scalia, because what happened was, the Ninth
Circuit was faced with the task, under the Federal Tort
Claim Act, of deciding whether -- if the Federal
Government -- the Federal mine inspectors, if you would --
were private people under like circumstances, would they
be liable? So, the Ninth Circuit was essentially asked a
hypothetical question by the Federal Tort Claim, and it
was asked to resolve that question on a motion to dismiss
for failure to state a claim, which the standard is, of
course, that we can set -- we can prove no facts which
would -- which would establish a cause of action. And
what the court really did, because the court applied a
body of law -- the Ninth Circuit -- that began with the
Louie doctrine -- is, the court looked at Arizona mine-
inspector law as a predictor to what Arizona private-
person law would be.
And from Justice Roberts' questions about police
officers, in the Louie case, the State of Washington, like
the State of Arizona, had waived sovereign immunity.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I mean, that might have
-- you might have won if they had said, "We're going to
look to see what the law is in Arizona governing a private
person who performs a similar kind of inspection. And we
decide that it's the same." You would have won that, I
guess. But you didn't, because they didn't. That isn't
what they said.
MR. COTTER: That --
JUSTICE BREYER: That is, we're not looking to
the law governing private persons, we are just looking at
law governing municipalities, and they're -- it seems to
me they are pretty clearly wrong about that, unless you
give me a reason why they're right.
MR. COTTER: Well, Your Honor, what -- our
position is that, although they applied the law of
municipalities and the State, what they were really doing
is applying the Louie doctrine, which says that when you
cannot identify a private actor, then the best evidence of
what the State's law is, with respect to the actions of a
party in the same circumstances, is to look at the State
liability, and that --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's a good question.
Suppose you really had a person who -- there's just no
comparable private person in like circumstances. I can't
even imagine what that could be. Maybe you could imagine.
But I was trying to think of some secret research on
turning people invisible or something for military
purposes. I mean, I -- it's just hard -- I mean, hard
here, obviously. There is such a person. There are
private mine inspectors.
MR. COTTER: Well, actually, I'm not aware of
any private mine inspectors, but if we want to take that
thought --
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe there are not --
MR. COTTER: If the private mine inspector had
the -- assumed the same duties, so it's under like
circumstances, that the Federal mine inspector had here,
which was to inspect the mine in its entirety four times
per year and to respond to all safety-related complaints
and determine whether they present imminent hazards, and
to remove the miners from the area -- if those are the
characteristics of the private individual under like
circumstances, then I concede that would be a better
predictor of State -- and if we knew what Arizona would
decide in that context, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Cotter, I don't -- I don't
see, in the opinion, any indication that the Ninth Circuit
was doing what you -- what you assert it was trying to do
-- namely, to predict what future California law -- locked
deep in the bosom of the California Supreme Court, but not
yet disclosed to the public -- will hold. It didn't
proceed that way at all. It says, generally, the United
States can be held liable only when liability was attached
to a private actor. However, the United States may be liable,
quoting from one of the Ninth Circuit's earlier cases, for the
performance of some activities that private persons do not
perform when a State or municipal entity would be held liable
under the law where the activity occurred. I don't see they are
saying, "We are trying to predict what California would do
in a private situation." They have set forth a rule that,
where there's no cause of action against a private person,
we look to whether there would be a cause of action under
-- against a State or subdivision of the State.
MR. COTTER: Justice Scalia, I concede that the
Court has accurately characterized the opinion. If I
remember the cases cited by the opinion, they're Concrete
Tie and Hines, which lead directly back to the Louie
opinion, which was the decided at the behest of the
Government, because, in Louie, there was a law enforcement
operator who -- a law enforcement official who failed to
stop a drunk driver, and they said, "There is" -- the
Government said, "There is no private person here." And,
therefore, if you look to Washington State law, which does
--
not impose liability in these circumstances, you get a
good idea of what Washington law would rule if there were
a private person.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How long ago was that -- was
Louie decided?
MR. COTTER: Your Honor, I believe it was about
years ago.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Twenty years ago. And
Washington still has not yet made this prediction come
true, I gather.
MR. COTTER: You mean it has not ruled on --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly.
MR. COTTER: -- the subject?
JUSTICE SCALIA: It has not extended its
Government Tort Claims Act to private citizens.
MR. COTTER: I think -- I think that the Federal
Tort Claim Act does not apply to private citizens in
Washington.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, I'm saying the prediction
that Louie made had not yet come true. There is still no
Washington decision that has done what Louie said it would
MR. COTTER: Would not do.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- would be done.
MR. COTTER: Louie predicted that there would be
no liability. And, in fact, I think that that remains the
law.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but Louie, according to
the SG, says, "We say here that this person is not liable
-- the Government is not liable, because, in Washington,
Washington would not make a municipality liable," while
adding that the law of Washington is that a municipality
is liable only if a private person in Washington is
liable. So, I wouldn't think Louie is very good authority
that the Ninth Circuit thought it was for the proposition
that you look not to the private person, but you look to
only the municipality.
MR. COTTER: If I understand Your Honor's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I'm just --
MR. COTTER: -- point --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- reading from their brief.
What they say is, the court stressed that the equivalence
is important. The equivalence of what? Under Washington
law, State and municipal government entities are liable
only to the same extent as a private person. And they
cite page 825. And they stress this equivalence, because
a finding of immunity for State employees under State law
does not determine the scope of the U.S. liability, etcetera.
MR. COTTER: And, in fact, Your Honor, the
equivalence factor in Louie is present in this case.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, anyway, if Louie helps
something other than that, it's wrong, too, isn't it?
Because what the statute says is, it's a question of
looking to the --
MR. COTTER: We --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- private person.
MR. COTTER: The respondents concede that the
question is "private person under like circumstances." We
concede that point. Our point is simply that, on a motion
to dismiss, the Ninth Circuit was faced with trying to
decide: What would Arizona law be with a private person
under like circumstances?
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it didn't try to do that.
It made no effort to do that. It just said -- it just
said the United States may be liable when a State or
municipal entity would be held liable. It made no effort
to figure out what Washington would do with a private
individual.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In the -- in the face of
a district court opinion that applied the Good Samaritan
statute and threw the case out because no allegation could
be made to come within the Good Samaritan statute. So, it
seems pretty clear that they're doing something quite different
from what you're suggesting.
MR. COTTER: Well, Justice Roberts, our
contention is that the genesis of the doctrine that they
applied, and that the Fifth Circuit applies, and that the
D.C. circuit applies, is to predict State law, that its
purpose is not to expand liability where State law doesn't
exist. In fact, if you read the opinion of the Ninth
Circuit in this case, it acknowledges that private person
is the test. But then it says that when we cannot find a
private person, this is what we do. We go look to the
State law. And the Crider case says, basically, that when
you do that -- from the Fifth Circuit -- what you're doing
is looking at the legal principles that are -- you're
looking at a factual situation that best articulates the
State-law legal principles --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But, doesn't that
approach -- it doesn't make any sense, because you're only
looking at half of the equation. Presumably, if you have
a special set of principles for governmental actors, they
include immunities and defenses and all that. And you
just want the benefit of the liability, but you don't
want, I take it, the immunities and defenses that go along
with it.
MR. COTTER: Well, that issue was actually
raised in the Henzel case, in the D.C. circuit, where the
-- there was a high-speed chase and the officer caused a
collision, and what happened was, the Government argued
that you can't apply the standard applicable defined duty
of the Government, but you can apply the Government -- or
the D.C. regulations as to standard of care. And the D.C.
Circuit found, no, it would follow Louie and Crider, and
say that the best predictor of the State law, when you
can't find an analogous private person, is the liability
statutes that concern the law enforcement, but, following
Indian Towing, it would not apply the gross-negligence
standard that the D.C. Circuit had adopted that concerned
the officers.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's actually a rather
interesting question I don't really know the answer to.
The idea is that you can't find an analogous private
person. We might have to write something about that. You
could say -- you -- there always is an analogous private
person. It's impossible to think of an example.
The other extreme, you have the Ninth Circuit,
which could -- which says as long as the Government was
involved in regulation, there is no analogous private
person, because private people don't regulate. I would
think that was almost certainly wrong.
But what is the right way to go about it? Are
there such people, or aren't there?
MR. COTTER: Well, Your Honor, what I would say
in this case is, the absolute wrong way to go about it is
on a motion to dismiss, because, unfortunately, the record
wasn't developed, which may, in fact, speak to issues that
may, in fact, address Arizona law on Good Samaritan, for
instance -- the issue of whether, under Arizona law, a
duty was assumed, the issue of whether reliance exists.
And I have to correct the Solicitor General.
The reliance does not merely come from the injured party.
The restatement section, section three- -- or the
restatement section 324 says reliance is from the other
for the injured party. So, in this case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, doesn't that make
it a contract case? If you're talking about the party
who's contracted with, say, a private inspector -- I mean,
I have a contract, somebody comes and inspects the house
for termites, and I assume, if they don't do a good job
and the house is damaged, they're liable. But that's
under contract, and this is a question of tort liability.
MR. COTTER: Well, if I may answer with a
hypothetical, Your Honor, because we did not get to
develop the record, what happened in this case is, the
mine method changed. They went from taking the floor to
the taking the back. And they ripped out the ground
support. So, people were working under unsupported ground.
We, because there was a motion to dismiss, never got the
opportunity to take the mine operator and said, "Why on
--
Earth" -- the deposition of the mine operator -- "did you
think you could do this?"
JUSTICE SCALIA: What --
MR. COTTER: "Why on Earth did" --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was your response to the
motion to dismiss? The Government said that you didn't
raise, in response to the motion to dismiss, any assertion
that private individuals would be liable --
MR. COTTER: Oh --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- under State law in this --
in this situation.
MR. COTTER: Justice Scalia, I did not
understand the Government to be saying that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I -- that's how I
understood it.
MR. COTTER: -- and it is not true, if that was
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. COTTER: -- what they said.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was your response?
MR. COTTER: Our response was that the law --
first, our response was that, under the motion to dismiss,
our factual allegations in the complaint have to be
accepted, and we alleged all the elements of the Good
Samaritan doctrine, and all the elements of the uniquely
governmental --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You said that? You said that,
"And we have a -- we have asserted all the elements of
Good Samaritan"?
MR. COTTER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. COTTER: And what happened was, frankly,
Judge Browning dismissed, relying, I think, on the -- more
on the discretionary function exception, and then the
Myers case, out of the Sixth Circuit, saying, as a matter
of law, this -- as a matter of Federal law, MSHA is not an
assumption of duty by the Government. And I don't know
whether this Court is inclined to address that issue or
not, but I'd just like to point out on that issue, the
Federal Tort Claim Act makes the issue of whether the
Government's liable a question of State law. The question
is, as we have conceded, whether the mine inspector would
be liable if he were a private person, and -- which I
think goes to the prior question about, "What if there is
no" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But we can remand for that.
What's here is, the Ninth Circuit held that there's
liability based on what the liability of a State agent
would be, and that's just not the rule.
MR. COTTER: Well, Your Honor, if the Court is -
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, we have to give some
instructions as to how the -- as to whether or not the
Ninth Circuit is right about that.
MR. COTTER: If the Court --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that's why you're here.
MR. COTTER: -- if the Court is convinced that
what the Ninth Circuit did was not try to predict what
private law would -- that -- what private law in Arizona
would be, if the Federal mine inspector was a private
citizen, then we would concede that that's not the law.
But we believe that is what the Ninth Circuit did
following those cases -- the Louie case, the Crider case,
and all of the cases that were --
JUSTICE BREYER: See, that's exactly what's
concerning me, and I don't quite see my way to an answer.
Suppose we do send it back because we think just what you
said wasn't so is so, they have to now into this. They'll
have to go into it. Should we suggest, "Look, you try
harder to find a private analogy, because there's almost
always a private analogy." Every Government official has
some similarities to private people, and some differences.
So, we could emphasize that, or we could suggest, "No,
actually, there are quite a few differences." I don't
have much of a feeling for which way to go on that.
MR. COTTER: Your Honor, if you do decide to
remand -- which if the issue of the Good Samaritan
doctrine or assumption of duty under Arizona law is going
to be addressed, we recommend that there is a remand -- we
would urge the Court, as a matter of first -- the first
rule is to instruct the Ninth Circuit that these are badly
-- these are cases that are badly decided on motions to
dismiss for failure to state a claim. Because the Arizona
law on when someone cites a -- adopts a duty -- the
Daggett case or the Papastathis case -- are all fact-
intensive.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, that's not -- that's not
what I've been asking.
MR. COTTER: And --
JUSTICE BREYER: And to expose everything I was
-- perhaps the better thing is to say, "There's always a
private analogy," or try very hard, because if you really
found an instance there was no private analogy to, maybe
there would be no recovery, because the statute simply
speaks about private party.
MR. COTTER: With all due respect, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: And this is a statute designed
to give people recovery --
MR. COTTER: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- when people commit torts.
MR. COTTER: It's a -- it's a statute where --
with a broad waiver intended. But I actually think if the
-- if the rule were "If there's no private analogy,
there's no recovery," it sort of reverses the statute.
JUSTICE SOUTER: It does.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, it does, but that --
would we end up there, because of the way the statute's
written? You avoid the whole matter if you say, "Look for
the closest private person, no matter what." And maybe
that's --
MR. COTTER: I concede that point, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay, who's your -- what's your
best analog?
MR. COTTER: My best analogy here is a private
mine inspector who has the same duties as a Federal mine
inspector, which, in this case, who -- you could say
someone who contracted --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Whom does he work for? Do
mines hire these people, or does he work for the liability
carrier, which I would have expected? I mean, if we're
going to make the kind of suggestion that Justice Breyer
says maybe we ought to make, we ought to have something in
mind. And is it -- is it the -- is it an inspector who
works for the liability carrier who would be the closest
analog in your case?
MR. COTTER: Well, earlier, the suggestion was
made, "What happens if the Government" -- I thought the
suggestion was, "What if the Government outsources mine
inspections? What if, instead of" --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but this -- that's all
hypothetical. You're litigating this case. You must have
something in mind. Whom do you have in mind as your best
analog?
MR. COTTER: The Arizona State mine inspector.
The --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's your second-best analog?
[Laughter.]
MR. COTTER: Well, my second-best analog, I
guess, would be a workers' comp carrier, an insurer, or --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But I thought you had assumed
that, under the Arizona law, you could rely on the Good
Samaritan doctrine --
MR. COTTER: I believe we can rely --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And I thought that, at least,
would be open on remand.
MR. COTTER: I --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Is it necessary that we go
further than that?
MR. COTTER: Well, I don't think it's necessary,
if the Court doesn't want to address whether the
Government always needs to -- or the courts always need to
find a private person. The Good --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Aren't there, in all kinds of
situations, private inspectors? One of them that was
mentioned in the briefs, I think, is an elevator operator.
MR. COTTER: Sure.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Elevator operation inspector.
So, there's lots of private inspectors. There may not be
private mine inspectors. I don't know about that. But
this would be inspector liability.
MR. COTTER: Well, in the restatement, section
4, under "Assumption of a Duty," gives an example. And
the example is, if a private company hires a scaffolding
inspector, and the scaffolding inspector does a negligent
inspection, and a worker falls and is injured, the worker
has a claim against the scaffolding inspector. And then,
under the reliance component is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but only --
presumably, only if they meet the requirements of the Good
Samaritan law.
MR. COTTER: I believe --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Which -- they would have
to show that there was an increase in the risk of harm,
which I think it would not be true in your hypothetical,
or that there was a duty owed to the third party -- the
scaffolding inspector is presumably hired by the
contractor, not by the employees -- or there was reliance.
MR. COTTER: I think that that's true, Your
Honor, although I'd like to read a quote from Papastathis,
which is -- the court relied on. The quote is just this,
"Numerous cases have held that once a party gratuitously
agrees to inspect and the third party is subsequently
injured, that party can be held liable for its negligent
inspection." There is a host of Arizona case law on
assumed duties. And the case I would refer to is Martinez
versus State, which is simply a case where a road washes
out, and the Government reroutes the road for a -- for a
period of time across a private land, and, for a period of
time, grades it, and then stops grading it. And, in that
circumstance, the Government was held liable simply for
having, for that period of the time, assumed a duty. And
there wasn't an analysis in the Martinez case of whether
or not the elements of section 324(a) were met or not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, we're just debating
now whether or not you've satisfied the requirements of
the Good Samaritan statute.
MR. COTTER: Or whether there are alternative
theories of liability available under Arizona State law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did you argue -- I mean,
you lost in the district court on the Good Samaritan
statute.
MR. COTTER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: On your appeal, did you
argue that that was wrong?
MR. COTTER: Yes. And the Ninth Circuit simply
didn't reach that issue.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you said the district
court went off on discretionary function?
MR. COTTER: It went off primarily under
discretionary function, but then in addressing the Arizona
-- the Good Samaritan doctrine under Arizona, it relied on
the Myers case, which is a case in which -- the Sixth
Circuit said that when you have the case -- or safety
inspections like the Federal -- like MSHA, that court
would adopt a actor, slash, monitor dichotomy so that
there could never be an assumption of duty under --
because the Government was only in a monitor function.
And, to the extent that that's at issue, Your Honor, I
would think that that would be a question, under State
law, of whether the Government had assumed the duty. And
if not under State law, it would be a question under the
Federal Tort Claim of whether an -- there is an exception
that has been met. And there is no exception. I think
that this Court, in Berkovitz, said that regulatory
conduct can be actionable under the Federal Tort Claim if
it -- the discretion isn't met -- or the discretionary
exception isn't met. And in this case there was an
absolute obligation to make these inspections and an
absolute failure to do so.
MR. COTTER: Your Honor, if there are -- or the
Court -- if there's no further questions, I'd like to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Cotter.
Ms. Maynard, you have five minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DEANNE E. MAYNARD
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MS. MAYNARD: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
If I may just start where he ended. Just to be
clear, Justice Scalia, the point that I was making is, the
only private-person law to which respondents pointed below
was that of the Good Samaritan doctrine. That -- whether
or not respondents can make out a claim under the Good
Samaritan doctrine would require meeting all of the
elements of that doctrine. That would be primarily a
State-law question, but we do think there's an ingredient
of a Federal question there, especially, for example, in
deciding whether or not they reasonably and detrimentally
relied. Other courts of appeals, including the Sixth
Circuit, in Myers and Raymer, have said that the language
of the Mine Act is relevant to whether or not a party can
simply rely on the very -- just the bare existence of the
MSHA -- of MSHA's existence and its inspections, and held
that, given the language in the Mine Act that expressly
leaves the safety of the mine to the -- primarily to the
mine operators through the assistance of the miners, that
it would be unreasonable to rely.
Here, it -- this was completely appropriately
decided by the district court on a motion to dismiss,
because they came forward with affidavits that say nothing
more than that they relied upon the existence of the MSHA
scheme. And that, under Arizona's Good Samaritan law in -
- taking into account the Federal scheme, is insufficient,
because it is insufficient under Arizona law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You consider affidavits
on a motion to dismiss?
MS. MAYNARD: This is a 12(b)(1) and a 12(b)(6)
motion to dismiss, Mr. Chief Justice, because it's also a
jurisdictional issue, so it is possible. They came
forward with these reliance affidavits, and I think it's
significant how little they say. The reliance affidavits
would obviously not require any discovery on their part to
indicate what their actions were, in terms of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But what --
MS. MAYNARD: -- upon which they were relying.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- what argument do you
have to avoid a remand for consideration of liability
--
under the Good Samaritan law?
MS. MAYNARD: I think that's -- that's one of
our arguments, that they can't meet the Good Samaritan law
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But they didn't have a
chance to argue that before the court of appeals, right?
MS. MAYNARD: Oh, no, Your Honor, they argued
that before the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But court of appeals
didn't decide that.
MS. MAYNARD: The court of appeals didn't decide
that. But, tellingly, I think, as Justice Breyer
suggested, the court of appeals -- and I think your
question has suggested -- it seems that they think there
is no liability there. The premise of the court of
appeals' holding was that there is no private-party
analog.
Justice Breyer, if there is no private-party
analog, if you conclude that this type of regulatory
activity has no private-party analog, the only appropriate
answer under the Federal Tort Claims Act is that the
United States cannot be liable. You cannot --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you think there is a
private-party analog.
MS. MAYNARD: We think that the Good Samaritan
doctrine affords an -- under this Court's interpretation,
in Indian Towing, of the "like circumstances" doctrine, we
think one could look to the Good Samaritan principles,
under which we think we would prevail.
If I may, Justice Ginsburg, return --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Saying that there is no
private-party analog is not quite the same thing as saying
you lose under what we consider to be the proper private-
party analog -- namely, Good Samaritan.
MS. MAYNARD: We believe that once -- I'm not
sure I get the vein of your question, but I'll -- the --
if there is no private-party analog, so there's no
private-person in like circumstances, the United States
cannot be held liable. If there is a private-party in
like circumstances, one then must apply that law to the
facts and the claims and determine whether or not the United
States is liable.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which the court of appeals
hasn't done.
MS. MAYNARD: But the district court did here,
Your Honor, and held that we weren't liable. If the
Court's going to decide this on the record, we think the
Court can decide on this record that there could not be
Good Samaritan law under Arizona law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But we didn't bring cert
on that question.
MS. MAYNARD: That was -- I think it's fairly
encompassed. The -- it -- the question presented is
whether or not the court applied -- should have looked to
private-person law. I think if you say yes, you could
look to that law and conclude on this record that there
can't be liability.
Justice Ginsburg, if I may turn back to your
point about Muniz, I think you're correct that they didn't
specifically -- the court in that case didn't specifically
suggest what the private analog might be on remand,
although it did suggest perhaps it would be personal-
injury law as it relates to private persons in like
circumstances. But I think the important point in Muniz
on that point is akin to what I was just making to Justice
Scalia, which is that the court said there is consent to
sue here, so the prisoners may sue. Whether or not
they're going to be able to ultimately make out a claim
under private-person law is a different question.
So, the Federal Tort Claims Act is not a
guarantee of monetary compensation from the United States.
And one cannot do what the Ninth Circuit did, which is to
keep looking for possible analogies in -- under which the
result would be that the United States is held liable.
Sometimes, just like with private-party analogs, just like
with private safety inspectors, the answer will be: the
private party can't be held liable under the applicable
private-person law. And in -- the private-person law in
Arizona, I think it's clear, is the Good --
I'm sorry. My Time is up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms. Maynard.
The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the case in the
