IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MIKE EVANS, ACTING WARDEN, :
Petitioner, :
v. : No. 04-721
REGINALD CHAVIS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, November 9, 2005
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CATHERINE BAKER CHATMAN, ESQ., Deputy Attorney General,
Sacramento, California; on behalf of the
Petitioner.
PETER K. STRIS, ESQ., Los Angeles, California;
appointed by this Court, on behalf of the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CATHERINE BAKER CHATMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PETER K. STRIS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 32
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CATHERINE BAKER CHATMAN
On behalf of the Petitioner 60
P R O C E E D I N G S
[11:03 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Evans versus Chavis.
Ms. Chatman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CATHERINE BAKER CHATMAN
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MS. CHATMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Ninth Circuit decision in the court below
was wrong, for three reasons. It adopted a rule that
frustrates Congress's intent to protect Federal Courts
from hearing stale claims and to respect the finality
of State Court convictions. It does so by improperly
and arbitrarily adopting a conclusive presumption that
misunderstands or ignores State law and practice. And
it is inconsistent with this Court's decision in Carey
versus Saffold.
If the Federal Courts, on the other hand,
complete their analysis of the Federal question of
tolling the AEDPA statute of limitations by deciding
whether a State petition was timely before granting
tolling, it can properly dismiss more Federal petitions
on statute-of-limitations grounds and can avoid
litigating stale claims on the merits. Any
--
difficulties in doing so can be ameliorated by the
limited nature of the State-law inquiry and adoption of
a 60-day presumption of timeliness.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's something --
where would we -- we would just pick that number, that
MS. CHATMAN: The 60 days?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. Because that's a
normal appeal period?
MS. CHATMAN: Well, Justice Ginsburg, when
California does look to timeliness in proceeding from
one lower court to a higher court, then we see that it
contemplates that a -- that a litigant will proceed in
days or less, because -- and the reason we have to
turn to analogies is because nothing in California law
requires the appellate courts in State habeas to look
to that particular period of time between the lower
court decision and proceeding to that court, because
they're courts of original jurisdiction. So, they look
at how long the prisoner proceeded from conviction to
their court, as a whole.
But the reason that we need to figure out
this period is because this Court, in Carey versus
Saffold, has said that our system functions enough like
an appellate system to bring those periods into the
tolling provision. So, when --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, can't --
MS. CHATMAN: -- we look --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- the -- can't the
California courts adopt a -- give us a 60-day rule, or
a 30-day rule, or a 90-day rule? And if they don't do
it, why should we do it?
MS. CHATMAN: Up to this point, they have not
done so. And I think that is because, as I said, they
are looking at the time from conviction. How long did
it take the prisoner to get to their court with their
claims? And how -- and how long they take properly
proceeding up the ladder through the courts is just one
factor that they look at. And they --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know how this came
about. I mean -- I mean, I'm asking both sides the
same question. It'll sound very favorable to you, but
if you answer it just yes, because it's favorable to
you, I might learn, later, I was wrong, and you won't
have had a chance to answer. So, I want your honest
opinion on this. I don't know how this happened. And
I don't know -- did you ask for en banc?
MS. CHATMAN: I'm sorry, how the 3-year delay
happened?
JUSTICE BREYER: No. I don't know how the
California Court could have read the opinion -- which,
of course, I wrote for the Court, so maybe I am reading
things into it that weren't there -- but I don't know
how any judge could read that opinion we wrote and come
to this conclusion. I thought that it said, you know,
on -- that there are three issues -- what's the word
"pending"? Does the word "pending" apply to the time
period between when the lower court decides a case and
you appeal? That's typically 20 days or 30 days.
MS. CHATMAN: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Are those 20 days or 30 days
counted in the tolling period? I thought part one
clearly said the answer is yes. Then we looked at
California, and they don't have the words "20 days" or
"30 days." They say "reasonable time." And then we
said, "Still applies, because 'reasonable time' is
probably 20 or 30 days." They don't have a radically
different rule; it's a similar rule. Then we come to
part three, and it says, "This is 45 days." There's --
no 4 and a half months, wasn't it?
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: This isn't just 20 or 30
days.
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, is it timely?
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: And, there, I thought the
Court said -- I mean, I was reading it -- say, "Well,
it's hard to say, because there might have been excuses
for the delay." What about the words that were written
there, "on the merits"?
MS. CHATMAN: And there was an equitable- --
JUSTICE BREYER: On --
MS. CHATMAN: -- -tolling question.
JUSTICE BREYER: But that had nothing to --
MS. CHATMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- do with the case. The
lack of diligence had nothing to do with this aspect of
the case. But, what about the words "on the merits"?
And there, what I think the court wrote is that the
fact that it says "on the merits" doesn't prove it --
what -- it doesn't prove that it was timely. Why? And
then I listed a bunch of reasons. There are reasons.
Sometimes courts say "on the merits," even though it's
delayed. All right? They say "on the merits." Or
because they want to tell the prisoner or -- there are
a lot of reasons why, all of which are listed. So, we
send it back to see whether this 4-and-a-half-month
delay, given the excuses, was still timely. We -- all
right?
MS. CHATMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now --
MS. CHATMAN: Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- we now get a case where
it's 3 years.
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the court says, "It's
timely, because they used the word 'on the merits.'"
But I thought -- I said, in the opinion, I thought the
court adopted that the words "on the merits" do not
decide the matter.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't it --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, what do you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- worse than that?
JUSTICE BREYER: -- do in those
circumstances?
MS. CHATMAN: Justice Breyer, I could not
agree --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, but did --
MS. CHATMAN: -- with you more.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- you ask for rehearing en
banc? Because any judge, including me, can make a
mistake. What did you do?
MS. CHATMAN: We petitioned for certiorari in
this Court.
JUSTICE BREYER: And you didn't ask for a
hearing en banc.
MS. CHATMAN: No, we did not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why, when you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- get a fair -- because any
judge can make a mistake --
MS. CHATMAN: The --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- why don't you just go and
ask the Ninth Circuit to say, "Look, this is not --
read the opinion, read what they said. Correct it."
MS. CHATMAN: This is not the first time that
we have tried to take that approach with the Ninth
Circuit on this issue. They -- on remand, in Saffold
versus Carey, they made the same mistake, and the
rehearing has got us nowhere -- asking for a rehearing.
And so, we felt that in order to get this clarified as
soon as possible, it seems futile to ask for rehearing
when on the -- when we had not been successful before.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. Well this --
MS. CHATMAN: This is, by the way --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- this case is different,
actually, from the one that Justice Breyer put,
because, in this case, the California Supreme Court
didn't say --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- "on the merits." It said
nothing at all. It just disposed of it. So, the
question presented is quite different.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's worse.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's whether -- not whether
it can be, nonetheless, timely when they say "on the
merits," but whether it can be, nonetheless, timely
when they don't say anything at all.
MS. CHATMAN: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would think it's an a
fortiori case, in other words.
MS. CHATMAN: And the Ninth Circuit is
treating it as if it were the same sort of decision
that was before this Court in Carey versus Saffold. It
is a decision on the merits. And they are reading that
as excluding any other possible grounds that might have
existed for the denial in that case.
JUSTICE BREYER: You're representing the
attorney general of California, and you have a lot of
litigation in the Ninth Circuit. It's -- I mean, the
other side's going to answer on the merits, if they
can. And they're in an awkward position here, I
understand. But I need to know what to -- what do you
think we should do? I mean, here, we write an opinion,
and they --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it seems to perhaps,
inadvertently or not -- and the reason I turn to you
is, judges are busy, they have huge dockets --
MS. CHATMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And, often, unless it's very
clearly pointed out by the lawyers, or the lawyers take
action, you get -- waste everybody's time and money.
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh. Well, I think the
answer is to instruct the Federal Courts that, when
they're undertaking this inquiry of whether an
application is pending during the intervals, a Federal
question that has a State-law component, then they must
apply the State law to figure out if it's timely. And,
you know, as this Court said in Carey the -- versus
Saffold -- it's a matter of whether it's timely; it's
not a matter of the basis of the State Court decision.
And in the context of California, I think the answer
is to adopt a presumption of 60 days, because that is
the most analogous --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In -- even if, as he
alleged, he was unable to do anything in --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This is a layperson. He
said, "I tripped in the intermediate appellate court,
because I didn't do any research. And so, I wanted to
do better, but they gave me a job where, during the
hours that the library was open" --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- "I had to be at work.
And that's why it took me all this time."
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Now, is that -- suppose
the prison locks down someone and says, "You can't go to
the library."
MS. CHATMAN: This is an easy decision for
the Federal Court, even on these facts. Okay, this
Petitioner has taken longer than 60 days, and he's
offered an explanation. But if you look at his
explanation, on its face, it's completely inadequate to
account for a 3-year delay, because he doesn't take
action to get -- to get library access for an entire
year after the Court of Appeals decision denying his
application is issued. Then he spends 3 months, quite
correctly, going through the administrative procedures
of the prison to get a job change. And he does, in
fact, get a job change 3 months later -- about 3 months
later. Then, he waits still more than another year
before he files his petition in the California Supreme
Court presenting essentially the same claims, same
facts, same law.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, in other words, he
delays, after he gets the library access, for an extra
year.
MS. CHATMAN: Yes, he does. Now, he --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, is there any excuse
they're making for that? Because if you don't tell me,
they're --
MS. CHATMAN: Later on --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- going to tell me.
MS. CHATMAN: -- later on, once he gets to
Federal Court --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MS. CHATMAN: -- he offers the explanation
that the prison was on lockdowns. There are several
problems with that assertion; the first being, it
wasn't presented to the State Court, so it's -- it
cannot cure his State untimeliness. The second being
that he doesn't offer specific dates or explain how it
prevented him from filing his petition. And the third
problem is that State prisons provide procedures during
lockdowns to get library materials to prisoners.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Can I ask a rather probably
sort of stupid question? But I gather there are a
large number of these cases disposed of by a postcard.
Would there be anything wrong if the California
Supreme Court said, "We're going to have two postcards.
One says that 'the delay was unreasonable, denied';
and the other said, 'there's nothing to the merits,
denied'" -- you use two postcards -- wouldn't that solve
all the problems?
MS. CHATMAN: The problem with that is --
certainly, it would solve things, but the problem with
that is, it would require the -- require the California
courts to make both of those determinations in every
case. And, as it is now, they use a procedure much
like --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But they could adopt a 60-
day rule, or a 90-day rule, and then just, when they
decided to not follow the rule, they'd put a check on -
- say, "Well, we did look at the merits in this case."
MS. CHATMAN: They could do that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Under our current law, it
wouldn't make any difference, would it? Because even if
they sent the "on the merits" postcard, Carey versus
Saffold says --
MS. CHATMAN: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- it doesn't matter.
MS. CHATMAN: That's true. And that is why I
say they would have to make both determinations,
because --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, may --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it might --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- may I -- no, go ahead.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I was just going to
say, it might matter if they had another postcard that
said it's untimely, and they didn't send that. That
would be a whole different situation, right?
MS. CHATMAN: That's true, but we are -- we
are engaging here in trying to tell the California
State Courts how to dispose of these cases, which I am
really not sure is an appropriate thing for us to do.
They're --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but --
MS. CHATMAN: -- using a --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if we --
MS. CHATMAN: -- procedure --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if we decided it -- it
was at least appropriate to give a hint, aren't we in a
little bit better position than you suggested, in the
light of Carey? Because in -- is -- correct me if I'm
wrong, but I thought, in Carey, the State order was not
merely that it was on the merits, but that it was on
the merits and it was untimely. In other words, it
said A and B. And we said, you know, "That's
ambiguous," to start with, and then we went on and
said, "You know, sometimes 'merits' don't mean merits."
But if the State were to revise its procedure and say,
"We're either going to say A or we're going to say B,
and that's our reason," and they said, "It's on the
merits" or "it's untimely," wouldn't it make sense for
us, even in the light of Carey, to say, "Okay, we'll
accept that as the -- as the State's reason"?
MS. CHATMAN: If they were to do that. But I
don't anticipate the State Courts adopting that
practice, because it would double their work. They
would have to make both decisions, merits and
untimeliness.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't --
MS. CHATMAN: It --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- see why. If they're
going to follow something like a prima facie 60-day
rule, and it's -- it's on day 65, all they've got to
say is, "It's untimely."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, in this --
MS. CHATMAN: But the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- in this case, in order to
determine it was untimely, they would have presumably
had to have gone into the factual analysis of whether
the prison was on lockdown, whether he delayed for a
year after getting the materials, and all of that
stuff. So, it's a lot easier for them, when the merits
of it seem to them absolutely clear, to simply deny it
on the merits and not reach the "timely" question.
MS. CHATMAN: And that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the "timely" question is
still before Federal Courts. That's what we said in
Carey versus Saffold. So --
MS. CHATMAN: I agree. And they --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- although they can avoid
it, we can't.
MS. CHATMAN: And that -- and that is the way
the State Courts are approaching these cases. They,
for the most part, will look first for a prima facie
case, and in -- much like the Federal Courts do in
Federal habeas under Rule 4, where they scream for
frivolous petitions that can be dismissed outright
without asking for a response from the warden or
instituting briefing, then they can deny those
summarily. And the reason why they cannot just decide
timeliness is because then the Ninth Circuit will
interpret that as not reaching the merits, and we will
have a problem of deference. So, if they were to
decide one explicitly, they'd have to decide the other,
the way things stand now. And I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I --
MS. CHATMAN: -- as a --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- I must say, I don't
quite follow the -- why couldn't they simply say it's
untimely? Wouldn't that -- that it -- there was -- it
was not pending during this period, because it -- 3
years elapsed, and that's unreasonable. Wouldn't that
end the case?
MS. CHATMAN: It would, but it's not a State-
law question. They don't -- whether it's pending
during that period is not a --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I understand --
MS. CHATMAN: -- State law --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- but whether --
MS. CHATMAN: -- question, because --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- it was a reasonable time
to file is a State-law question.
MS. CHATMAN: Whether he took a reasonable
time from the lower -- from time of conviction to their
court is the only State-law question --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, isn't the --
MS. CHATMAN: -- because of the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Doesn't the --
MS. CHATMAN: -- original --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- California Supreme Court
sometimes decide that the time between the intermediate
court's decision and the filing in the California
Supreme Court -- don't they ask whether that was
reasonable?
MS. CHATMAN: I have --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Or they only relate it back
to the day of the conviction?
MS. CHATMAN: I have only seen one case in
California where they specifically addressed that
particular interval because the Attorney General raised
it, and that's Moss -- In Re Moss, which is cited
in the red brief.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask that, if you had
a case in which the Attorney General raised the -- say,
this case, and yet -- and say California Supreme Court
wrote an opinion in which it said, "Now, 3 years has
gone by, but the prisoner has given us a very elaborate
explanation," as Justice Ginsburg suggested, "and we
find that explanation sufficient; therefore, we
conclude that, even though it was 3 years, it was a
reasonable time; and, therefore, we're going to address
the merits. And we now address the merits and say you
lose." Now, in that case, would it be pending, for our
purposes?
MS. CHATMAN: Yes, because the State Court
found it timely, and that would be --
JUSTICE BREYER: It would? I thought --
MS. CHATMAN: -- that would be --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that was --
MS. CHATMAN: -- the end of --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- an open --
MS. CHATMAN: -- the matter.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- question, frankly. I
mean, I can't imagine California would do this, but I
guess if California did say that, "The period of time
between the time you lost in the District Court and the
time you filed, in every other State, is 30 days, but,
in California, it's a reasonable time. And what we
mean by a 'reasonable time' is 3 years, without any
excuses" -- I guess, then, maybe the dissent in Carey
v. Saffold would have been right in respect to that.
MS. CHATMAN: If --
JUSTICE BREYER: It would have said that that
isn't pending under Federal law, whether California
says it or not. So, the role of the Federal law versus
the State law, I thought we left open.
MS. CHATMAN: I think this Court, in Carey
versus Saffold, and in Pace versus DiGuglielmo, has
stressed the importance of deferring to State-law
determinations --
JUSTICE BREYER: But you can't --
MS. CHATMAN: -- State Court --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- defer to something --
MS. CHATMAN: -- determinations.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- under this statute, where
Congress wrote the word "pending." And I wouldn't
have thought they did have in mind a --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- State that says, "It's
pending, even though you have no excuse and didn't file
anything for 3 years, your appeal." Now, I haven't
heard that fully briefed and so forth, so I hesitate to
express a final conclusion on it. But it --
MS. CHATMAN: Well, it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- since it's never going to
come up, I don't think, I don't know I have to have a
final conclusion.
MS. CHATMAN: I don't think so. But it's
pending -- it's pending while -- if it's timely under
State law. And if the State Court has already spoken
to State law, I don't know that there's a question left
for the Federal Court. I think -- I think they say,
"Okay, this was timely, and, therefore, pending during
the interval." But --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Now, you want us to apply
a presumption that a petition is timely if it's filed
within 60 days. But California doesn't apply such a
presumption, does it?
MS. CHATMAN: No, it does --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And --
MS. CHATMAN: -- not, but --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- where do we get that?
I mean, where does that come from?
MS. CHATMAN: Where that comes from is, if
you look to the closest analogous State procedures --
say, direct appeal from a conviction -- then you're
allowed 60 days to go to the next -- to the appellate
court. Similarly, if the State appeals the grant of
habeas relief -- the State, unlike the defendant, can
appeal -- then the State gets 60 days. So, when
California thinks -- when California quantifies the
concept of reasonableness in the appellate context,
they do so in terms of 60 days or less. And I say "or
less," because State habeas is actually supposed to be
a quicker process than the appellate process.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, shouldn't we leave
it to California to adopt such a presumption?
MS. CHATMAN: California's not going to do
that, because it's not a State-law question. It's just
not a State-law question. But it's -- I think it's
acceptable for a Federal Court to adopt a presumption
to assist them in deciding a State-law issue, much --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What --
MS. CHATMAN: -- the way.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- good would the --
what good would the presumption do if it's just a
presumption? Presumably, if it's a presumption, the
prisoner is --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- going to say,
"Well, here's why you shouldn't follow the presumption
in my case," just as, if it looks like he's waited a
long time, he's going to say, "Well, here's why that
delay was reasonable." I don't know that the
presumption you're proposing serves much of a purpose.
MS. CHATMAN: The value of a 60-day
presumption is that it saves the Federal Court from
having to look at the State-law time -- of the
timeliness in that particular case and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, it doesn't --
MS. CHATMAN: -- it ought --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- not if the
prisoner says, "Here's why you shouldn't follow the
presumption."
MS. CHATMAN: Well, that's true. But if it -
- but if he files within 60 days, there's no need to
look further or consider his argument regarding
timeliness. And the other value in the 60-day --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why phrase it as a
presumption? Why not phrase it, "We determine
California law to be, unless we hear otherwise, having
examined what it does in other situations, that 60 days
is timely"?
MS. CHATMAN: I think that would be perfectly
fair.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's the same thing. But I
wouldn't call it --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- a presumption.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that's a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And then --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- and then the -- you know,
the incarcerated individual can come forward with
excuses and say that, "California would make an
exception to the 60-day rule for this," and we're back
where we were.
MS. CHATMAN: Well, that would be fair, and
it would accomplish the other thing that I offered the
-day presumption to accomplish, is to offer a sort of
safe harbor where the Petitioner knows that he gets
tolling for 60 days, and need not file a protective
petition.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it would --
MS. CHATMAN: So, it alleviates that problem.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- it would -- it would be
fair, but to call it a finding of California State law
is a -- would be a bit of a stretch, wouldn't it? I
mean, you -- you've made a perfectly good argument that
it would be a sensible rule for California --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- to adopt, would not be
sensible for us to adopt. But I'd have a hard time
saying that I could justify it as a statement of
current California law, and I'm --
MS. CHATMAN: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Am I missing something?
MS. CHATMAN: Well, Justice Souter, I think
it works very well as a presumption adopted by the
Federal Courts for ease of administrability and, you
know, at the same time, reflecting State law.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay, the --
MS. CHATMAN: But the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So you're back to the
presumption. But --
MS. CHATMAN: Right. But --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- but if --
MS. CHATMAN: -- but the one thing --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if we're going to go
further and say, "Oh, well, we find that that's what
the State law is, unless they tell us differently,"
that's where I'm having trouble.
MS. CHATMAN: Well, it's not very different
from when the Federal Courts adopt a State statute of
limitations --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but we --
MS. CHATMAN: -- for a Federal --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- know what it --
MS. CHATMAN: -- cause of action.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- we know what it is.
There's a State statute of limitations. It says --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- 3 years.
MS. CHATMAN: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: We don't have anything like
that here.
MS. CHATMAN: By analogy, you know that the
period of time for seeking direct appeal is 60 days.
So, it is -- it's deciding something by analogy, in
much the same way the Federal Courts do for a Federal
cause of action that has no statute of limitations.
JUSTICE BREYER: How many cases are there on
habeas in California every year, about?
MS. CHATMAN: Oh.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I mean about. Just give
me the rough ballpark.
MS. CHATMAN: I would -- there are about
,000, I would say.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, the -- in
the Supreme Court.
MS. CHATMAN: No. In the Supreme Court, I
would say it is more like about 2500.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, there are 25- -- so
there are several thousand cases every year.
MS. CHATMAN: Thousands.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Thousands.
MS. CHATMAN: Thousands.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So, I don't know what
I'm doing with California procedure when I pass a --
pass a law, is what it would be. Write a rule, write a
presumption. I have no idea what I'm doing there.
They've worked out a system. But I don't -- why
doesn't it work just to say to the lower courts, "Do
your job"? What we said -- and maybe it wasn't
expressed clearly -- maybe -- "Courts, look, it says
'reasonable time.' All right? Now, reasonable time,
in every other State is 30 days, sometimes 20 days."
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: "Sometimes the most, 60
days. So, look and see if it was filed within a
reasonable time. That's all. And if California passes
-- some specific thing says something special about it,
of course, pay attention to that." What's wrong with
that? They just would do it like they do any other
thing of deciding what happens in --
MS. CHATMAN: That is -- that is exactly what
I would ask this Court to do. Exactly -- is to --
Federal Courts take on this Federal question of tolling
and complete the analysis by applying State law to find
out if these petitions were timely filed in merit
tolling.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is "reasonable time" the
issue, or is it what California would consider a
"reasonable time"? I mean, that's the problem.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, that is the problem.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We're not --
MS. CHATMAN: It --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- making up, for ourselves,
what's a reasonable time. If California says a year is
--
a reasonable time, that would be the reasonable time at
issue, wouldn't it?
MS. CHATMAN: I don't think it would be, in
light of --
-- in light of the analogous
State law that you only get 60 days to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but if --
MS. CHATMAN: -- appeal, but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the California Supreme
Court says, "Despite all of these, in this kind of a
situation, we think a year is a reasonable time" --
MS. CHATMAN: But they --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you --
MS. CHATMAN: -- haven't said so. The -- of
course, you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I know, but if they said so
MS. CHATMAN: If they said so --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that would be binding --
MS. CHATMAN: -- if they had --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- on us, wouldn't it?
MS. CHATMAN: If they said so, then we'd have
State law, and we would have to apply that. But we
don't.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why would you have to
apply that? It's a Federal question whether the claim
is pending or not during that whole period, right?
MS. CHATMAN: Of -- certainly it is.
Certainly it is. But, at the end of the analysis,
there is a little bit of State-law analysis. It has to
be timely under State law. And if California Supreme
Court tells us more about what's timely under their
reasonableness standard, then I think you would have to
take that into account.
But the concept of reasonableness and due
diligence that are employed in States -- in
California's timeliness standards, I don't think
"reasonableness" and "due diligence" mean anything
different at the Federal courthouse in Sacramento than
they do at the State Court of Appeal five blocks away,
or in this Court. It's -- these are common terms that
are used in the law all the time.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this question? I
think our opinion the last time around suggested that
possibility would certify into the California --
MS. CHATMAN: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- Supreme Court, and that
was not done. Was any other effort made that you can
tell us about? Maybe you should, off the record, but
to try and get the guidance of the California Supreme
Court on the -- on the State-law problem here? Has
anybody suggested to the court they might adopt a rule
or a different practice or anything like that?
MS. CHATMAN: Your Honor, yes, we have
suggested that. The California Supreme Court -- and,
as you said, this is not within the record -- the
California -- but, if I may, the California Supreme
Court has declined to adopt a rule. They think it's a
political question that has to be decided by the
Legislature. And the Legislature, to date, has not
adopted a rule or -- not a rule, a statute of
limitations for these cases. And I have to say that,
if they undertook that, then there would be certain
costs to doing that, as well. You know, we would -- we
would -- we would ease this issue, but we would
confront the cost of considerable litigation, I would
imagine, if we adopted a new statute for collateral
relief in California. So, there's a cost to doing
that, that might outweigh the benefits of --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Thank you.
MS. CHATMAN: -- clarifying this issue.
If I may reserve my time?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Stris.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER K. STRIS
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. STRIS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In light of Justice Breyer's questions, I
feel compelled to begin with a brief explanation of why
this case is a necessary consequence of Saffold. And,
although it wasn't my initial intention to speak
plainly, what I would suggest is that the problem is
not the Ninth Circuit's decision in this case, but,
rather, California's timeliness standards. And the
problem that's presented by this case is one of Federal
line-drawing. And it presents serious federalism,
comity, and fairness concerns. And if we could step
back from the facts of this case for a moment -- and I
will discuss them -- I think it -- I hope, at least, it
will become clear that the Ninth Circuit, in light of
what it's dealing with in California, adopted the only
sensible rule.
So, the place to begin in answering some of
your questions, Justice Breyer, is with California's
timeliness standards. And to give some background, I
would start with the principle that was articulated in
the Warden's brief and that the California Supreme
Court has articulated, which is that California does
enforce its timeliness standards. It's usually done by
-- in the summary-denial context, by citing to In re
Swain or In re Robbins --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I missed it. You said the
problem is, California doesn't "support" or "import"?
I just didn't --
MR. STRIS: Oh, I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- hear your word.
MR. STRIS: -- apologize.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- the -- I just didn't
hear what you said.
MR. STRIS: What I had said is that
California does enforce its --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Enforce.
MR. STRIS: -- timeliness standards. And the
way they customarily do that --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: And what are those
standards, please?
MR. STRIS: Okay. The standards are that a
prisoner must file within a reasonable time. And that
requires a two-part inquiry, Justice O'Connor. The
first part is, Was there substantial delay? It's
determined based upon a set standard, when the delay
begins. But California's never articulated any
standards for what period of time constitutes
"substantial." That's the first problem. It's
essentially an ad hoc determination that's made by
individual California Courts. And that's why former
Justice Brown described that as "an abstraction," and
former Justice Moss described it as "vague and
indeterminate at its very core." But that's what the
Ninth Circuit is dealing with when it reviews these
cases.
So, to put it context for a moment, the way
the State Courts do enforce this on a case-by-case
basis, to be practical, is, the State Supreme Court
often summarily dismisses cases on procedural bars,
including timeliness. And, to give you some statistics
from the Warden's brief, in 2004 there were 1,223
unexplained summary denials -- in other words, just
denied -- and there were 1,174 denials with a citation
to a case. And this is significant, because this means
that, in about half of the cases in 2004 that went to
the California Supreme Court, they enforced one of
their procedural bars, and, in many of them, it was
timeliness.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. A case that was a
procedural-bar case?
MR. STRIS: I'm not sure -- I'm not sure I
follow the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you --
MR. STRIS: -- question, Justice.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you could summarily deny
and cite a case that showed you were denying on the
merits.
MR. STRIS: Oh. What I -- what I was
suggesting is that there were 1,174 cases that were
procedural-bar cases, where it said --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where they cited a
procedural-bar case.
MR. STRIS: That's correct.
It would say, "Denied, In Re Swain," meaning
denied for being untimely. As opposed, Justice
Scalia, to the 1,223 cases that were
unexplained.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And this could be --
JUSTICE BREYER: But, now, maybe I'm --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- just one point, if I
may, Justice Breyer -- those are the California Supreme
Court or California appellate court?
MR. STRIS: That's the California Supreme
Court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Thank you.
MR. STRIS: Okay.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, the difficulty of
looking to that, which may be a good difficulty -- I
mean, that is a serious problem, but I thought what we
wrote in the case -- see, there are two problems here.
First, which was bothering me, had to do with our
Court's relation to the Ninth Circuit, which may be
simple and -- as far as legally is concerned -- but I'm
not sure about it. The other, which is much more
interesting, is what you're talking about.
All right, now, on the first one, I read the
words. It says the words "on the merits." The Ninth
Circuit thought those three words meant that the
California Supreme Court could not have considered the
petition too late, for, after all, it decided it on the
merits, just as with the cite. Now, whether these
words are right or wrong that follow, that's what we
wrote. The next words were, "There are many plausible
answers to this question." Sometimes, a court
addresses the merits of a claim that it thought was
presented in an untimely way. Why? Because they don't
present any difficulty, and the timeliness issue does,
or because it wants to give the reviewing court
alternative grounds for decision, or maybe it just
wants to show the prisoner we thought about the claim
on the merits. He, after all, doesn't have a lawyer.
He gets a postcard. That helps him. So, there are a
lot of reasons. And it says, "Conclusion." Given the
variety of reasons why they might have put the words
"on the merits," the fact that they are there, those
words cannot, by themselves, show that the petition was
timely. So, then I read what they wrote. What they
wrote is, "When the California Court denies a habeas
petition without comment or citation, we have long
treated the denial as a decision on the merits." Okay?
And then it cites a pre-Carey case. "Therefore, the
summary denial was on the merits, and the petition was
not dismissed as untimely," citing two pre-Carey cases.
Now, I don't see how, since I just said the
words "on the merits do not end the issue" -- here, the
words weren't even there, but they say, "We're treating
it as if they were, and that ends the issue." So, what
do we do about that?
Then the next question, once I figure that
one out, is, What do we do about the issue you're
raising, which is quite important and interesting and
so forth?
MR. STRIS: Okay. Well, as to the first
question, the explanation that you just provided
clearly requires the Federal Courts, when there's some
indication from the State Court that it might have been
untimely, to look into it. And that was the very
problem with what the Ninth Circuit did in that case.
--
It said "on the merits and for lack of diligence." So,
to presume that that was just on the merits, that's
flatly wrong. You'd need to do some further
investigation.
In light of the context of what's happening
in California, however, when the State Court says
nothing, there has to be some process by which the
Federal Court can make a decision as to what that
means, because if, in fact, in that case it was denied
on the merits and the State Court thought it was
timely, it would be extremely invasive for the Federal
Court to re-review the case, potentially come to a
different conclusion, and, we would suggest,
dramatically alter the landscape of how prisoners
exhaust their remedies in California, because now
you're developing a Federal body of law that may be
very different in deciding what's substantial and
what's reasonable than California did. And so, what
the Ninth Circuit, I believe, did in this case was look
to context and come up with the presumption that was
most reasonable in light of what's going on.
So, the first thing that is relevant, from a
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that the most
reasonable presumption? Why isn't the most reasonable
presumption that the California Court denies, for
untimeliness, wherever that issue is absolutely clear -
MR. STRIS: The --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- and where that issue is
not absolutely clear, and the -- and the merits issue
is absolutely clear, it just -- it just denies?
MR. STRIS: The answer -- pardon me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't want to say
"denied on the merits," because that would suggest that
it was timely.
MR. STRIS: The answer, I would suggest,
Justice Scalia, requires looking to California
practice. And where I would start is with the
California Supreme Court's decision in In re Sanders.
And in In re Sanders, the Court made clear that after
the Supreme Court adopted their policies in 1989
regarding certain presumptions in capital cases, and
after the seminal In re Clark case in 1993, which
asserted -- rather, articulated California's timeliness
standards, most petitions -- and these are the
California Supreme Court's words -- "Most petitions are
timely filed." So, with that backdrop and the fact
that half of the California Supreme Court's cases are
being denied with a case citation, it's reasonable to
conclude that the unexplained denials are not
necessarily untimely.
Now, I would add to that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know what it --
"most" is 51 percent. I mean, among those that you
don't know whether it was the merits or not, there
could be a lot of ones where the timeliness is simply
not decided upon.
MR. STRIS: It's certainly the case, Justice
Scalia, that the presumptions the Ninth Circuit adopted
could permit cases that even the California State
Courts would consider to be untimely --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, we could work with
that. Now, that's, sort of, helpful, because if they
say "most are timely filed," then the next question
would be, "All right, what period of time is it?"
MR. STRIS: Well, that's the --
JUSTICE BREYER: You'd have to get some
professor to go through these cases, and they could --
they could figure out how long it is. What do you
think it is, from your experience?
MR. STRIS: I can't really answer that, and
that's at the heart of --
JUSTICE BREYER: But, I mean, is it more like
a month, or is it more like 3 years?
--
MR. STRIS: Well, the reason I would suggest
that -- and answering that is not necessarily
appropriate or helpful in resolving the question -- is
because of the series of cases that we quoted in
footnote 15 of our brief. In certain instances, the
California Courts have found 3 and a half years, 1 and
a half years, 2 years to be reasonable. Now, that
doesn't mean --
JUSTICE BREYER: Because?
MR. STRIS: In one instance, it was because
of attorney abandonment. In other cases, it was
because the prisoner was indigent.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, there's a special
reason. In your case, is there really a year that
isn't explained at all?
MR. STRIS: Oh, I think it would apply to our
case, as well.
JUSTICE BREYER: Because?
MR. STRIS: In our case, the first 15 months
JUSTICE BREYER: No, forget that. The
library, I'll give you. What's the rest?
MR. STRIS: After that, our client was
effectively on lockdown and had no access whatsoever to
the library. Now, this presents the burden problem
with doing any sort of independent determination. The
Attorney General suggested, in the District Court, that
there was a paging system in place whereby prisoners
who are on lockdown could get access to the library.
There was never any suggestion in the District Court on
the part of the Attorney General that the lockdown
didn't exist. And the Attorney General, and not my
client, would have access to those records.
JUSTICE BREYER: But -- well, did your -- did
your client file an affidavit or something saying he
didn't have access to the library during the whole
period of 3 years?
MR. STRIS: I wouldn't call it an affidavit,
but it was -- he filed an opposition to the motion to
dismiss.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well --
MR. STRIS: And --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is there anything in the
record that says, during the year after they said,
"We'll change your job so you can get access to the
library," that he didn't have access to the library?
MR. STRIS: Yes. I -- well, I -- he didn't
talk about not having access to the library. It's
implicit, if you look at the Joint Appendix at --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, all right, so what's
his reason for saying that, "Last year, I was not able
to file a petition in California Supreme Court"?
MR. STRIS: That he had had -- had access to
nothing. In other words, he didn't say, "I didn't have
access" --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, what does it say? What
does he say? Go ahead.
MR. STRIS: Well, it would be on the Joint
Appendix, pages 38 and 39, where he describes the
lockdown. And, you know, I haven't looked at it
recently, but my understanding is that he was
suggesting that he had had access to nothing, including
the prison library. And the Attorney General suggests
that there was a paging system, but the documentary
evidence that the Attorney General puts into the
record, which is on pages 68 -- 67 -- no, pardon me,
through 96 -- is a prison manual that's dated 2000.
Now, it says it's amended. But my client takes the
position that this wasn't in the place at his prison at
that time, and that would require a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well --
MR. STRIS: -- evidentiary hearing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the burden --
MR. STRIS: -- to determine --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- for that one is on him.
I mean, if you say the burden is on the State to come
up with a -- you know, showing that there was such a
system, they came up with it. And you say, "The system
may have been amended." Well, if it has been amended,
there the burden is on you.
MR. STRIS: Of course. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean --
MR. STRIS: -- the burden --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- well --
MR. STRIS: Pardon me. The burden on him
would be in the context of an evidentiary hearing,
which never took place. The District Court in this
case didn't reach that issue, because they found that
statutory tolling --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, the --
MR. STRIS: -- wasn't available.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- the next thing, what he
actually says here, is that the C facility where he was
confined was put into lockdown clearly into February
97. And this is all after he got access. Then it
remained quiet and lockdown free until August 11th,
97. So, that seems six months, on the most generous
interpretation --
MR. STRIS: But that --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- where he's not in
lockdown, and he has access to the library.
MR. STRIS: But that illustrates the very --
JUSTICE BREYER: About six months.
MR. STRIS: That's correct, Justice Breyer.
And that illustrates the very problem with this case,
which is that in cases where there is 90 days, 2
months, 4 months, the very difficult questions that a
Federal Court would normally look to State law, if it
was determinant, to apply, California is giving no
guidance. And our case falls within that once you look
to the particular explanations that our client put
forward. And so, we would suggest that if there is a
concern on the part of the Court about certain cases
getting through and essentially allowing prisoners to
abuse the writ, that this Court will use its equitable
discretion to look at individual cases and to decide,
"Hey, is this a situation where the behavior is
dilatory? Is this a situation where the behavior is
abusive?" And that would restrict the number of cases
where Federal Courts would need to engage in a factual
inquiry. The alternative is adopting a presumption,
that the Attorney General suggested, that the
California Courts have flatly rejected. That
presumption has been adopted -- has been imported from
the direct-appeal context. It has no significance in
California habeas law. In the direct-appeal context,
prisoners have the right to counsel. In the habeas
context, they don't, except in capital cases. And,
unsurprisingly -- pardon me -- unsurprisingly, the
California Supreme Court has adopted a presumption of
days, in the capital context. So, in the -- in the
noncapital cases, like my client's, where individuals
have no incentive to delay -- my client has been up for
parole twice already, he has no incentive to delay the
habeas process -- and where people like Mr. Chavis
think that they're, in good faith, complying -- and
it's not just an issue of excuse -- and this goes back
to a -- to a question that Justice O'Connor asked
earlier -- there are specific policy reasons why the
State of California has adopted the standard that it
has. They've articulated --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I just interrupt? I
want to be sure that I get one thing straight. The 90-
day presumption in capital cases, that is that if it's
within 90 days, it's reasonable. Does it also presume
that it's a -- more than 90 days, it's unreasonable?
MR. STRIS: It presumes that if it's within
days, it's timely.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. STRIS: And then you engage in the
--
inquiry. But that's significant, Justice Stevens,
because these individuals are represented by counsel.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I understand. But do
they adopt the converse? If it's more than 90 days, is
it presumed to be untimely?
MR. STRIS: No, they do not. And they've
flatly rejected that and found cases where there's --
several years' delay, even in the capital context, to
be reasonable. But --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I could see how they
could overcome a presumption that way, but there's not
even a presumption that over 90 days is unreasonable.
MR. STRIS: That is correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There isn't. You --
MR. STRIS: There is not.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You mean if you go in and
you say, "I'm" -- you know, it's more than 90 days, and
you bring in no evidence whatever of any excuse for
being over 90 days, you're telling me that California
Supreme Court would accept it?
MR. STRIS: No, that's not true. The --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then --
MR. STRIS: -- the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- then it is a presumption
--
MR. STRIS: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that if it's over 90
days, unless you have a reason, it's untimely.
MR. STRIS: The burden shifts the prisoner to
produce some evidence. I didn't understand that to be
JUSTICE BREYER: So, here we have 180 days --
0 days, twice 90 -- with no excuse at all presented.
MR. STRIS: In the noncapital context. And
it's very -- it's very different, because the
California State Courts are articulating particularly -
- particular policy reasons for noncapital prisoners to
delay. One that they're articulated is a desire to
avoid the piecemeal presentation of claims. And this
is particular to California's original writ system.
You can have a functional appeal, but, because it's
also an original writ, you -- if you have an additional
claim that's legitimate, you need to add it in that
claim.
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: But once it's --
MR. STRIS: And --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- in the Federal habeas
context, the AEDPA law suggests there's a great premium
paid -- at stake for promptly resolving these things.
What do we do about that? This is in the Federal court
system now.
MR. STRIS: If it were the case -- and
there's no evidence on the record to suggest this --
that a substantial number of cases were going to start
coming through California with massive delays, and this
Court was going to be forced to provide statutory
tolling, that would be a problem. But there's no
evidence to suggest that. And that ties back to --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: Well, what would we do in
that situation?
MR. STRIS: If that --
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: If it's --
MR. STRIS: -- started happening?
JUSTICE O'CONNOR: -- open to the Federal
Courts.
MR. STRIS: If that started happening, I
think you, in this Court, would do nothing. I think
that Congress would see what was going on, and they'd
amend the statute, because that's clearly not what they
intended. But that's not this case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Amend just for California,
when the system is working fine, all the other States
that do have the timelines?
MR. STRIS: I don't think they would do that,
Justice Ginsburg. But there's a proposal that I'm
aware of, already, to change the specific language of
44(d)(2), and it was made by a congressman in
California. It doesn't suggest changing it for
California; it suggests changing the language. But
that hasn't happened.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: To do what? What would it
say?
MR. STRIS: I believe it replaces the word
"pending" with some replacement. And so, it
essentially changes the tolling provision to account
for this problem. But that hasn't happened yet. Right
now, we have a congressional statute that, on its face,
does not require the Federal Courts --
JUSTICE BREYER: What about this? You might
lose under this, but it -- see, so you say -- look, in
every other State, the time for appealing from an
appeals court to the State Supreme Court, asking them,
is 20 days, normally, or sometimes 30. So, if the
Ninth Circuit gets a case in which it was longer than
days, then, irrespective of whether they say "on the
merits," whether they cite a case, whether they don't
say anything and just have a postcard, what the Ninth
Circuit should assume that they've done is consider it
untimely, in the absence of the kind of excuse that the
California Courts might accept as an excuse. So, then
they'll look into that. And if California, in the
future, wants something different -- which I'd be
surprised -- they will say that their system means that
a 3-year delay, or whatever it is, is actually timely.
But, in the absence of some reason to think that, why
not use the words, which would give you a chance to go
back, and you could say, "This is not a case of total
lack of excuse. There is excuse of the kind that
California would accept."
MR. STRIS: Well, I think the problem with
that sort of rule, Justice Breyer, is that it risks
error, because California's standard is so
indeterminate, and at very little -- it gets very
little benefit. Because there's -- there is no real
harm -- there's no real harm to the Federal interest
here just because we have a conclusive presumption.
The very nature of a conclusive presumption is that
sometimes there will be cases that don't fit the
presumption. But, on this record, and on anything I've
seen from my review of California procedure, there's
nothing to suggest that a -- the Federal interest in
avoiding substantial delays is compromised by the
specific rule that the Ninth Circuit has adopted. And
the Ninth Circuit has adopted a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, how can you --
how can you say that? We do have a Federal rule and a
limitation, and (d)(2) is an exception for time that
it's pending before the State Courts. And if the State
Courts aren't going to bother to tell us whether
something's timely or not, or pending, giving them a
blank check does undermine the Federal interest behind
the 1-year limitation period.
MR. STRIS: I would say two things about
that, Mr. Chief Justice. The first thing is, I would
strongly resist your characterization that the State
Court is saying nothing. I think that, in most cases,
they are saying something, and that, in the cases that
involve postcard denials, many of them, the court is
saying that they're timely, and, in others, those are
the hard questions. So, I would restrict your
characterization to the fact that California is not
saying something in some cases.
Now, because the Federal statute necessarily
imports a State standard, that's the very problem with
the statute. I can conceive of many instances where --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why do you think the
Federal statute necessarily imports a State standard?
It says that the State postconviction proceeding must
be pending. And California presents an unusual
situation, but we interpret that pending is a question
of Federal law. It's not a State standard.
MR. STRIS: That's true, Mr. Chief Justice.
But if you took that to its logical conclusion, then,
when State Courts made errors -- they didn't see that a
case was properly filed, they just missed it -- the
Federal Court would go in and review. Or in a case
where they did claim the reverse, the Federal Court
could say, "No, there was clear error." But this Court
has rejected that in Saffold. It's rejected it in
Pace. And -- because that is informed by the very view
that the tolling provision was included to encourage
one round of State exhaustion free of Federal
interference.
JUSTICE BREYER: But we decided --
I'd like you to suggest something to -- from putting
yourself in the -- in an imaginary position. Carey
versus Saffold did have a dissent. And four Justices
joined it. And let's imagine that, when I read the
dissent, I see the -- and then I look at this case -- I
see imaginary words on the top of the dissent, which
are, "We told you so."
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE BREYER: And -- now, therefore, think
not of if you were arguing Carey v. Saffold afresh, but
think of the words that are actually written there.
And now think of what happened here. And now propose
something, please, that will, in fact, deal with the
problem that this case seems to present.
MR. STRIS: Well, I would be lying, Justice
Breyer, if I didn't say that I haven't thought about
that. And the problem is that the rule announced in
Saffold isn't the right rule. It's trying to deal with
a problem that's been created by the California State
Courts. And so, the solution that the Ninth Circuit
has adopted -- that's our proposal. We essentially
think that it has a minimal harm to Federal interests,
because maybe certain cases will get in that Congress
didn't intend, but if you don't adopt it, there's no
alternative. You can't certify the question. In
California, you can't certify to the Court of Appeal.
You can't certify from a District Court. So, if the
California State Courts aren't going to change, it's
not incumbent upon this Court to read the statute
differently than the proper interpretation. And I
concede the arguments that were made in the dissenting
opinion in Saffold are very interesting, and they don't
compel, in my opinion, a different interpretation of
the statute; they recognize the difficulty that the
statute presents. And it presents that difficulty
because it does incorporate, in some measure, a State
standard, and because there's one State out there,
California, that's doing something that's very
difficult to deal with.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this -- two
questions about California? Is the problem we're
discussing, with these long delays, primarily in the
application the third range, the application of the
California Supreme Court, as opposed to lower courts?
MR. STRIS: Well, I wouldn't characterize it
as a problem, because, like I said before, I don't
think that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But is the condition, that
there is the long delay, that primarily occurs in the -
- in the application of State Supreme Court? Is it --
MR. STRIS: I have no -- I've seen no
specific evidence to be able to answer that with any
citation, but my understanding, Justice Stevens, is
that that makes sense, because it's the last process
that the prisoner is going to be able to engage in,
then they'll have to go to the Federal Circuit.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then my second question is,
Have we decided, or is it a matter of common practice
in California, that the application to the California
Supreme Court is necessary in order to complete the
exhaustion?
MR. STRIS: It is -- it is necessary, in my
opinion. I don't know if the State -- if this Court
has ever --
JUSTICE STEVENS: We've held it --
MR. STRIS: -- decided that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- in cases where there's
direct review, but this is a different sort of animal
that you have in California.
MR. STRIS: But once you start from the
premise that these are functional appeals, which they
are, I don't see how you could read AEDPA any other
way. I mean, AEDPA says that if there's an available
method to challenge and -- a petition, whether it be by
review or original writ, to the California Supreme
Court would be available. So, you could be sure that
if prisoners --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I think it is --
MR. STRIS: -- didn't file --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- required.
MR. STRIS: Yes. If they didn't file, they'd
get kicked out of Federal Court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There's one aspect of
Saffold that you haven't addressed. We not only said
what we said about they're saying "on the merits," we
actually cited a case that involved exactly the
situation here -- namely, Welch versus Newland, a CA9
case from 2001. And we cited that as an example of how
the Ninth Circuit rule, quote, "risks the tolling of
the Federal limitations period even when it is highly
likely that the prisoner failed to seek timely review
in the State appellate courts," close quote.
MR. STRIS: I would say two things about
that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How could the Ninth Circuit
here simply have ignored that criticism of exactly what
they did here?
MR. STRIS: Well, I don't believe they
ignored it, Justice Scalia. And if you look at the
Welch case that you're referring to, on en banc
rehearing the en banc panel reached a very different
result. They didn't reach the issue of timeliness, for
the reasons I described, but they determined that that
was not a functional appeal, because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we --
MR. STRIS: -- the claim --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- we didn't cite the en
banc decision. We cited the panel decision --
MR. STRIS: The en banc --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- didn't we?
MR. STRIS: -- decision occurred after your -
JUSTICE SCALIA: After.
MR. STRIS: -- case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the point is, we
criticized the panel decision in Welch, which did
exactly what this panel did here.
MR. STRIS: I don't agree with that
characterization, Justice Scalia. I believe that case
was included to illustrate that this Court thought that
was probably too long, and that not looking at all to
what's happening in the California system risks that.
I don't think anything was at least necessary to the
holding in Saffold --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We cited --
MR. STRIS: -- because it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- it for the proposition
that it -- as an example of how the Ninth Circuit rule,
quote, "risks the tolling of the Federal limitations
period even when it is highly likely that the prisoner
failed to seek timely review in the State appellate
courts." That's what we cited.
MR. STRIS: That is true. And in the context
of a case like Saffold, where there's a reference to
lack of diligence, that risk is too great. I'm not
going to get up here and suggest that there's no risk
to a conclusive presumption that some cases are going
to make it into Federal Court that Congress didn't
intend. But it's a balancing that's inherent in the
notion of federalism. There is a risk that, by not
reviewing clear statements by the California State
Court, that cases get in that shouldn't. A case could
not have been properly filed, and the State Court
didn't find it. But, in Saffold and in Pace, this
Court announced the principle that once the State Court
decides, that's the end of the matter.
And I guess, in summation, what I suggest is
that atmospherically this case presents a difficult
problem. The Ninth Circuit is involved. There is a
five-four decision in Saffold. We recognize those
things. However, there is no easy solution. The Ninth
Circuit has adopted a rule that balances the very
interest in federalism that the tolling provision was
intended to preserve, and there's no suggestion that
some corresponding Federal interest is compromised.
And, in fact, if the Federal Courts are required to
review these cases, they'll be required to do it in 60
days, in 70 days, in 80 days, and, if they make a
mistake, and they find a case to be untimely that the
California Court didn't, will deprive first Federal
habeas, one Congress didn't intend. That's
fundamentally contrary to the purpose of AEDPA.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you --
MR. STRIS: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- Mr. Stris.
Ms. Chatman, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CATHERINE BAKER CHATMAN
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MS. CHATMAN: Thank you.
Of course there's a Federal interest at stake
here. It's the Federal interest in the Federal Courts
not having to deal with stale habeas claims in Federal
Court.
One thing I'd like to address is the capital-
case presumption, which is now -- excuse me -- 180
days. It's been changed from 90 days. That
presumption is for -- from the filing of the reply
brief to filing an initial petition in California
Court. That is, your first habeas petition. That --
you only get presumed timely for 180 days. Here, we're
talking about noncapital cases going just from --
taking claims, that have already been presented in one
petition, to the next level. So, in those --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, 180 days from what?
MS. CHATMAN: From the filing of the -- the
final due date of the filing of the reply brief --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I mean, you file --
MS. CHATMAN: -- in the direct appeal.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- the reply brief in the
lower court. Maybe the judge will take 4 months to
decide it. What's the relation? I don't understand
that. Or maybe it'll take --
MS. CHATMAN: I --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- 2 days --
MS. CHATMAN: I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- to decide.
MS. CHATMAN: I think they -- I think they
date it from the filing of the reply brief because --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? What would the theory
be? I don't understand that.
MS. CHATMAN: Because they like to see these
claims presented along with the appeal to be -- so that
they can possibly bring them together and decide habeas
claims in light of the record on appeal. So, I think
that's why they date it from filing of the reply
briefs.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, a judge -- you file it.
On day -- what -- you file it on April 1st, and then
the judge decides it in August. Or September. And now
it's only 3 days before the 6-months -- you have to
file your appeal, like, in 3 days. That wouldn't make
sense. And the converse would not --
MS. CHATMAN: Well, you're not -- you're
generally not supposed to be waiting. I mean, you were
talking about claims such as --
JUSTICE BREYER: You can't --
MS. CHATMAN: -- ineffective --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- file an --
MS. CHATMAN: -- assistance --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- appeal before -- oh,
maybe you can in California. You're going to file the
appeal before the lower court decides it?
MS. CHATMAN: Well, if we're talking about
capital cases here, they are -- they are filing their
appeals directly in the California Supreme Court;
similarly, with their habeas petitions.
JUSTICE BREYER: Even -- or even before they
get a lower court decision.
MS. CHATMAN: There would be no lower court
decision.
JUSTICE BREYER: They don't, at all.
MS. CHATMAN: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: In other --
MS. CHATMAN: No, no, no.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- they don't, at all.
MS. CHATMAN: No, they go --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh.
MS. CHATMAN: -- straight to California
Supreme Court. Which brings up one point, which is
that the problem that we're looking at here in deciding
timeliness will not arise in capital cases. We will
not have that problem, because capital cases go
straight to the California Supreme Court. There are
not going to be intervals between the courts to deal
with. So, that simplifies, I think, the problem a
little bit.
The other thing I'd like to address is the
argument that a State Court is saying something with
these summary orders. I strongly disagree with that.
They are absolutely saying nothing. This Court said in
Ylst that the essence of an unexplained order is that
it says nothing. It does not say, "This is a timely
petition."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the ones that
would cite a case that threw out the petition because
it was untimely -- and we were told there were over a
thousand of those every year -- that would be saying
something, wouldn't it?
MS. CHATMAN: That is -- in the California
Supreme Court, you will find that sometimes, that they
will indicate untimeliness by a case citation; hardly
ever in the lower appellate court.
And I would also disagree with the
characterization of delay being a problem going from
the lower appellate court to the California Supreme
Court. We see it at both levels.
And I would also disagree that this shouldn't
be a problem because these Petitioners have no
incentive to delay. That may be the case, that they
don't have an incentive to delay, but they do, in fact,
sleep on their rights, as --
JUSTICE BREYER: How often --
MS. CHATMAN: -- Mr. Chavis did.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you, as the Attorney
General, what period of time after the District Courts
made a decision, and now -- they've now filed their
claim in the Court of Appeals -- how long is it before
you say it's untimely?
MS. CHATMAN: We would -- we would say
anything over 60 days. Yes, Your Honor.
I see my time is up. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms.
Chatman.
The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the case in the
