IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DONALD CURTIS SAMSON,
Petitioner,
: No. 04-9728
CALIFORNIA. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, February 22, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:16 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ROBERT A. LONG, JR., ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
RONALD E. NIVER, ESQ., San Francisco, California; on
behalf of the Respondent.
JONATHAN L. MARCUS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ROBERT A. LONG, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
RONALD E. NIVER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 34
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JONATHAN L. MARCUS, ESQ.
For the United States, as amicus curiae,
Supporting the Respondent 53
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ROBERT A. LONG, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 63
P R O C E E D I N G S
[10:16 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Samson versus California.
Mr. Long.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT A. LONG, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. LONG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The search in this case was not based on
individualized suspicion, and no other adequate
safeguards limited the police officer's discretion to
search Petitioner. For this reason, the search, which
would not be permitted by virtually any other State or
by the Federal Government, was unreasonable.
The Court has reaffirmed many times that the
Fourth Amendment does not permit the individual officer
in the field to exercise unconstrained discretion to
search. The Court has said that the Fourth Amendment
is primarily directed at the evil -- it was primarily
directed at the evil of general warrants and writs of
assistance, and the evil of general warrants and writs
of assistance was that they gave individual officers
blanket authority to search where they pleased and
placed the liberty of every man in the hands of every
--
petty officer.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Long --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Long --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- with respect to
liberty, as it -- it's not disputed, is it, that your
client could have had his parole revoked even though
the search was suspicionless? So, what we're talking about
the difference between revocation of parole, on the one
hand, and a separate criminal offense. Is that right?
MR. LONG: Well, a parolee has conditional
liberty. But, at the time of this search, Mr. Samson
was on parole, there was no suspicion of any wrongdoing
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought that
evidence seized could be introduced, could be a basis
to revoke parole.
MR. LONG: Oh, well, the Court held, in the
Scott case, that the exclusionary rule does not apply
at parole revocation hearings. So, if there is an
unreasonable search of a parolee that violates the
Fourth Amendment, the evidence could not be admitted at
a criminal trial, but it could be admitted at a parole
revocation --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, the -- what the -- the
consequence here is whether --
MR. LONG: I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- he will have his parole
revoked --
MR. LONG: I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- or he will have a
separate criminal offense.
MR. LONG: I understand your question. In
California, Justice Ginsburg, a nonviolent drug
offense, the possession of a small amount of an illegal
substance, is not a basis for revocation of parole. It
is not possible to revoke parole in California for this
offense. So, parole revocation would not have been a
possibility here.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
suppose, can pursue her own line of questioning, but
let me ask you this, because I -- her question suggests
this, to me at least. Suppose the parole officer said,
"Now, look, I'm going to search you. If you don't
consent, then I'm going to revoke your parole."
MR. LONG: Well, this, of course, was a
police officer, not a parole officer.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I --
MR. LONG: But if --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- my question was
a parole officer, and I'll get to police officer next.
MR. LONG: All right. I think if a parole
officer said, "You must consent to this search" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: When you see the --
MR. LONG: -- "this particular search" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- person on the street, et
cetera, et cetera.
MR. LONG: "And, if you don't, I'll revoke
your" -- I mean, the consent is not, in this case,
first. I mean, California has said, the Supreme Court
has said, parole, in the parole search condition, is
imposed as a matter of law. Your hypothetical poses a
question of, could there be knowing and voluntary
consent to a search if the consequence of refusing is
revocation of parole? I would argue, in that
situation, that the consequences of refusal are so dire
that, effectively, the parolee would have no real
choice but to consent. So, it would be, in a sense, a
coerced consent.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why are they dire? I mean,
he's just back in the situation he would have been in,
did he not comply with the conditions of his parole. I
don't see that that's dire. He has a choice. He can
stay in prison and --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- and suffer the reduction
of privacy there, which is much, much greater than
being subjected to -- I mean, he -- he cannot even go
to the toilet in privacy. Or he can go out on parole,
subject to the condition that --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that he --
MR. LONG: I mean --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- he can --
MR. LONG: I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- be searched.
MR. LONG: I have two answers to that,
Justice Scalia. I mean, first, in California, you
finish your prison sentence, and then parole is a
separate period that happens. The California Supreme
Court said, in People v. Guzman and other cases, parole
is not a part of the sentence --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but it's --
MR. LONG: -- in California.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- but it's also clear from
the California statute that it is not a right, that
it's a privilege, that you get the privilege of parole
in exchange -- in exchange for agreeing to the
conditions, one of which is that you can be searched.
MR. LONG: Well, it's -- in California, every
inmate gets parole. It's a matter of law. It's not a
--
privilege -- in Morrissey against Brewer. The Court --
in other cases, the Court rejected the rights privilege
distinction anyway.
JUSTICE SCALIA: California statute says it's
a privilege, doesn't it?
MR. LONG: Yes, in section 3067.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It does.
MR. LONG: But it is -- it is also a --
section 3000 of the California penal code says every
prisoner gets parole. It is imposed on the prisoner as
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even if the --
MR. LONG: -- a matter of law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- prisoner -- oh, I thought
that he can turn it down, and that some prisoners do,
if --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- if they decide that they
don't want to be subjected to searches.
MR. LONG: The California Supreme Court has
held, in People v. Reyes, and in other cases cited in
our brief, that, in California, parole is not a matter
of choice, it is imposed as a matter of law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is -- and you mean people
are put out on the street when -- kicking and screaming
when they say, "No, I want to stay in jail. I don't
want to be" --
MR. LONG: Well, it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- "searched. I would
rather stay in jail"? And --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- they are dragged out --
MR. LONG: That --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- into the street. Is that
what happens?
MR. LONG: That is what the California
Supreme Court has said.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I --
MR. LONG: And what the statutes say is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- I don't think so.
MR. LONG: That -- the statutes say that
parole is a -- is a transitional period, and that every
inmate should undergo a period of parole.
But coming back to your earlier question, the
Court has said that the condition of a parolee is very
different from the condition of a prisoner. The Court
said that in Morrissey against Brewer. And the Court
said, in Griffin, as to probationers, that while the
Fourth Amendment rights of probationers -- and so,
parolees, too, we concede -- are reduced, there are --
the State can go too far. And if the State exceeds --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but --
MR. LONG: -- the permissible limits, it's a
violation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- their condition is
very different, in a broad range of areas. They -- you
give up First Amendment rights. For example, it's
typical to have a condition of parole that you don't
consort with known criminals or gang members. You --
often it says you must refrain from alcohol. Sometimes
they say you can't go near particular places, if they
think that's going to tempt you to return to a life of
crime. Those are all First Amendment rights that are
sacrificed while you're on parole. Why is this any
different?
MR. LONG: Well, there are many rights that
are sacrificed. What the Court has said about the
Fourth Amendment rights is, because parolees have
conditional liberty, they will have a reduced, but not
eliminated, Fourth Amendment protection --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about a drug --
what if you're convicted of a drug offense, you're on
parole, and one of the conditions is, every week you
have to go in for a drug test?
MR. LONG: Well, that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you --
MR. LONG: -- that would be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- do you -- is that
acceptable?
MR. LONG: That would be different in several
respects, Mr. Chief Justice. First of all, there would
not be discretion. You wouldn't have the individual
officer deciding --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it would be a
Fourth Amendment right that you would be giving up --
MR. LONG: Yes. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- that you would
otherwise have if you weren't on parole.
MR. LONG: And I want to be clear, we are not
-- we're arguing there is a broad spectrum of searches
that States can undertake of parolees, and I'm, by no
means, arguing today that all of them, or even most of
them, are unconstitutional. This is a --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What would you say about a
condition that you must -- not a regular drug test --
you just have to submit yourself to a drug test
whenever a police officer asks you to?
MR. LONG: Well, you know, that would be much
narrower, because it would simply be a drug test. I
think it would have the problems of -- the officer
--
would have complete discretion. If it were like the
California --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but it's -- I
mean, the point --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you think it would
valid? That's what I was asking you.
MR. LONG: I think, because that's a much
narrower test, that that could pass muster if -- but I
would think there really ought to be some guidance to
the officer. I think our ultimate submission today is
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, so that a --
MR. LONG: -- this is so --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- so that a burglar could
be searched for burglar tools --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- but not for drugs? And
the drug addict can be searched for drugs, and not
burglar tools?
MR. LONG: If it were -- if it were tied to
the crime that the parolee has committed, you know,
that would give it some limitation. This is a
completely unlimited search, for anything, any crime.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But Justice Stevens's
question highlights the point that you criticize about:
the randomness of it is often a critical element. I
suppose it makes much more sense to say you're subject
to a random drug test than that you have to come in at
a scheduled time, when you -- presumably, you could
refrain from using drugs prior to the test. And, to
some extent, it's the same, even if you're not talking
about a drug test.
MR. LONG: Well, in all --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The search is only
going to be effective if it's not announced or --
MR. LONG: Well, in --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- scheduled.
MR. LONG: -- and in this Court's
suspicionless search cases, you can have a random test
where you draw names at random. There's some other
process that doesn't leave it up to each individual
officer to decide who gets the drug test or which car
to stop to check the driver's license and registration.
What the Court has consistently held is really at the
core of the Fourth Amendment is this notion of: the
individual officer in the field has complete discretion
to decide, "Do I search this person? Do I not? What's
the scope of the search? What do" --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you relying --
MR. LONG: -- "I search for?"
--
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- on the difference
between -- you said "officer in the field." Would this
be okay if it had been his parole officer?
MR. LONG: Well, I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The parole officer was
walking along the street, saw this guy, and said, "I'm
going to search you."
MR. LONG: I think it's a very different set
of circumstances if we have a parole officer. This
Court has said, at least twice, in Griffin and in
Scott, that a parole officer has a different function.
They are not in an adversarial, or a purely
adversarial, relationship. They often think of the
parolee or the probationer as a client. They're trying
to see that the person succeeds. In some sense, the
parole officer fails when the parolee goes back to
prison. The parole -- the parole officer can act on
their entire knowledge and experience with the client,
or the parolee. So, all of that makes a difference.
And the Court has noted that several times.
JUSTICE SCALIA: When he's in prison, is
there any problem about the prison guards intruding
upon his privacy, willy-nilly, whenever they choose?
MR. LONG: The -- as I understand the Court's
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, walking --
MR. LONG: -- holding --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- by his cell, which is
always opened, and checking in on him to see what's --
what he's doing.
MR. LONG: As I understand the Court's
holding in Hudson against Palmer, the Fourth Amendment
does not apply in a prison cell. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, he's better off on
parole than -- well, at least no worse off on parole
than he would be when he was in prison.
MR. LONG: But, Your Honor, that's not the
way this Court has analyzed the Fourth Amendment
issues. It's a different situation. It is conditional
liberty. It's the -- that sort of active grace theory,
or right, privilege, distinction, or greater power
includes the lesser, all those arguments have been
rejected, in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are --
MR. LONG: -- Morrissey against Brewer, and
Gagnon --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What --
MR. LONG: -- against Scarpelli.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- what do you make of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- by me. No, please.
MR. LONG: It's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What do you make of the
pragmatic argument that seems to cut through all of your
objections? The pragmatic argument is both in favor
of complete discretion and of suspicionless search,
that the in terrorem effect of knowing that these
searches can occur at any moment, in fact, discourages
recidivism.
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's your response to
that?
MR. LONG: -- I have a pragmatic argument,
and then I have an argument just based on the Fourth
Amendment. Pragmatically, no other State, as far as we
can tell, and not the Federal Government, authorizes
this kind of search; that is, blanket suspicionless
discretionary searches by police officers.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Apart from --
MR. LONG: So --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Apart from the lack of
popularity of the State's view --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- do we have -- do we have
any empirical evidence that bears on the in terrorem
argument?
MR. LONG: The -- well, the empirical
evidence is that all the other States don't seem to be
having a harder time --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I --
MR. LONG: -- with recidivism.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- I realize that. But,
beyond that, do we have any empirical evidence, one way
or the other?
MR. LONG: Well, the California -- I think
that's a pretty powerful demonstration, but we do have,
beyond that, empirically, California was with all the
other States until the People against Reyes decision.
Now they've moved to suspicionless searches. They seem
to have about the same rate of recidivism --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I take it --
MR. LONG: -- as they --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- the answer is --
MR. LONG: -- did before.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- we don't have any
empirical evidence, one way or the other, apart from
the fact that California stands out in its system. Is
that correct?
MR. LONG: Well, I -- I'm -- think I'm
offering you evidence that counts as empirical in my
mind, but --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I --
MR. LONG: -- apparently it's not --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- I know it, but I've said,
about three times, that I want to get beyond the
peculiar position of California to any other empirical
evidence that cuts for you or against you. And I take
it there really isn't --
MR. LONG: Well, there -- we have a footnote.
There is a brief submitted by a Stanford law
professor, and we have at least a footnote in our
brief. There is some social science research that
suggests that this more intensive supervision is really
not effective, if you look at broad numbers. I mean, I
think you will catch some additional people. I mean,
it happened in this case. But if you step back and
look at the overall effects, it's not -- it's not
particularly helpful --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why, if we're going to catch
some additional people, is that not sufficient? That
is, why is it unreasonable, say, not for law
professors, but business school professors, management
consultants, to say, "You have a lot of prisoners in
California, hundreds of thousands -- I don't know,
maybe more than 100,000 -- and we'll tell the
Legislature that they can cut the terms, save money,
release them early, but we want to have management
checks. And the management checks are, you might be
searched at any time. And we catch a few. And that's
helpful." Now, if the --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- State decides that,
what's unreasonable about it? "They're" --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- "letting the people out
earlier than they otherwise would" --
MR. LONG: Because --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- says the Legislature.
MR. LONG: Because, Justice Breyer, it has to
be a balancing analysis, and --
JUSTICE BREYER: And what's on the other
side? The other side --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is, you'd rather not have
policemen search you, but your alternative is going to
be in jail.
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, the other side is a
search condition that says you have -- you could be
searched at any time, any place, by any police officer
for evidence of any crime, is a breathtakingly broad
invasion of privacy.
JUSTICE BREYER: But, of course, that's how
it happens when he's in prison.
MR. LONG: Well, but he has come out of
prison. The State has seen fit to release him on
parole into society. He has conditional liberty. And
the Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But there is a
breathtakingly high probability that he is committing a
crime. The statistics cited in the Government's brief
say that in an April 2001 report prepared by the
California Criminal Justice Statistics Center, 68
percent of adult parolees are returned to prison -- 68
percent; 55 percent, for a parole violation; and 13
percent for the commission of a new felony offense. I
mean, it seems to me a breathtaking statistic like that
may call for breathtaking --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- measures to try to police
the matter closely.
MR. LONG: It is a very serious problem. We
don't want to minimize it. I mean, it is a fact that
many -- many parolees -- and this is true especially in
California -- end up being returned for technical
violations, like not showing up to meetings with parole
officers. Some of the offenses are not as serious as
others. But it is a very serious problem. We
recognize that. But what the Court has said is that
the gravity of the problem cannot justify any means.
There has to be a balancing of the invasion of privacy
against the State's need to undertake this.
And coming back to my second answer to the
question you asked several minutes ago, Justice Scalia,
I mean, ultimately this search is a -- it's a general
warrant. It's a writ of assistance. It's limited to
parolees, but if the Court is going to stand by what it
has said in Griffin and other cases, that their
parolees and probationers have some modicum of Fourth
Amendment rights -- reduced, we recognize that -- this
is -- this is the core of what the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the --
MR. LONG: -- framers of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- California --
MR. LONG: -- the Fourth Amendment
prohibited.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The California
Supreme Court said that the Fourth Amendment applied to
these searches, but it only protected in a limited way,
along the same lines as we said in Griffin. And the
standard they applied was, it protected against
arbitrary or harassing or capricious searches --
MR. LONG: Yes, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- which seems to go
to your argument, which is centered around the
unbridled discretion of the officer. And the
California Supreme Court is saying it's not unbridled.
MR. LONG: That is their answer to my
argument, and I want to be very clear about "arbitrary,
capricious, and harassing." That's the California
Supreme Court's standard. So, of course, they get to
define it. And they have not defined it the way this
Court perhaps would define "arbitrary." It's not
arbitrary, capricious, or harassing if it has a
permissible law enforcement purpose. So, as long as
the officer says, "Well, I don't have any reason to
think there's evidence of any crime here, but that's
what I'm looking for. Perhaps there's evidence of
crime" --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's --
MR. LONG: -- that's enough.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- fine. But it
turns out he stops the guy every hour of the day, then
he has a pretty strong case that this is for
harassment, and it's not --
MR. LONG: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- for the special
law enforcement --
MR. LONG: Well, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- need that
accompanies releasing parolees.
MR. LONG: And I take it the Fourth Amendment
itself would prohibit that sort of thing. But it --
you couldn't -- you couldn't justify a general warrant
by saying, "Well, yes, the officer can search anybody,
without any suspicion, and he can choose." But it --
you know, the search can't happen too often, or it
can't last too long. That would not be -- and you --
and you -- similarly, it would not be an answer to say,
"Well, as long as he's looking for evidence of crime."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, but your point
was that this is the core of the Fourth Amendment, and
they're taking away all of the protection and leaving
it to the unbridled discretion. And that turns out to
be not the case. Under the law that authorizes the
procedure, the California Supreme Court interpretation
is that the Fourth Amendment provides protection
against harassment or arbitrary and --
MR. LONG: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- capricious
searches.
MR. LONG: -- I mean, my argument is that
what is left of the Fourth Amendment under the
California approach is not the core. It's the far
periphery. There has never been a case -- and we were
able to find over a hundred, and perhaps over 200; it
depends on how you count -- of cases where parolees or
probationers have said, "You know, this search was
arbitrary or capricious or harassing." It is always
rejected, for the same reason it was in this case. The
Court says, "Well" --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Then which way do you
think that cuts? There's --
MR. LONG: It --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- never been a case
of a harassing search of a parolee.
MR. LONG: I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I mean, that's what -
- or 200 cases in the --
MR. LONG: I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- in --
MR. LONG: -- I think it cuts in the
direction that it is an empty, vacuous standard. It's
a standard --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why?
MR. LONG: -- that's always --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why? If it -- if it -- if
it -- it doesn't go to the suspicionless character of
the search, but it does say it has to be reasonable in
time, place, or manner.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And maybe the --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- officers are reasonable
in time, place --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- or manner.
MR. LONG: And -- but it's -- it had -- there
has never been a case in which a court has rejected a
parolee search as unreasonable in time, place, or
manner. And you could --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How many times has it been
challenged --
MR. LONG: As --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- on the --
MR. LONG: -- we said -- we found over a hundred
cases in which it's been challenged in the California
courts. And it --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well --
MR. LONG: I mean, if you think about it, if
the search is, say, at night, the argument is going to
be -- well, if we said we'd not -- "never going to
search you at night," then you would commit crimes at
night. We had a very extreme case in our brief about
body-cavity searches. And they said, "Well, that -- of
course, that" -- you know, the suggestion was, "Of
course, that would be too extreme." But you could see
an argument if parolees and probationers knew that that
was off limits, that -- you know, that would become a -
JUSTICE SCALIA: You say there was a case in
which, without any special reason, they did --
MR. LONG: No. Let --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- a cavity search --
MR. LONG: No, let me be -- I am not aware of
any actual case. We posited that. We said -- you know,
because you don't need to know anything about the parolee,
except he's on parole, and you can search for evidence
of any crime. You don't need any suspicion that -- so, you
could have somebody, a sort of white-collar criminal,
or you'd check someone who's written a bad check. And
if you say, "Well, I think perhaps you're involved in
drugs. Maybe you're one of these balloon-swallowers" -
- you don't need any actual reason to think that's
happening, you can simply say, "I want to investigate
that." And the way -- you have to investigate that by x
rays or something else quite intrusive.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The California Supreme Court
may -- might well hold that it's arbitrary to conduct
such an extreme search as a body-cavity search, or to -
- I don't know --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to decide to search the
person when he's in the men's room or something. I
mean, there are --
MR. LONG: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- there are a lot of
limitations that the California court --
MR. LONG: They might, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- could put on it, within
the context of harassment or --
MR. LONG: But our principal submission,
Justice Scalia -- I mean, if California said, "We have
a terrible problem with crime in California; and,
therefore, we're authorizing every police officer to
search every person anytime, anywhere, for any crime,"
that would be, I would submit, the clearest sort of
Fourth Amendment violation you could imagine. It would
be a general warrant or a writ of assistance. It
couldn't possibly be justified by saying, "Well, if it
gets too extreme, if it gets into body-cavity searches,
we won't allow it." We are talking about parolees,
yes. Their Fourth Amendment rights are reduced, yes.
We recognize that. But saying that this sort of
absolutely unguided discretion --
JUSTICE BREYER: But the reason ---
MR. LONG: -- there's no sort of --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- the reason that people, I
think, are saying that is because they have a lot of
prisoners, they're trying to create a category of
people who don't have to stay in prison, where they
have no rights. And the real question is, can
California, in trying to create this interim category,
reduce the Fourth Amendment right in the way you
describe?
MR. LONG: They --
JUSTICE BREYER: Of course they can't do it,
but the justification is not that there is something
bad about this particular individual or he's in some
kind of limbo. The reason is that there's a policy
tending towards release, which California has decided
they want to introduce this as a condition. Now --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and so, what -- and the
question is, what's unreasonable about that?
MR. LONG: Well, what's unreasonable about it
is that it goes so far in the direction of eliminating
the Fourth Amendment rights of people who are not
prisoners -- they are -- they have conditional liberty
-- that it is simply not consistent with the Fourth
Amendment. And on the empirical side, California is an
outlier. All the other States --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I -- may I ask you --
MR. LONG: -- and the Federal Government --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- this question? Part of
your appeal of your case is, you talk about the
corporate offender or tax dodger, something like that.
It seems quite unreasonable, I agree with you. But
what if you defined the class much more narrowly and
limit it to people who have been convicted of violent
crimes of a very serious nature and so forth, and said,
as to those, they can have a totally suspicionless
search? Would that --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- be permissible?
MR. LONG: -- I -- one of the things we
wanted to make -- I think there are many things that
States can do. They could certainly --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But I wonder whether --
MR. LONG: -- there's the possibility of --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- whether you think they
could do that.
MR. LONG: There's the possibility of
individual determinations, based on the individual
circumstances. If you went --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, what I'm --
MR. LONG: -- category by --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I wanted to see if there is a
way that the class could be defined narrowly, because I
want to ask the other side if they would allow the
search for any ex-felon, for example. You could divide
it in a way that seemed obviously too broad. But is --
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- there a narrower class -
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- that you think would be
acceptable?
MR. LONG: I think this could be much
narrower. And, in my view, it would become a much
closer constitutional question if it were limited to
certain crimes where the legislature or the State made
a finding that there's a particular need to have --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Say you were a --
--
MR. LONG: -- suspicionless --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- terrorist, for example.
MR. LONG: And --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's just limited to
terrorists, convicted terrorists.
MR. LONG: Yes, perhaps convicted terrorists.
You know, that -- and it -- that's very different from
what we have here, because --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about drug offenders,
given the high rate of recidivism?
MR. LONG: Well, I -- you know, we -- I think
you would have to see the facts of that case, but if
they made a finding that, "Because of the nature of
drug offenses, we need suspicionless searches rather
than simply reasonable suspicion, and we need police
officers, not parole officers" -- and there could be
other regulations. The Federal regulations, we think,
are a model, really. They have lots of limitations on
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Long, is it -- is it
fair to compare California to other States? The
assumption would have to be that other States grant
parole as liberally as California does. Maybe
California has made the decision, "We have too many
people in prison. We're going to let a lot of them
--
out, but we're going to keep them on a very tight
leash." Why shouldn't it be able to do that? To
have tighter controls, but let out many more people on
parole, which is -- which is exactly what I think
they're doing.
MR. LONG: Well, and I -- I think they can
have tighter controls, Your Honor. They can -- they
can have -- they could have -- they could make this a
special condition of parole --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But my only --
MR. LONG: -- rather than a general condition
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- point is --
MR. LONG: -- of parole.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the fact that other
States aren't as tight doesn't prove anything, because
other States --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- may not be --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- be trying to do the same
thing --
MR. LONG: I mean --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to empty their prisons --
MR. LONG: This Court has said, generally,
that what the Court has found to be reasonable for one
State is reasonable for all. And when a practice is
not well established -- and here, it's far from well
established; California's virtually unique -- the Court
has taken that into account for --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose you were in a
halfway house, and the State says, "We're creating a
status. One is, you're a prisoner. Another is, you're
a halfway house. Another is, on your -- parole. But
we want to subject you to suspicionless searches at --
in all three stages -- prison, halfway house, parole."
Could they do it for the halfway house?
MR. LONG: Well, they might -- halfway
houses, as I understand it, Justice Ginsburg, are
largely now a thing of the past. But if the idea is
you would actually be in a custody situation at night,
perhaps in lockdown, then perhaps Hudson against Palmer
would come into play --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This person goes --
MR. LONG: -- which --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- out to work, comes back
at the end of the day, and is checked in.
MR. LONG: And so, your hypothetical is,
could there be suspicionless searches by --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, while the --
MR. LONG: -- police officers --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- while the --
MR. LONG: -- at work?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The person who is in this
semi-custody state, he's going to work, and, while he's
at his workplace, the police officer shows up and says,
"I'm going to pat you down, and then I'm going to" --
MR. LONG: It's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- "see if you have
drugs."
MR. LONG: It's a -- it's a harder case.
Again, our bottom line is, there would need to be some
limitations on that individual officer's discretion.
That's the core of the Fourth Amendment.
If there are no further questions, I'd like
to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Long.
Mr. Niver, we'll hear now from you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RONALD E. NIVER
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. NIVER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it --
may it please the Court:
Alarmed by the State rate of recidivism and
revocation of the more than 100,000 parolees,
California enacted a statute which authorized the
search of a parolee based solely on his status as a
parolee. We submit that such a search is reasonable
under the Fourth Amendment.
As this Court held recently in United States
versus Knights, to determine the validity of the search
we balance the State's need to search against the
privacy interest affected. Here, the need is
overwhelming, and the privacy interest is dramatically
reduced.
Turning first to Petitioner's expectation of
privacy, it is greatly diminished. Even if it exists,
it is far less than that enjoyed by the average law-
abiding citizen. No one outside the confines of a
prison has a lesser expectation of privacy than a
parolee.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why is that? Doesn't
that kind of beg the question? I mean, if we say he's
got the normal Fourth Amendment rights, his -- I mean,
the expectation-of-privacy analysis seems to me to be
totally circular.
MR. NIVER: That's what the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You say he doesn't
have an expectation of privacy, so it's not protected.
Well, if we say he does have a -- if we say it is
protected, then he does have an expectation of privacy.
MR. NIVER: Well, this Court spoke to that in
Knights and said, unanimously that the -- in Knights,
it was a probation condition, but I think that it --
obviously, the same analysis applies here -- that the
imposition or acceptance of a -- of a search condition
by a parolee or a probationer results in the severely
diminished expectation of privacy enjoyed by the
parolee or probationer. And this Court said that
unanimously in Knights.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, Knights
involved a situation where reasonable suspicion was
required, so it addressed the problem that Mr. Long has
of unbridled discretion. You still had to have an
articulable reasonable suspicion with respect to the
individual.
MR. NIVER: That is true, Your Honor, but the
threshold question was whether he had an expectation of
privacy at all, or to the -- the extent of that
expectation of privacy. And the Court, in Knights,
before it discussed the balance, had to identify the
factors in the balance. In terms of the probationer's
interest in that case, by virtue of the search
condition, this Court said that his interest in -- his
expectation of privacy was severely diminished, and
left open specific --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why -- and why was
his expectation of privacy severely diminished?
MR. NIVER: Because of the parole's -- excuse
me -- the probation search that was imposed upon him by
virtue of the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Because of the very
practice that's being challenged here today, right?
MR. NIVER: Well, yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Because he saw
something -- you -- he signed something that said,
"You're subject to searches." Well, that's what is at
issue. It seems to me that it's -- I guess I've said
it before, he's -- it's begging the question to say,
"You can do this, because he has a diminished
expectation of privacy." How far do you push this?
Can you have parolees come in and take a lie-detector
test every week? Do they have -- do they have
diminished expectation with respect to their Fifth
Amendment rights?
MR. NIVER: With regard to the Fifth
Amendment rights, if they are not in custody, then --
or even if they are -- I don't think that that would
necessarily -- the -- any expectation of privacy would
preclude the imposition of a lie-detector test, no.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Was that a yes, you
can have them --
MR. NIVER: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You can.
MR. NIVER: Yes. But in this case, the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that right? I mean, even
in prison, I -- what -- I'm not sure you could even do
that if they were still in prison. Can you subject
people in prison --
MR. NIVER: Well, of course, that would not
be a Fourth Amendment claim.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. No, I --
MR. NIVER: It would be a different --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Chief Justice was trying
to get out of the Fourth Amendment into the Fifth.
MR. NIVER: That failing -- well, in terms of
the lack of a precedent from this Court, you know, at
this point we can only speculate, but it seems to me
that if a person can be required to submit to a drug
test by virtue of the status as a parolee or
probationer, I don't think that it is an extravagant
step to say that they could be required to submit to an
--
interview.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Would you say the same
thing if the offense he had committed was tax evasion
or price-fixing or speeding? Would the -- would a
person on parole for any one of those offenses have --
be subject to the same risk of a suspicionless search?
And would it be justified?
MR. NIVER: Suspicionless search?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well --
MR. NIVER: Where we're back to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- applying this statute to
MR. NIVER: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- a price-fixer, tax-
evader, speeder. Do you think it's justified?
MR. NIVER: If he's on parole, Your Honor, if
he's -- look, this applies to parolees in California
who have been convicted of felonies, served time in
prison, and have been --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And if it's to be --
MR. NIVER: -- released on parole.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- applied to the tax
offender and so forth, how about just applying it to
all ex-felons? Would that be permissible?
MR. NIVER: On parole, or not on --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, just the very fact that
there's -- they're an ex-felon. And let the person
know, at the time of his discharge from prison, that
this is one of the things that the State is going to
exact from you as a punishment for your crime.
MR. NIVER: If the person is on parole, the
answer --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I'm saying --
MR. NIVER: Oh --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- he's not on parole.
MR. NIVER: -- he's no longer on parole?
Than the entire balance changes. The reduction of the
expectation of privacy --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But I'm hypothesizing a
case in which the law will destroy the expectation of
privacy, because it will provide that all ex-felons are
subject to search. So, they would know, the same as a
parolee now knows, he's subject to search. Would that
be valid?
MR. NIVER: My answer to that is, it would
not be valid, Your Honor, because a person, having
served his time on parole, the State's overwhelming
interest in supervision has ended. The State has
determined that that person, having successfully
completed his period of parole --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But -- so you don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Most --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- rely on --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Most States --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- the fact that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- don't let felons vote. I
mean, that's a punishment that they impose after
they're out of prison.
MR. NIVER: Yes, but this is not -- yes, Your
Honor, but this is really not about punishment, this is
about supervision. And if a parolee has successfully
completed this parole, has been discharged from parole,
then the balance --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But then we're not relying
on the elimination of the expectation of privacy,
because, under my hypothetical statute, the ex-felon
would know he's subject to it. So, it has to be
something other than the absence of an expectation of
privacy. Is that correct?
MR. NIVER: Not -- a person who is no longer
on parole, there is no longer the overwhelming State
interest in supervision. The balance changes. Our
position would be that that would not be a permissible
search.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me that the
principal difference, Mr. Niver, is that when he's on
parole, it's in lieu of being in jail. If that's not
the difference, you don't persuade me. He has
voluntarily accepted the parole in exchange for his
getting out of jail. And he'd be in worse condition if
he were in jail. That's what, seems to me, makes the
difference.
MR. NIVER: Well, that's -- I think that's
exactly right, Your Honor. The ex-parolee, no longer
on parole, is no longer in custody of the -- of the
California Department of Corrections. There is no
longer an overwhelming need to supervise the person,
who, having successfully completed parole, is
presumptively not the threat to society that he was
that he -- when he was a parolee. The balance changes,
and such a condition -- that is to say a suspicionless
search of an ex-parolee, I think would offend the
Fourth Amendment.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Niver --
JUSTICE BREYER: But what do you achieve by
this system that you have that you couldn't achieve by
a system that more carefully worked out the rules and
conditions of a random search? I mean, rules, so that
you avoid the totally discretionary element. And if
you want to have management consultants, as I was
imagining, have 'em. They're not just going to tell
you, "Go and ask anybody to search anytime he wants."
They'll have a system worked out. So, why not at least
require you to think it through that much? And,
otherwise, it is unreasonable.
MR. NIVER: Well, we have disputed
Petitioner's position that this is a search, although
suspicionless, that it is -- that discretion is not
circumscribed is our position. And it is, because --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, are there manuals --
are there any -- here is the cop on the beat.
MR. NIVER: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: He sees someone that he
knows is a parolee. Is there any instruction that he's
been given so that his discretion can be guided instead
of rudderless? In practice in California, are all --
MR. NIVER: In -- I'm sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. What is the
practice?
MR. NIVER: In practice, the -- a search -- a
parole search may not be arbitrary, capricious, or
conducted solely for the purpose of harassing --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm asking you about what
instruction, what training, if you know, are officers
given? Or are they given no training, just the law
that says, "You can search any parolee"?
MR. NIVER: No, they are not told that they
may search any parolee, Your Honor. Rather, they are
told that the search must be to rehabilitate, reform,
or have some other law enforcement purpose. And they -
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. The officer says,
"I'm searching to see whether the person has any
evidence of crime on him." For example, whether he has
any drugs on him. Law enforcement purpose:
supervisory, I suppose. They want to know whether
their -- whether their parolees are committing
offenses. And yet, that reason would apply to everyone
virtually all the time. So, it doesn't seem to be a
limitation at all. What -- am I -- am I missing
something?
MR. NIVER: It does apply -- it is a
limitation. It is not a limitation that would protect
the expectation of privacy of a nonparole --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, how does the
limitation work? The guy is on 1st Street, and an
officer says, you know, "I recognize this person is a
parolee, and I have a law enforcement objective. Is
the person committing a crime? Is the -- is the person
a recidivist? Is the person violating parole?" So, he
searches him. The person gets to 2nd Street, another
officer does the same thing. Three hours later, a
third officer does the same thing. In each case, it
seems to me, their justification would not fall afoul
of the arbitrary, capricious, or harassment standard.
It's not coordinated. They have a -- both a parole
and a law enforcement objective. Why is there any
limitation, then, on the right to search?
MR. NIVER: If these are, as I understand
Your Honor's hypothetical, three independent searches -
JUSTICE SOUTER: Uh-huh.
MR. NIVER: -- to the extent that that could
happen, and I suppose it could, the -- again, the
limitation is it be, as Your Honor states, for a
valid law enforcement purpose, and it would require --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. No, but let's get
behind the rhetoric. Is there any reason my
hypothetical could not, in fact, turn out to be true?
MR. NIVER: There is no --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Apart from the unlikelihood
of all those police officers out there. But, leaving
that aside, is there -- is there any reason, in the
standard, that my hypothetical could not be true?
MR. NIVER: Well, Your Honor, no, there is no
reason, but it would -- it requires more than testimony
by the officers. If the officers at -- each testified
that they conducted the search, they're -- also
requires a finding of fact by the trial court that the
searches were, in fact, for a valid law enforcement
purpose.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. I mean, let's assume
the police are telling the truth, and the judge says,
"Sure." So, there is no limitation. And it sounds to
me, then, as though about the only limitation that
would be enforceable would be the limitation against
harassment. If one officer did it every 15 minutes to
the same person, or if there were a departmental
systematic policy saying, you know, "Get so-and-so,"
that I can understand as being a limitation. But I
don't see any other limit.
MR. NIVER: Well, the limitation is, as Your
Honor states, if it's a -- for a valid law enforcement
purpose or to promote rehabilitation or --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I realize --
MR. NIVER: -- recommend --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- but do you --
MR. NIVER: But --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- do you agree that there
is not any practical limitation, other than the
harassment limitation?
MR. NIVER: I -- well, that harassment
limitation is sufficient to protect the residuum of an
expectation --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, maybe --
MR. NIVER: -- of --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- maybe it is. But what's
the answer to my question? Is that, in practical
terms, the only limitation?
MR. NIVER: It is a -- but it -- yes, Your
Honor, that is the protection.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you said that
maybe cavity searches would not -- would not be allowed
without some special reason for them. And that
wouldn't necessarily be harassment.
MR. NIVER: I think it depends on the
circumstances of the search.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes --
MR. NIVER: There's an --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean --
MR. NIVER: -- overarching principle here,
under the Fourth Amendment, that the search be
reasonable, in terms of manner and scope.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. NIVER: That applies equally to a
suspicionless search as it would to a search based on
individual suspicion. To that extent, it's really not
an issue that arises from the fact that this is
suspicionless.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would be arbitrary
and capricious? You told us harassing would be the
repeated searches by the same officer.
MR. NIVER: Or an -- or a needlessly intrusive
search, as has been just described, or --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, let's assume -- let's
assume that the cavity search is demanded at the bus
station, and the officer says, "We know that drugs get
transported by people who ingest them in the balloons,
and they get on buses and they travel back and forth
from city A to city B." Any reason that that would run
afoul of arbitrary and capricious?
MR. NIVER: Depends on the circumstances of
the search. Again, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOUTER: All I'm telling you is, he's
at a bus station. The facts are that a lot of people
who travel on buses are drug couriers. This person is
a parolee. Would that run afoul of the -- of any
arbitrary and capricious limitation?
MR. NIVER: It would, for example, if it were
done in public view. If the officer didn't, then --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, sure, but the officer
says, "All right. I'm taking you down to the station
for a cavity search."
MR. NIVER: Again, the office -- if the
officer did it under those circumstances, it's for the
finder of fact to decide whether it was done for a
legitimate purpose or --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, you're -- I'm asking
you to be the finder of fact for me. This is the
officer's explanation. This is the factual -- set of
factual premises on which he acts. Has he violated the
arbitrary and capricious limitation?
MR. NIVER: If, in fact, it was for the
purpose that you state, a legitimate law enforcement
purpose, and he has been removed from public view, and
it's reasonable, in terms of manner and intensity, then
it would be permissible.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have one --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, suppose you couldn't -
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have one --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you couldn't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- conduct cavity searches
without some special reason, even in prison. Wouldn't
that be -- isn't there some remnant of a fourth-
amendment right in prison that you cannot subject, you
know, the whole cellblock to cavity searches?
MR. NIVER: That would depend, Your Honor, on
the prison, the prison regs, the State. I can't answer
that question --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I --
MR. NIVER: -- in --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- I thought the assumption
of your answer to my question a moment ago was that
there was no such limitation, so far as California is
concerned.
MR. NIVER: No, there is a limitation, in
terms of manner and scope.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, sure. But we -- the
manner, in this case, is, they take him down to the
station, so that they're not going through this in the
middle of a crowded bus terminal. But the point of the
question was, any parolee at a bus terminal could be
subjected to this demand for search, and I thought your
answer was, yes, he could be. And now, in response to
Justice Scalia's question, you're saying, "Well, there
may be some limitation." So, which is it?
MR. NIVER: That if the search is a -- for a
valid law enforcement purpose, and it is reasonable in
scope and manner, then it is a permissible parolee
search, in California.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does it depend -- I
mean, what if he's on parole for transporting drugs in
balloons from bus stations? Does that make a
difference? -- as opposed to, he's on parole for tax
fraud.
MR. NIVER: It certainly might, Your Honor.
And, again, that would be -- that -- an additional bit
of evidence to present -- to be presented to the
suppression court to determine whether the scope of the
search was reasonable.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But all this is on a case
-- would be on a case-by-case basis. There are no
going-in guides for the officer on the street.
MR. NIVER: It's necessarily determined on
the -- any search has to be decided -- the
reasonableness of any search has to be decided on a
case-by-case basis.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do we --
JUSTICE BREYER: But the reasonableness here
would be unreasonable, unless there are some checks.
We're talking about suspicionless searches. And you
could have checks. But what about saying -- why is it
reasonable to do it without any rule-based controls on
the behavior of the police? That's the question.
MR. NIVER: Okay. And the answer is, in
terms of the competing interests, the lowered
expectations --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. But what interest
does it serve not to have some rules, manuals,
regulations that help make sure it really is random, or
help make sure it isn't harassing, or help make sure
that it's serving the very ends that you hope to serve
with the suspicionless searches?
MR. NIVER: If a State wishes to adopt such
rules, those would -- may comply with the Fourth
Amendment. The question is not, what could be done?
The question is, What was done? The question is
whether California's rule, which permits parolee
searches that -- with the -- absolute prohibition of
arbitrary, capricious, and harassing suits, and which
must be conducted under the Fourth Amendment, in terms
-- reasonable, in terms of time, place, manner, and
scope -- the question is whether that system, the
California scheme, is constitutional under the Fourth
Amendment. And here, the system was designed to
address an overwhelming problem that the Court, this
Court, has well defined. The -- over 100,000 parolees
are on the street at any given time. Almost 90,000 of
them will be revoked in any given period. They -- the
California parolees require intense supervision. The
statute, 3067, was enacted to permit that kind of
intense supervision. And the protection afforded to
the parolee, in terms of a requirement of a proper
purpose --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Niver.
Mr. Marcus.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JONATHAN L. MARCUS
FOR THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF RESPONDENT
MR. MARCUS: Thank you. Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Concerned about the threat that parolees pose
to public safety, the California Legislature, in 1996,
authorized both police and parole officers to search
them without individualized suspicion. Whether
evaluated under the special-needs doctrine applied in
Griffin, or the totality-of-the-circumstances approach
applied in Knights, the search of Petitioner in this
case, pursuant to his search condition, was reasonable
under the Fourth Amendment.
JUSTICE ALITO: Do we have --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But not the consent --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- to decide --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- not the consent
approach, I take it. I didn't get an opportunity to
ask the counsel who argued just previously. Seemed to
me that he argued consent when he answered Justice
Stevens's question about the tax-evader. But he argued
the overwhelming practical needs when he argued the
rest of the case. And I thought I saw some tension in
the argument there. And I take it the Government does
not embrace the consent argument?
MR. MARCUS: No, we do embrace it. We -- but
we briefed --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you --
MR. MARCUS: -- the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- just --
MR. MARCUS: It --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- put it in number --
MR. MARCUS: We --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- you put it --
MR. MARCUS: We --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- in number three?
MR. MARCUS: Right. It --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In --
MR. MARCUS: -- well, primarily -- for a
couple of reasons. First, Your Honor, the California
Supreme Court has not had a chance to interpret
67(a), you know, after the Reyes decision. They
weren't interpreting it there. And so, they haven't
had a chance to revisit their ruling that, as a matter
of State law, it's not -- there's no consent when it
comes to a parolee. And that's -- so, we thought maybe
that would be a reason this Court, prudentially,
wouldn't want to reach that issue.
And, secondly, the -- while the joint
appendix contains a portion of the agreement that the
Petitioner signed, it doesn't contain the whole content
of the agreement. The appellate record doesn't contain
the whole content of the agreement. So, we didn't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But in your view, if the
consent was straightforward in the documents, would
that be the strongest argument or the weakest argument?
MR. MARCUS: Well, I think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, I take you'll win
on any --
MR. MARCUS: We --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- argument --
MR. MARCUS: Right, we think all --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- you can take.
MR. MARCUS: -- we think all three arguments
are strong. I don't think -- one isn't necessarily
stronger than the other. And -- but -- and this Court
-- but if the Court -- I mean, the Court certainly, at
a minimum, can look at the statutes under California
law, and can certainly conclude from the statutes that
if a -- if some -- if an inmate doesn't sign the
papers, he stays in prison until his sentence basically
terminates. And then -- and then, at that point, when
he's released, this -- another provision, section
60.5, kicks in, and his parole -- his parole is
revoked. And he eventually will -- he ultimately will
serve his whole term of parole in prison, so that the
Court can see by the statutes that it is, effectively,
a choice, statutorily, that he -- someone who does not
want to be on parole does not have -- does not have to
sign the condition, and will never go on parole.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Long seemed to have --
tell us something different about that. It's -- they
had -- they must go out. He seemed to say they didn't
have the choice of staying in.
MR. MARCUS: Well, I think it's fairly clear,
Your Honor, under -- if you look at the appendix to the
Petitioner's brief, if you -- if you look at a
combination of section 3067(b), and then -- which --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think he said he was
unaware of anybody who was dragged out kicking and
screaming.
MR. MARCUS: Right. And then if you look at
67(b), and then you also look at -- 3067(a) and (b),
and then you look at section 3060.5, which provides for
revocation if the -- if the inmate is -- or the parolee
is unwilling to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it really --
MR. MARCUS: -- sign the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- it really isn't.
MR. MARCUS: -- agreement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It's -- this is not like
you sign an agreement and you're -- you can do it or
you can not do it. I mean, this is a real Hobson's
choice, isn't it?
MR. MARCUS: Well, you know, again, if you
think that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You can't --
MR. MARCUS: -- there --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- negotiate, "I don't" --
MR. MARCUS: There --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- "want this part."
MR. MARCUS: There undoubtedly are adverse
consequences to not signing the agreement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could you --
MR. MARCUS: But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- waive your --
could you waive --
MR. MARCUS: But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- your Eighth
Amendment rights? You know, if your parole's revoked,
you're going to go back into a very cruel and unusual
prison, not the one you left.
MR. MARCUS: Well, I mean, I think -- I think
the test would be whether it's -- whether it's
reasonably the consent -- what they're asking you to
agree to is reasonably related to the purposes of
punishment. And, in this case, the -- you know, the
supervision of the parolee, rehabilitation, protection
of public safety. And so, we think the consent
argument works very well here.
But, if I could, I'd like to also address our
arguments under the totality of the circumstances and
special needs. Faced with a serious recidivism
problem, California has made the reasonable judgment
that subjecting parolees to suspicionless searches is
necessary to protect public safety and to promote
rehabilitation.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if it's the case --
MR. MARCUS: But --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- that this program would
allow some searches that are -- that violate the Fourth
Amendment, but that this particular search would not?
How closely can we focus just on what happened here, or
do we have to consider all the -- all the types of
searches and the circumstances of searches that the
California program might permit?
MR. MARCUS: Well, I -- no, I mean, I think
typically this Court applies a very, sort of, narrowly
tailored approach to Fourth Amendment questions, and
focuses narrowly on the context in which the search was
conducted. In this case, for example, you wouldn't --
you wouldn't have to reach the question of whether a
search of a home was constitutional. This -- I mean,
the question here is whether a search of the Petitioner
on a public street was constitutional. And the Court
does typically limit its Fourth Amendment cases to the
facts presented.
So -- but, at the same time, in analyzing
that, I think you do have to consider what the Fourth
Amendment standard is. And we believe the Fourth
Amendment does impose -- the Fourth Amendment itself
imposes restrictions on the discretion of police
officers and parole officers that are meaningful, that
-- as the Reyes Court said, there are restrictions on
the timing, the frequency, the duration, and the
oppressiveness of the search. So, police officers and
parole officers are on notice that courts will review
suspicionless searches very carefully. They're on
notice that there are limits to what they can do. And
they're --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But following --
MR. MARCUS: -- on notice that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- up on Justice --
MR. MARCUS: -- if a search is --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- Alito's thought,
supposing there were no restrictions whatsoever, but
this particular search didn't seem very offensive.
Would you still defend it?
MR. MARCUS: If there were no -- no, we --
no, we think there are -- the Fourth Amendment imposes
restrictions -- time, place, and manner restrictions --
on the suspicionless searches.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No.
MR. MARCUS: And so, that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He's asking you, I think,
Justice Alito's question, "Do we have to get into
that?" So long as this one's okay, why do -- why do we
have to get into whether there might be some other ones
that aren't okay?
MR. MARCUS: I -- that's correct. I don't --
I mean, I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And it --
MR. MARCUS: -- I think you just --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- it was assumed
California --
MR. MARCUS: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- didn't say if they had
protection against harassment and so forth. Suppose
they just said, "Cart blanche, you can search any
parolee at any time, any place." And then you'd ask
whether this search was reasonable.
MR. MARCUS: Right. And I think, in determining
that, you would -- in determining it and looking at the
facts of this case, you would -- you would apply a Fourth
Amendment standard to determine whether this search was
objectively reasonable. And you would look at factors
like the time, place, frequency, and manner to
determine whether a search was, in fact, reasonable --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So, it would uphold this.
MR. MARCUS: -- and objective --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There's --
MR. MARCUS: -- objective --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- no matter now
unreasonable the California statute might be in other
applications.
MR. MARCUS: That's correct. And it's to see
whether it's objective -- whether the search in this
case was objectively related to the purposes of
supervision, to protect public safety, and to promote
rehabilitation. That, we think, is the test under the
Fourth Amendment. And while Petitioner points out that
there are a hundred cases out there where the standard,
you know, hasn't been used to throw out a search, at
the same time, he hasn't pointed to any cases where a
prosecution has been based on an abusive search that
this standard has been too toothless to throw out. And
we think that's significant, given that this type of
condition has been in place for over 20 years for
probationers, since the Bravo decision in 1987. And
the parole condition has been in place since 1996, when
the Legislature authorized this and made a considered
decision to switch from a reasonable-suspicion standard
to a suspicionless standard for parolees.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The Government -- is the
Government of the United States somewhat behind the
State of California? It's not efficient in -- as
efficient as California in supervising its parolees?
Because you don't have this rule.
MR. MARCUS: We don't have this program.
There are -- I mean, District Courts have the authority
to impose a suspicionless search condition. And some
have. I think the important thing to keep in mind here
is that this is a -- the Court has traditionally given
a lot of deference to States in dealing with convicted
felons in their criminal justice system, in making
sentencing determinations, reasonable sentencing
determinations, as this Court emphasized in the Ewing
decision. And so, California clearly has a big problem
on their hands. The recidivism rates are demonstrated,
they're in the record. The -- California was
responding to those high recidivism rates. They were
also responding to some high-profile crimes involving
parolees. And the -- and, on top of that, we do have a
brief that's submitted by 21 States who say that they
do need this authority to effectively supervise
parolees.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Has --
MR. MARCUS: But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the recidivism rate
gone down in the years since the Reyes decision, since
this is suspicionless search, as opposed to reasonable
suspicion?
MR. MARCUS: Well, I -- I mean, I'm not sure
if the studies have been -- statistics have been, sort
of, documented up to this -- to this date, but I think
it's fair to say that it would be difficult to draw
conclusions from those statistics, because, of course,
this gives -- this provision gives the California
parole and police officers more authority to conduct
searches; and so, there's -- to the extent it's
increasing the detection of crime, and so more people
are actually being, you know, put back in prison on a
parole violation or a criminal violation, it wouldn't
necessarily mean that it's -- this isn't, you know,
being successful in reducing recidivism, because
there's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Do --
MR. MARCUS: -- I mean, there's that side to
it, too.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Even apart from the -- what
-- the lack of evidence for any change since the Reyes
decision, do we have any empirical evidence, perhaps
involving a control group, about the likelihood of the
-- this liberal search policy in reducing recidivism?
MR. MARCUS: May I answer the question, Your
Honor?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
MR. MARCUS: I think, you know, traditionally
this Court has been very deferential to State decisions
on -- you know, on efficacy, on whether a particular
program is going to be efficacious -- I mean, cases
like Martinez-Fuerte and the Sitz decision involving
checkpoints for drunk driving -- in a court. Even
with, you know, very strong, you know, low efficacy
rates -- in, you know, a program that's showing very
low efficacy rates, the Court said that these are
judgment that -- judgments that the States need to
make, and they ought to be given a lot of deference,
even if, you know, their -- the numbers, you
know, of -- don't show, by clear and convincing proof,
that the problem isn't being ameliorated.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Marcus.
Mr. Long, you have 2 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT A. LONG, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. LONG: In answer to Justice Alito's
question, this search is unconstitutional, because the
officer was completely at liberty -- he had complete
discretion to decide whether to search. And it would
not be acceptable if California said, "You can search
anybody on the street," if the answer was, "Well, it
wasn't a particularly invasive search." Granted,
parolees have far less Fourth Amendment rights than
others, but this is so much the core of the Fourth
Amendment. This is what the framers wrote the Fourth
Amendment to stop, these general warrants and writs of
assistance. One --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we --
MR. LONG: -- consent --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- we normally don't look
into the mind of the officer to decide whether his
action was okay or not.
MR. LONG: Well, and we're not asking you to
look into the mind of the officer. It's --
California's system, it's quite clear -- they admitted
it here -- leaves it up to -- the officer can have any
reason for doing the search. It's arbitrary, in the
sense this Court would use, but not California.
On consent, very quickly, footnote 16 of our
reply brief, the California Supreme Court has said
repeatedly that -- including very recently, since this
section 3067 -- that parole is not a matter of consent;
it is imposed on you. This is a question of State law.
Perhaps this Court would read the State law
differently. But, as the Court said in Griffin, the
State Supreme Court is the last word on the questions
of State law.
As to abuses, there are a number. One that
I'll just mention, the California Supreme Court has
held that it's perfectly okay -- if the officer knows
somebody in the house is on parole or probation, they
can use that as a lever to go in and search to try to
find evidence about somebody else who's in the house.
That is permissible under the California standard.
But the bottom line here is that this type of
search regime is at the core of the prohibition of the
Fourth Amendment. It's what the framers wrote the
Fourth Amendment to prohibit. So, if parolees have any
Fourth Amendment rights, other than, you know, an
essentially useless arbitrary-and-capricious standard
that's never going to work, the Fourth Amendment has to
prohibit this search. There are many other things the
States can do. They have many options. This is at the
endpoint on the spectrum.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Long.
The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 11:18 a.m., the case in the
