IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
BELL ATLANTIC :
CORPORATION, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 05-1126
WILLIAM TWOMBLY, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 27, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for
oral argument before the Supreme Court of the United
States at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MICHAEL KELLOGG, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
THOMAS O. BARNETT, ESQ., Assistant Attorney General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; as
amicus curiae in support of the Petitioners.
J. DOUGLAS RICHARDS, ESQ., New York, N.Y.; on behalf
of the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MICHAEL KELLOGG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
THOMAS O. BARNETT, ESQ.
As amicus curiae in support of the
Petitioners 17
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
J. DOUGLAS RICHARDS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL KELLOGG, ESQ.
On behalf of Petitioners 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear
argument first today in Bell Atlantic Corporation vs.
Twombly. Mr. Kellogg.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL KELLOGG
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MR. KELLOGG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
I think the most important point that I
can make today is that this is a case about the
substantive requirements of antitrust law, and just
as in Dura and in Blue Chip Stamps, the Court
articulated the substantive requirements for pleading
a claim under the securities law, and just as in
Anza, it did so under RICO, so too in Associated
General Contractors, in Trinko. And in the instant
case, the Court is faced with the question of what a
plaintiff needs to plead in order to state a claim
and show an entitlement to relief under the antitrust
laws.
In that regard, I'd like to direct the
Court's attention to paragraph 51 of the plaintiff's
complaint in this case, which is at page 27 of the
joint appendix, and which summarizes the grounds for
plaintiffs' allegation that there is a contract
combination or conspiracy in restraint of trade. The
complaint states, and I quote, "in the absence of any
meaningful competition among the defendants," and,
quote, in light of the parallel course of conduct
that each engaged in to prevent competition, the
plaintiffs -- the defendants conspired.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, but isn't the next
sentence, the substance of the sentence is
"plaintiffs allege upon information and belief that
defendants have entered into a contract combination
or conspiracy to prevent competitive entry in their
respective telephone and/or high speed interstate
markets, and agreed not to compete with one another
and otherwise allocated customers and markets to one
another." Now, does that state a violation of the
Sherman Act?
MR. KELLOGG: It does not, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It does not?
MR. KELLOGG: It does not state a claim.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I mean, you could leave
out everything before plaintiff, the part you quoted,
that's not part of the declaration in the sentence.
But the sentence itself alleges a garden variety of
the violation of the Sherman Act, doesn't it?
MR. KELLOGG: The sentence recites the
language of the Sherman Act, that is correct. But
what this Court's cases indicate and what Rule 8
requires --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's got the language of
the Sherman Act, a conspiracy to prevent competitive
entry in their respective telephone and/or high speed
markets. That's not in the Sherman Act, that's a
description of the alleged conspiracy in this case.
MR. KELLOGG: It is true that they have
described the alleged conspiracy, but what Dura,
Associated General Contractors, and other cases of
this Court require is a statement of facts that
warrants the legal conclusion that the plaintiffs
wish to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Kellogg, the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure assiduously avoid
using the word fact throughout. And from 1938 on, it
has been repeated that it is not necessary to plead
facts. The index of forms, the appendix of forms
shows how simple the plain statement of a claim is,
and you're not required to plead facts. And yet
that's the central -- seems to be the central thrust
of your argument.
MR. KELLOGG: Your Honor, every case of
this Court dealing with pleading standards has
indicated that it is not sufficient merely to recite
a legal conclusion, and claim an entitlement to
relief therefore. In Dura, for example, the
plaintiffs claimed proximate cause and loss
causation, and the Court said --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But Mr. Kellogg, that's
not a legal conclusion, it's an allegation of fact
that there was an agreement to prevent competitive
entry into respective markets. There are dozens of
antitrust complaints that are no more specific than
that.
MR. KELLOGG: Your Honor, in the context
in which this claim is made, the allegation of
agreement or conspiracy is not a statement of fact.
It is an inference that the plaintiffs seek to draw
from the facts that they allege in the complaint.
Context here is everything. In form 9, for example,
Justice Ginsburg, or in the case of Sherkovitz, you
had a specific context. You had a time, a place,
individual participants named, a clear injury in form
, a broken leg as a report --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But negligently drove.
It doesn't say whether it went through a stop light.
Doesn't say whether it was speeding. It doesn't say
any one of the umpteen ways one could be negligent.
MR. KELLOGG: That is correct, Justice
O'Connor, but you have a direct context -- Justice
Ginsburg, you had a direct context in which an
eyewitness participant in the event is claiming
negligence on behalf of the driver of the car. In
the instant case, we have no injury that's separate
from the alleged conspiracy, and we have no time,
place or participants for the alleged conspirators.
JUSTICE BREYER: But you do have a case --
anywhere, forget antitrust. Suppose it's a tort
case, and the following complaint is filed. My foot
hurts. I've gone to Dr. Smith for 15 years. I claim
he is negligent. Is that valid?
MR. KELLOGG: I do not think so, because I
don't think --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now, if you
think that's valid, I understand that you think this
complaint does just what I said in the field of
antitrust. But is there any case that you've come
across which would say a complaint just as I have
described it --
MR. KELLOGG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Either is valid or is not
valid. You'd like to find one that says it's not
valid, so what's your best effort in any field of
law.
MR. KELLOGG: I would cite, for example,
the Court's decision in the Papasan case, where the
plaintiffs claimed that they were not getting a
minimally adequate education. That sounds like a
factual statement. But what the Court expressly said
in that case is that we do not have to accept legal
conclusions in the guise of factual allegations.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But of course, there the
legal standard was not clear. And the Dura case, I
looked at, and perhaps you disagree based on what you
-- what I have just heard, and I thought Dura was a
lack of proximate cause. They just didn't show any
relation between the injury they alleged to have
suffered, and their own.
MR. KELLOGG: Well, I think Dura is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that's the way I
read Dura.
MR. KELLOGG: I think Dura is an exact
analogy. In Dura, they allege proximate cause, they
allege loss causation. And the Court said, well,
let's look at their statement of facts, which only
showed that they had bought at an inflated price.
And the Court said there was a fatal gap between that
factual allegation and the legal conclusion that they
wished to draw.
JUSTICE BREYER: You can get into trouble
by alleging too much, I guess, because if you allege
a lot, you might leave something out.  And you say,
well, what about that one. But suppose we keep it
very, very minimal. And a person just says, I'm hurt
and the defendant, I claim, negligently injured me.
Period. Period.
MR. KELLOGG: That would not provide --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why not?
MR. KELLOGG: The grounds upon which the
claim is based.
JUSTICE BREYER: So the only thing that's
missing there are some facts.
MR. KELLOGG: Some facts indicative that
the defendant is responsible for the --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So now you're
saying a complaint has to have facts?
MR. KELLOGG: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I thought you were
also making a different argument. I thought you were
making the argument that they have, by their
pleadings, in effect, affirmatively indicated that
they don't have enough facts to support a general
allegation. I thought you were saying that because
of the preface that you began reading, that in view
simply of the fact that they are not competing, and
in view of parallel conduct, they have violated the
Act.
So I guess my question is, would your
position be different if there were no allegation
simply of an absence of competition and parallel
action if -- would your position be different if they
had simply alleged, as Justice Stevens emphasized,
that here were these parties and they had -- they had
taken some action, not specified, which resulted in
violation of the Act?
MR. KELLOGG: Our position would not be
different. It's the uniform view of the cases that I
cited, the Courts of Appeals and a requirement of
Rule -- Rule 8 that you do more than simply parrot
the words of the cause of action or announce legal
conclusions. But as you point out, in this case --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So that would not be good
enough, but are you saying that this is worse
because, in effect, they have gone some steps towards
specification. And the specifications that they have
made affirmatively show that they don't have enough
for the agreement.
MR. KELLOGG: It is certainly true that
all they have alleged is conduct from which they seek
to draw an inference of conspiracy. And they have
made that quite clear, that they have made no direct
allegation.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And you're saying that
inference cannot be drawn from the particular facts
that they have alleged.
MR. KELLOGG: That is correct. Our
position is that as a matter of substantive antitrust
law, what this Court said in Matsushita is that
antitrust law limits the range of permissible
inferences that can be drawn from parallel conduct.
And if all you have is parallel conduct that's
consistent, on the one hand, with conspiracy, or on
the other hand, with ordinary business judgment, you
cannot draw an inference of the sort that the
plaintiffs depend upon in this case.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Of course, that may be
true on summary judgment, you may be dead right on
the merits, but are you telling me that an allegation
that the defendants have agreed not to compete with
one another is not a statement of fact?
MR. KELLOGG: I am. I would say that
that's a -- that's a conclusion --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, what if they said
they agreed in writing not to compete with one
another, would that be sufficient? Or if they have
agreed orally not to compete with one another, would
that be sufficient?
MR. KELLOGG: If there were a specific
context and they said --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If they said they have
agreed orally not to compete with one another, would
that be a statement of fact, an allegation of fact?
MR. KELLOGG: Yes. Because you require --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then why did you leave
the words orally out? Why is it not a statement,
allegation of fact?
MR. KELLOGG: Because the plaintiffs here
were very careful, in light of Rule 11, not to make
any direct allegations of conspiracy, not to suggest
that there was a time and place --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But that's a direct
allegation of conspiracy, that very statement.
MR. KELLOGG: But they make it clear in
that paragraph that it's an inference.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They make it fairly
clear that they may only have the evidence of
parallel conduct that you describe, and that may not
be sufficient, and maybe for that reason, you get a
summary judgment. But how you can say this is not an
allegation of fact, I find mind-boggling.
MR. KELLOGG: I'm saying that it's not
sufficient to state a claim. Just as the allegation
that there was lost causation in Dura, or that there
was harm to the union in Associated General
Contractors or there, that there was harm --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now you're, that's the
part precisely which you're following that I don't,
that I actually don't know, is the extent to which
you have to put in a complaint, in whatever field of
law, you can allege a fact. You say the person ran
over me --
MR. KELLOGG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Or you say, they treated
me negligently. That's a fact. That means something
happened there. But suppose you write the complaint
and there is just no notion that you have a what and
when, how, under what circumstances. It's just
totally out of thin air, and the defendant doesn't
know what, what period of time he is supposed to be
thinking about, what, what happens to such a
complaint? There must be some law on it in torts or
someplace?
MR. KELLOGG: Well, ordinarily in a
complaint like that, you could file a 12(e) motion
and ask for more specificity. Our problem --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why couldn't you do
the same?
MR. KELLOGG: Our problem with the current
complaint is not a lack of specificity, it's quite
specific. It provides color maps and such. The
problem is that the facts specifically alleged simply
don't amount to an antitrust violation because they
don't support the inference that the plaintiffs ask
the Court to draw.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, but they're --
they're using the fact that there was parallel
behavior as a basis for thinking there was more than
parallel behavior. They are using it as a basis for
thinking that once, on some occasion that's relevant,
there were people meeting in a room and saying things
to each other. So they are not just saying that it's
sufficient. They are saying it's evidence that
something else occurred.
MR. KELLOGG: That's correct. That's
exactly what they are saying and what Matsushita and
the other courses, cases of this Court dealing with
parallel conduct indicate, is that that's not a fair
inference from parallel conduct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Wasn't that a summary
judgment case and hadn't there been discovery before?
The Matsushita decision?
MR. KELLOGG: That is correct. But the
Court announced that as a principle of substantive
law. They said substantive antitrust law limits the
range of permissible inferences. We are not
suggesting that the plaintiffs need the sort of
specificity or certainly any evidence at the
pleadings stage. For example --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They just have to say
orally, I wish you would reconsider that? Because if
that's, if that's all you're arguing, I don't see
anything to be gained by -- by such a holding. It
doesn't tell you -- you know, this is a suit against
a number of large corporations, nationwide
businesses, thousands of employees. And on this
complaint you have no idea who agreed with whom,
where, when, any of that.
I can understand that you're saying that
does not give us enough notice to prepare a defense.
But if you say oh, but it would be perfectly all
right so long as they said orally. I mean -- forget
about it.
MR. KELLOGG: I -- I should not agree to
that. That's simply adding the word orally. It's
certainly fair when you are talking about a
nationwide class over a period of 10 years attacking
an entire industry to suggest that the plaintiffs
have to give some indication of what it is that the
defendants have done that is wrong. Some concrete
basis for the Court to believe there is a reason to
go forward to the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So in the negligently
drove case, the plaintiff negligently drove over --
the defendant negligently drove over the plaintiff,
if it's not specific as to time and place it must be
dismissed? If it's specific as to time and place
it's, it withstands the motion?
MR. KELLOGG: Well certainly, Form 9 is
very specific. It gives a specific corner, it gives
a time, it gives the names of the participants.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What if it does say
within the last 10 years.
MR. KELLOGG: I don't think that's
sufficient, Your Honor. But with a -- with a --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you have a case, do
you have a case I can look to that tells me that?
MR. KELLOGG: With a negligence case a
(e) motion could then specify the actual time and
place, but the plaintiffs here have had ample
opportunity to amend their complaint to supplement.
If they had any specifics indicating that there was
such an agreement as opposed to lawyer speculation
and a desire to engage in expensive discovery they
would have produced that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did you seek a more
specific statement?
MR. KELLOGG: We did not, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why not? Why didn't you
ask when and where was this agreement.
MR. KELLOGG: Well again the whole way
this was litigated below by the plaintiffs was that
they, they acknowledged they had no specifics. They
simply asked that an inference be drawn from the
parallel conduct they alleged. And that is our
central point that you simply cannot infer an
agreement from this conduct. If the Court has no
questions, I reserve my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Kellogg. Mr. Barnett.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THOMAS G. BARNETT,
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS
MR. BARNETT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court.
The fundamental concern of the United
States is that the decision of the Second Circuit can
be read to hold that a Section 1 Sherman Act
complaint will survive a motion to dismiss merely by
alleging parallel action or inaction in attaching the
bare assertion of an agreement. Such a result fails
to appreciate that parallel action or inaction is
ubiquitous in our economy and often reflects
beneficial competitive forces.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What do you mean can be
held, can be thought to hold that? Is there any
interpretation of what they did.
MR. BARNETT: Well there are certain
portions of the decision that talk about a
plausibility requirement but when it turns to the
specific area of a Section 1 complaint and a
complaint alleged on parallel conduct, I agree with
you, Justice Scalia, that that's the only
interpretation I can draw from that passage. The
Court held that if you allege parallel action unless
there are no set of facts that can be proved, and
it's always possible to hypothesize an agreement, you
cannot dismiss that complaint.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, is that really what
they -- I thought, and correct me if I'm wrong, but I
thought that the, that the Court spoke of no set of
facts, only on the assumption that there had been a
pleading which did raise a plausible, possible
inference of forbidden conduct, and I thought the
Court was saying if the, if the plausibility
criterion has been satisfied, then the only way that
the defendant can get a dismissal is by showing that
there is no set of facts which would actually support
the action. And I'm not sure that that can be done
at the, at the, at the stage of simply pleading a
dismissal as opposed to summary judgment or something
like that. But I thought the Court did not get to
its no set of facts point until it had first assumed
that there had been a, a pleading on the basis of
which a plausible inference of forbidden conduct
could be drawn. Am I about that?
MR. BARNETT: Well, Justice Souter, I read
that passage of the Second Circuit decision as not
expressly referencing the plausibility requirement.
There is language saying that the allegation needs to
be plausible but when you get to this specific
passage it says that if you allege parallel conduct a
court cannot dismiss the claim unless there could be
no set of facts that could be proved. But
regardless, even if I am, your interpretation is
potentially permissible interpretation, the
fundamental concern of the United States is that this
Court, having the case now, clarify that a Section 1
Sherman Act complaint should not be able to survive a
motion to dismiss unless it alleges some facts beyond
mere generic parallel action.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So, so that if
plausibility is the standard this does not meet the
standard of plausibility, that's your argument?
MR. BARNETT: Well, we prefer the
formulation that, from the Court's opinion in Dura
that says that the facts need to demonstrate some
reasonably founded expectation that there is an
unlawful agreement within the meaning of Section 1 of
the Sherman Act.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And some parallel action
would indicate that wouldn't it? I mean, if for
example they, you have nine companies that change
their price at the same hour of the same day, 10
months in a row.
MR. BARNETT: Absolutely, Justice Scalia.
I agree.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're, you're not
saying that parallel action can never create this,
this kind of --
MR. BARNETT: That is correct. If all you
know is that there is parallel action or inaction,
that in and of itself tells you nothing. Once you
start to add the facts and circumstances surrounding
it, particular parallel action can be suspicious
enough, and the example you give is a good one, that
demonstrates a reasonably founded expectation for
believing that discovery may yield evidence showing
that that parallel price increase at the same time by
nine different companies was the result of an
unlawful conspiracy.
If I can turn to, in -- in deciding
whether or not there is such a reasonably founded
expectation, you do need to look to the substantive
law. Here the issue is the law on agreement under
Section 1 of the Sherman Act. Some of the questions
I think I've heard go to this issue. Section 1 law
specifically limits the kinds of facts that can be
used to establish an agreement that is cognizable
under the Sherman Act. In particular, the Court's
rulings made clear that conscious parallelism which
some economists might argue is a form of an
agreement, is not an agreement within the meaning of
--
Section 1.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's clear it's not
sufficient to prove it, but is it admissible
evidence?
MR. BARNETT: It may be admissible
evidence but depending on the facts and circumstances
JUSTICE STEVENS: Should a plaintiffs's
complaint fail because it includes unnecessary,
verbose, admissible evidence?
MR. BARNETT: No. It should fail if it
fail -- if it does not allege facts that indicate
reasonable found --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is not it an allegation
that they've agreed not to compete with one another
an allegation of fact?
MR. BARNETT: It is a combined question of
law and fact in our view, because as I said the
Section 1 law limits the kinds of facts that can be
used to establish an agreement. If all they have
alleged is parallel action without more --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But they have alleged
more. They have alleged an actual agreement.
MR. BARNETT: But as paragraph 51 of the
complaint is, as you were discussing, in some ways
even worse. Because it specifically relies upon
parallel action and alleged parallel inaction.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But what if it didn't? I
mean, I mean face the question that Justice Stevens
puts. Suppose you have a complaint that says nothing
else except that these defendants entered into an
agreement in -- in restraint of trade.
MR. BARNETT: And that is not sufficient
because in our view the complaint needs to allege
some facts that demonstrate a basis for believing
there was an unlawful agreement within --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What if the complaint in
addition to that alleged that up to a certain date,
it was unlawful for the companies to compete with one
another but the law was changed and after that change
took place they were advised by their lawyers they
could compete, but they agreed not to. Would that be
sufficient?
MR. BARNETT: No. Every business, every
day fails to enter some new line of business or take
some potential competitive action. The mere --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But Justice
Stevens's question was that the allegation was that
after that date they agreed not to compete. That
states -- that states a cause of action under the
--
--
Sherman Act, doesn't it?
MR. BARNETT: No. I would, with respect,
Mr. Chief Justice, I would disagree with that. There
still needs in our view to be some allegation that
indicates -- a factual allegation that indicates a
reason for believing there may have been unlawful
agreement.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can they say on the 14th
of January, 2004, we believe that in the city of New
York, they agreed upon this course of action? That
would surely be sufficient?
MR. BARNETT: That may be sufficient
because it is providing enough facts to give you a
reason to believe that the plaintiff has a basis for
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, it's saying, all
I've done is limited it in time and space. Just as
you might say on October the 24th, 2004 at the corner
of 14th and Third Avenue, defendant drove negligently
and injured me. That's certainly a complaint, isn't
MR. BARNETT: Well, and it -- you -- you
JUSTICE BREYER: Isn't it?
MR. BARNETT: It needs to allege enough
specifics --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, look, the one I
just alleged in the tort law is a complaint. I've
just copied it out of the model complaints.
MR. BARNETT: I want to be clear --
JUSTICE BREYER: Am I right or not?
MR. BARNETT: The facts allege need to be
specific enough to suggest --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I understand the
standard.
MR. BARNETT: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: I want to know how to
apply the standard and now I take my tort case --
MR. BARNETT: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which is okay, and now
I say sometime during the last 10 years he drove
negligently and injured me. Is that no good?
MR. BARNETT: In my view that's probably
insufficient --
JUSTICE BREYER: And so you're saying that
this case is like that, when because they don't say
when they met, they don't say what happened, they
don't give a time or place.
If that's, leaving your side parallelism
out of it, I'm past you on that, all right? I'll
accept for argument's sake all your point about that.
Now if you're saying this is too vague, leaving that
out of it, because it doesn't say time and place of
the meetings or give any other clue for meetings
etcetera, what's your best authority ?
This is an area of law I'm not familiar
with. I'm looking for cases that will tell me how
specific a complaint has to be to tie the events down
to specific ones.
MR. BARNETT: I believe that this Court's
decision in Dura Pharmaceutical --
JUSTICE BREYER: Dura is still the best.
I think I, did I write that case?
(Laughter.)
MR. BARNETT: You did --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not drawing total
comfort from it.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: In fact I'd like
something in tort law or something that, you know,
that I get a general idea of what the law is because
I don't know that antitrust is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Barnett, I thought --
MR. BARNETT: I thought our brief lists
cases that go to that point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Barnett I thought you
had, you had said that you don't need to indicate the
particular day of the agreement. That it would be
enough if it was the kind of parallel action that
suggested an agreement that over nine years they all
raised the price at the same time. Now that doesn't
really give the defendant notice of, you know, what
individuals were responsible for this, when it
occurred. But you say that would still be adequate?
MR. BARNETT: Well, it does provide notice
that -- this is a fairly low threshold. It provides
some indication. It can be an indication of direct
evidence. It can be an indication of circumstantial
evidence. It does focus the litigation, however, by
providing a, a reason why the court and the defendant
should be defending themselves against a section 1
claim.
My time is up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Barnett.
Mr. Richards, we'll hear now from you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF J. DOUGLAS RICHARDS
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MR. RICHARDS: Mr. Chief Justice and may
it please the Court:
There are four essential dimensions to the
problem that's before the Court and on every one of
those dimensions the guidance that the Solicitor
General gave in its amicus brief in the Swierkiewicz
case is 180 degrees opposite the guidance that the
Solicitor General is providing in its amicus brief in
this case. The first of those dimensions I'll begin
with because it's where petitioners began. In their
brief, the Solicitor General in the Swierkiewicz case
very clearly said that evidentiary standards cannot
be made into pleading standards. What they said on
page 5 was that by requiring pleading of the
McDonnell Douglas prima facie case from employment
law the Second Circuit had erroneously conflated the
fair notice owed the defendant at the outset of the
litigation with the standards governing the
plaintiff's present of proof in court. Later at page
, they said the court's test confuses pleading ---
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Now you're reading from
the Swierkiewicz brief?
MR. RICHARDS: From the Swierkiewicz
Solicitor General brief.
They said that the court test in the
Second Circuit that was reversed --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, i mean, you know,
that's shame on them. But we're trying to get this
case right and, you know, I don't care what position
they took before. I care about what the right answer
is, and I find it difficult to believe that you can
simply allege in a complaint, I was injured by the
negligence of the defendant in driving an automobile,
period. Does that satisfy the, the Federal Rules?
MR. RICHARDS: There's a big difference
between -- the answer is I don't know, perhaps.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Perhaps?
MR. RICHARDS: Perhaps. But that's very
different from this case and it's different in that
an automobile accident is something that happens all
in one moment in time. An antitrust conspiracy like
the conspiracy alleged --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The agreement happens at
one moment in time.
MR. RICHARDS: Oh, it could happen in many
moments.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Meetings of the minds,
meeting of the minds. I used to each Contracts.
Meeting of the minds at one moment in time, okay.
MR. RICHARDS: But what the Second Circuit
said on this point, and I submit that the Second
Circuit was correct, was that the complaint does set
forth the temporal and geographic parameters of the
alleged illegal activity and the identities of the
alleged key participants, and I think that's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But where does it
set forth agreement?
MR. RICHARDS: It alleges --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Temporal,
geographic, the identities, but where does it set
forth anything evincing an agreement other than the
allegation of parallel conduct?
MR. RICHARDS: It alleges that there was
an agreement, but it doesn't prove that there was an
agreement because proving the facts alleged is not a
plaintiff's burden in the complaint.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you have any,
is there an allegation of an agreement apart from the
parallel conduct?
MR. RICHARDS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And what does that
consist of?
MR. RICHARDS: The leading plus factor
that's generally used in, in the Matsushita context,
in the Monsanto context, is action that would have
been against the self-interest of the conspirators in
the absence of a conspiracy, and this complaint
alleges very clearly that the conduct of not entering
into one another's territories and competing among
the ILECs as a CLEC was contrary to what would have
been --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it states --
would it state an antitrust violation if had you a
grocery store on one corner of the block and a pet
store on the other corner of the block and you say,
well, the grocery store is not selling pet supplies
and they could make money if they did, therefore
that's an antitrust violation?
MR. RICHARDS: If that conspiracy were
implausible, if it made no sense.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's all the
facts that are alleged.
MR. RICHARDS: Right, but the Second
Circuit standard and the standard we defend is that
if someone alleges a conspiracy I that just makes no
sense because it's obvious from the face of the
complaint that the alleged conspirators aren't in the
same product market, not in the same geographic
market or something of that kind, there is no
conceivable motive for them to enter into the kind of
conspiracy at hand, the complaint can be dismissed.
JUSTICE BREYER: If my case, the gasoline,
oil prices fell, but I happen to know there were four
gasoline shops near each other, gasoline stations,
and they didn't cut their prices. Complaint?
MR. RICHARDS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, then that's the
economy, and you can go sue half the firms in this
economy. Every firm in a concentrated industry
engages in -- I mean, normally conscious parallelism,
and I know there are economists who think that that
should be the case, but I thought the law to date was
that the Department of Justice is not given by the
Sherman Act the authority to remake the entire
American economy. But if we accept your view I guess
it is.
MR. RICHARDS: Well, Justice Breyer, in
the NHL case, the National Hockey League case, which
is one of the cases that the petitioners relied upon
for a circuit conflict to get here, what the court
said is that allegations that defendant's action
taken independently would be contrary to their
economic self-interest will ordinarily tend to
exclude the likelihood --
JUSTICE BREYER: Ordinarily, if you take
that sentence and read it for how you're reading, a
consciously parallel action is a violation of Sherman
Act section 2, then we have that radical change that
many have advocated for the last 40 or 50 years, that
half the economy is in violation, because in any
concentrated industry, after all, it is in the
interest of a firm to cut prices and to make a large
market unless he knows his three competitors will
also keep prices up. Now, you have to know that or
you'd cut them. And that's called conscious
parallelism. And I had always thought that this
Court had not said that that in and of itself is a
violation of the Sherman Act.
MR. RICHARDS: Well, Justice Breyer, we
don't just allege conscious parallelism. We
allege --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know that, but if in
fact all you have to do in order to bring a
price-fixing case and get into discovery is to allege
conscious parallelism and then add without further
foundation, and we think there was a real agreement
too, but there's nothing other than the conscious
parallelism to back it up, now we've got just what I
said, with the exception you might not win at the end
of the day. What have you is a ticket to conduct
discovery. Now, that's what's bothering the
Department of Justice and so I'd like to know the
answer to that problem.
MR. RICHARDS: Well, Justice Breyer, the
difference between that, a critical difference
between that scenario and what we have alleged in
this complaint is that we do allege in great detail
that not entering into one another's territories
would have been contrary to the interests of --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that does not help
you with respect to the other claim, the claim that
there was a conspiracy to prevent upstart competitors
from coming in. There's no plus factor as I
understand it alleged there, and I also understand
that it would have been entirely in the interest of
each of your defendants to keep the upstarts out and
that there is no need for them to agree to do that.
It would be the most natural thing in the world to do
it. What do you say about that part of your case?
MR. RICHARDS: As to that aspect of the
case, paragraph 50 does allege two plus factors, but
they are essentially allegations of common motive,
which is a less strong, I'll grant you --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but a common, isn't
the common motive consistent, just as consistent with
no agreement as with agreement? In other words, they
didn't have to agree; their common motive was
operative agreement or not?
MR. RICHARDS: The important thing as to
that aspect of the conspiracy is the Continental case
in this Court, which said that you're not supposed to
dismember -- it's an inappropriate way to approach a
conspiracy to dismember it, look at one piece of it
in isolation, evaluate it as though it's by itself
and then wipe the slate clean at the end of that
analysis, and that's essentially what the other side
is trying to do repeatedly.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, what the other side
is saying is that simply by alleging parallelism when
it would be in the interest of each of the alleged
conspirators to do just as you claim they are doing
in the absence of an agreement, you have not alleged
something that gets to the threshold of plausibility.
That's their argument and I, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think, by the way, that
that argument applies not just to the keeping out the
upstart claim, but also to the not entering the other
alleged conspirator s' fields of monopoly, if you
want to put it that way, because if I, if I enter
your field I know that you're going to enter mine.
It just doesn't pay for me to do it. Yeah, I can
make money, but I'll lose money. It seems to me
perfectly natural for companies that have a certain
geographic area in which they are the, the principal,
the selected instrument and although they technically
can enter somebody else's geographic area, they know
that if they do it they will be subjected to the same
thing. That is nothing more than conscious
parallelism.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You may reply to us
jointly or severally, however you may want.
(Laughter.)
MR. RICHARDS: If I may, I'll try to pose
a hypothetical that I think addresses Justice
Souter's question and then, Justice Scalia, I'll try
to address your question. Justice Souter, a good
example would be suppose one alleges a conspiracy to
rob a bank and to steal a number of getaway cars at
the same time and one comes -- in order to get away,
so that the conspirators couldn't be found at the
site of robbing the bank. One could say, well,
there's a reason to rob the getaway cars totally
independent of the bank and without a conspiracy.
Why do they need a conspiracy to steal a car? Why
isn't that something that they wouldn't individually
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the difference
between that case and this is that the allegation
with respect to the agreement to procure the getaway
cars gets to a kind of specificity that is not
present here. Here the allegation simply is parallel
conduct to make it hard for the upstarts to get in.
And at that general level the answer is, of course
anyone in his right mind would want to make it
difficult to let the upstarts in. There's no need to
assume that they might have agreed on some matter of
detail which is not essential to the scheme. This is
a general characteristic of competition and
resistance of competition.
MR. RICHARDS: I understand, but the point
I'm trying to make with the hypothetical is that what
one does if one is just looking at the conspiracy to
keep CLECs out by itself first, taking the secondary
aspect of the conspiracy, putting it first and
analyzing it in isolation, is like taking the getaway
car theft, analyzing it in isolation, saying, well,
they have a reason individually to steal the cars, so
I guess that couldn't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Richards, can I ask
you this question. Supposing that you were allowed
to have discovery and each chief executive of the
defendant companies got on the stand and said: I
never talked to my, my competitors at all, I never
seriously considered competing in the other, other
company's territory for the reasons set forth in the,
in your opponent's brief on the merits here. We
never did agree. And you're able to prove the things
you've alleged in the agreement. Would the, would it
be appropriate to enter summary judgment against you
on that testimony if you had no evidence of a
specific agreement?
MR. RICHARDS: In the context of summary
judgment or at trial, we would be required to prove
what we have now alleged.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But my question is you
can prove what you've now alleged factually, but they
deny the existence of any agreement and they
explained the reasons for it exactly as the lawyers
did in this brief. Would you not lose on summary
judgment?
MR. RICHARDS: If we don't have proof at
that point of what we've alleged here, we'd lose --
JUSTICE SCALIA: After several years --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Prove what you have
alleged, in effect, except for the key allegation of
agreement among the competitors. If you had no other
evidence of that agreement, would you win.
MR. RICHARDS: If we had proof that they
actually acted against what would have been their
self-interest in the absence of a conspiracy, we
would satisfy then the Matsushita standard for
summary judgment.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't understand
acting in self interest. I mean, they might just
decide apart from, you know, if they go into their
territory they'll come into mine, that investing in
this wired business isn't the best, the best bet for
them. Maybe they want to get into the wireless
business and think that's a better way to spend their
money.
MR. BARNETT: Surely it is possible to
conceive of facts under which they would not have not
conspired and they would have had a different motive,
but that's not the legal standard under Conley versus
Gibson.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I'm questioning
you. You say you meet the plus factor because they
were acting against their self- interest, that a
self-interested player in this league would have gone
into the other's territory, and I'm questioning that
by saying that they might have seen this whole area
as not the best place to invest their money.
MR. RICHARDS: I understand that. But we
have alleged that as fact, Justice Ginsburg, and that
fact and that allegation has to be treated as true
under conventional pleading standards for purposes of
a motion to dismiss.  If we are unable to prove that
fact when we get to summary judgment --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You mean the mere fact
that you have alleged something is against their
self-interest is enough to make an issue of fact on
whether it's against their self-interest?
MR. RICHARDS: Yes, yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They could have gone on
the stand, they gave all the reasons in the red
briefs -- or the blue briefs in this case, that say
it's not against their self-interest; you'd say that
would be a jury question?
MR. RICHARDS: No, not at summary
judgment. What I'm saying is that at the pleading
stage to allege that, which is an allegation of fact,
satisfies pleading standards. Just to allege it with
testimony on the other side and no evidence to prove
that allegation on summary judgment --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are you suggesting that
you don't have to prove an actual agreement? You can
merely prove conduct contrary to self-interest is
sufficient?
MR. RICHARDS: Conduct contrary to
self-interest is a way of inferring actual agreement
in the absence of direct evidence.
JUDGE STEVENS: Do you agree you must --
do you agree that you must prove an actual agreement
among the defendants?
MR. RICHARDS: There must be an inference
of actual agreement, but the inference can be drawn
from circumstantial evidence, and that's what
Matsushita is all about.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So then when we
get back to the paragraph 51, let me start with your
statement at the bottom half of that paragraph, that
plaintiffs allege upon information and belief that
they have entered into a contract, is a conclusion
based upon your prior allegations, it's not an
independent allegation of an agreement. It's saying
because of this parallel conduct, because we think
it's contrary to their self interest, therefore, they
have agreed.
MR. RICHARDS: Counsel presented it as
though it's a complete summary of everything, but
what it says is, and the other facts and market
circumstances alleged above, and it's preceded by --
--
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it's a
statement of a conclusion based upon your allegations
that precede it.
MR. RICHARDS: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not a
statement that independently there apart from all of
this, there's an agreement.
MR. RICHARDS: Well, it's also an
independent statement and allegation on information
and belief, which is permitted under Rule 8, that
there is agreement.
JUSTICE ALITO: I guess if you had just
alleged the last part of paragraph 51, plaintiffs
have alleged, plaintiffs allege upon information and
belief, et cetera, without the detail that you
provided, would that have been sufficient?
MR. RICHARDS: If you gave no context of
what kind of a conspiracy you were alleging and what
kind of scope it had, so that a court could balance
JUSTICE ALITO: But you omit all the
allegations about parallel conduct and the other
allegations that you think provide a basis for
inferring a conspiracy from the parallel conduct, if
you omit all that but you just include the last part
of 51, would that be enough?
MR. RICHARDS: If there isn't enough in
the way of facts alleged to permit a court to
understand what it is you're claiming in general
terms happening, then you haven't satisfied Rule 8.
I mean --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's the answer to
Justice Alito's question in this case?
MR. RICHARDS: Well, in this case we have
provided, as the Second Circuit --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No. His hypothetical is
all you've done is to allege the final sentence
without the preceding clause, the five or six lines
before there's a comma. That's out. All there is is
the allegation of the conspiracy. Is that enough in
this case?
MR. RICHARDS: In this case with the
allegations of the nature of the conspiracy that
precede that sentence, it's enough.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No. The hypothetical is
without the preceding clause. Is that enough --
MR. RICHARDS: That sentence by itself --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is that enough in this
case for what Justice Alito asked, and I think we are
interested in the answer that you make given this
complaint in this case that we are faced with.
MR. RICHARDS: I think that that would
satisfy conventional pleading standards under Rule
(a). On the other hand, I don't think it would
satisfy the Second Circuit's standard below, because
the Second Circuit required enough facts to enable a
court to wrap its mind around a complainant,
understanding what it is you claimed happened. You
don't have to prove your case as a complainant, you
just have to --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'd also like a clear
answer, and I would like to go back to Justice
Stevens' question because I'm not sure what you're
thinking there. We have three steel sheet companies
in the United States, no more. They sell at $10 a
sheet. One day we have action in the case, a memo to
the president of the company. He says Mr. President,
if you cut your prices to $7 you will make even more
money unless the others go along. And if they get
there first, you will lose money. So whether they
cut or not, you'd better cut your prices. Reply from
the president: But if I don't cut my prices, they
won't cut theirs, and we are all better off. That's
your evidence. Do you win?
MR. RICHARDS: That would depend on the
vehicle --
JUSTICE BREYER: There is no depend.
That's the evidence. Do you win?
MR. RICHARDS: If that's the evidence, I
think I win.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. And you cite
Matsushita for that?
MR. RICHARDS: No. For that I would cite
Judge Posner's decision.
JUSTICE BREYER: If you're right, then I
guess we could engage in this major restructuring of
the economy, and if that's the law, I'm surprised
they haven't done it, but maybe they have just been
recalcitrant.
MR. RICHARDS: Well, there's no major
restructuring of the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, because we have
concentrated industries throughout the economy, I
guess, or at least we used to, and I suppose that
that's a perfectly valid way of reasoning for an
executive in such a company, at least they teach that
at the schools of government, and people who aren't
really experienced in these things, but --
MR. RICHARDS: Well, the way Judge Posner
explains it in High Fructose is to say that it is
possible to have an agreement without a moment where
there's a statement of agreement. The participants
in a conspiracy can possibly treat what one of them
does as an offer, which another one can accept by
following it, to satisfy that way of showing a
conspiracy.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, fine. Now, let's
forget my immediate disagreement or not. Let's say I
agree with you on this. Now we have our example
right in mind. What other than the parallel to my
example could one reading this complaint think you
intend to prove?
MR. RICHARDS: Well, Your Honor, the
strongest -- plus factors that, in the absence of
direct evidence of conspiracy at the outset of a
case, which private plaintiffs will almost never have
because people don't conspire in public parks. All a
plaintiff can have is what are called plus factors
under Matsushita, and the strongest of those plus
factors is what has been alleged in great detail in
this complaint of action against self interest. The
case law recognizes that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But how do you
tell? I mean, companies get proposals all the time.
Here's a way you could make more money. You could
all enter the market in some foreign country. The
people decide, I mean, life is short and they've got
certain objectives, and they don't have to do
everything that an economist might think is in their
economic self interest. I mean, what is the limiting
self interest to that?
MR. RICHARDS: This is different from that
because this is a situation where when the
Telecommunications Act was passed in 1996, Congress
expected that the ILECs would compete in one
another's territories as CLECs. The defendants
pledged that they would compete in one another's
territories at ILECs. They then for years in
Congress complained that the CLECs who were trying to
compete with them were given an unfair advantage in
the terms and conditions on which they were permitted
to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is it an adequate
response for the executive to say, I'm a little risk
averse, I want to see how things work out over the
next five years. They keep changing the laws, the
regulatory environment. That's why I didn't jump in
and compete?
MR. RICHARDS: If they can prove that
that's the reason why they didn't jump in and
compete, then they have a nonconspiratorial reason
for what they did.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if they don't do
that, is it your argument that simply by behaving
differently from the way Congress assumed when it
passed the statute, that raises the plausible
inference of violation?
MR. RICHARDS: Within the other facts that
I was identifying, there is a strong suggestion here
that competition as a CLEC would have been, in the
absence of the pattern of conduct that we allege
here, would have been a profitable endeavor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. But is part of the
plausibility of that inference the fact, in your
argument, the fact that Congress assumed that would
happen?
MR. RICHARDS: That's one factor that I
point to among several to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I mean, the
congressional assumption is part of your case, in
other words?
MR. RICHARDS: It is.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. RICHARDS: I believe that along with
other factors such as the constant complaints to
Congress about how CLECs had the better side of the
deal than the ILECs, along with the pledges of the
defendants that they would do, and that they didn't
JUSTICE SCALIA: I used to work in the
field of telecommunications and if the criterion is
that happens which Congress expected to happen when
it passed its law, your case is very weak.
MR. RICHARDS: Well, Your Honor, that -- I
certainly don't expect that that is the evidence that
we would be relying on at trial or at summary
judgment to support our case, but in our motion to
dismiss we don't have to have the evidence to support
our case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you need what is
called the plus factor, and I gather that you
acknowledge that if I disagree with you that this,
this parallel action seemed to be against the self
interest of the companies, you no longer have a plus
factor and you would lose.
MR. RICHARDS: I don't think that the
Court, if the Court comes to a conclusion on its own
that the facts that we have alleged, which is that it
would have been in their interest to do this in the
absence of conspiracy, is wrong, then the Court is
not following conventional pleading standards.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So all you have to do to
prove, to establish a plus factor is to say in your
pleading, and there is a plus factor?
MR. RICHARDS: Well, you have to say what
it is.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have to say what it
is, that's all, and even if it's implausible?
MR. RICHARDS: Well, if it's implausible,
that might be a different consideration.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Richards, didn't
the Second Circuit say you don't need a plus factor?
They said if you did, we think that the plaintiffs
could show it, but the second sentence is you don't
need a plus factor.
MR. RICHARDS: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that can be wrong
or right, but the Second Circuit was very clear that
Rule 8 wants a plain statement of the claim and no
plus factor.
MR. RICHARDS: I agree with that, Your
Honor, and my contention as to what the law is is
that we are not required to plead plus factors. But
the fact remains that we have, and that our factual
pleading of plus factors has to be treated as true
for purposes of a --
JUSTICE ALITO: What if you pled more than
you had to, and it's clear from what you pled that
you were drawing an implausible inference? Can't the
complaint then be dismissed for failure to state a
claim?
MR. RICHARDS: No, I don't believe that it
can be if -- because the Court is not, the correct
function of the Court under a Rule 12(b)(6) motion is
not to be decided by whether it believes or is
persuaded by the allegations in the complaint.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let's take the Form
where you take the form complaint for an automobile
accident, and suppose what it says is, I was injured
in an automobile accident at a particular place in
time. I was hit by a compact car with Massachusetts
plates. The defendant owns the compact car with
Massachusetts plates. That's the complaint. The
Court can't dismiss that for failure to state a claim
when it's apparent from the face of the claim that
you're, that the basis for suing the defendant is a
totally implausible inference?
MR. RICHARDS: Well, if the allegation is
also made that the defendant was negligent, then I
think it clearly satisfies the pleading standard
under Form 9. I think it would be a more detailed
complaint than the sample that comprises Form 9 of
the rules.
JUSTICE ALITO: Even if it reveals that
the only basis for identifying this person as the
defendant is the fact that the person has a
Massachusetts license plate and a compact car?
MR. RICHARDS: Yes, because that's more
than nothing, and the rule in Form 9 contains
nothing.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, it contains a
time and a place. It's quite specific that there was
an accident and that defendant, defendant of a
certain name at a certain time and place negligently
drove. What it doesn't tell you is the details of
the, of what was negligent, but it certainly is
specific in time and place and person, which is one
of the -- one of the concerns, I mean, if you strip
away everything, it seems that you have a suspicion
that there may have been a conspiracy and you want to
use a discovery process to find out whether or not
that's true. Isn't that essentially what this
complaint is?
MR. RICHARDS: That is the situation that
any plaintiff is going to be in in a horizontal
conspiracy case in the sense that we don't know for
certain that there was a conspiracy. We have
observed market facts which are suggestive of a
conspiracy and we allege that there was a conspiracy.
Now under conventional standards, all we would have
to do is allege that there was a conspiracy and say
what it was. We wouldn't have to plead a basis to
infer that we are correct or incorrect because that's
not the analysis that Rule 12(b)(6) --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you don't
think you have to prove that either? I mean, you
don't think you have to prove anything more than what
you've alleged in the complaint about the background
context, the parallel conduct?
MR. RICHARDS: If the Court -- if we were
to prove to the satisfaction of the finder of fact
that the conduct we have pointed to here was or would
have been contrary to the interests of the defendants
in the absence of a conspiracy, we were to prove that
as distinguished from pleading, we would satisfy
Matsushita. Now at that stage in the case, it's
inconceivable that there won't be all kinds of other
memos and, you know, real world things that will shed
light on why the defendants internally think they did
this.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How much money do you
think it would have cost the defendants by then to
assemble all of the documents that you're going to be
interested in looking at? How many buildings will
have to be rented to store those documents and how
many years will be expended in, in gathering all the
materials?
MR. RICHARDS: Well, to address that
concern, which we share, because we don't gain
anything with Matsushita. At the end of the road in
the case, we don't gain anything by pursuing a case
for years in an unnecessarily burdensome way if we
are not sure that it's going to prevail. So we
proposed in this case a phased discovery process,
pursuant to which you would first have discovery into
conspiracy, and then the Court would have an early
opportunity for a Matsushita motion and we either
carry the day at that point or we don't. That's
discovery.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: At what point does it
get characterized as a class action, before this
discovery or after?
MR. RICHARDS: It's at the Court's
discretion when to entertain the motion for class
certification. In this particular case the
defendants, a couple of the defendants proposed that
we include in that phased discovery proposal class
certification as an additional subject of that first
phase of discovery, and we would be amenable to that
as a compromise. But the point, getting back to
Justice Scalia's point, that discovery as to whether
there was a conspiracy in this case in order to
satisfy that first phased analysis, would not need to
be terribly burdensome and wouldn't necessarily be
more burdensome than all kinds of other cases. It's
really a very targeted issue. I think it's actually
an appropriate way to deal with cases of this kind
and it's actually a way that the Court has proposed
dealing with similar issues in the past in the
Anderson versus Creighton case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, how would it
be focused if you're talking about whether it's in
their economic interest? You would have to say why,
why didn't you enter into this particular realm of
competition and they would say, well because we were
doing other things. We had other areas that we were
focusing on. And they would have to document all
that to your satisfaction.
MR. RICHARDS: We'd -- we would ask for
production of documents reflecting their thinking
process about entering into one another's
territories. And that would be very enlightening.
And after we get those documents we would have a much
clearer idea and be able to share with the Court a
much clearer idea of the entire picture of a kind
that we can't have at the 12(b)(6) stage.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you
Mr. Richard, Mr. Kellogg, you have four minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT BY MICHAEL KELLOGG,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MR. KELLOGG: Thank you. Your Honor.
I have three quick points that I would
like to make. First following up on Justice
Ginsburg's point, the private plaintiffs do not have
an authority to issue purely investigative
complaints. The Department of Justice of course can
issue civil investigative demands, but for private
plaintiffs the price of admission even to discovery,
particularly to the sort of massive discovery at
issue here, is to establish some basis for thinking
the plaintiff -- the defendants have done something
wrong. In that regard, in the Trinko case, the
plaintiffs there specifically alleged that the
defendants were engaged in actions against self
interest by not cooperating with new entrants. And
what the Court did is it went behind that mere
allegation, looked at the complaint, looked at facts
concerning the industry, looked at the statute,
regulatory rulings and said that's ridiculous. Of
course it is in the self interest of the incumbents
to not go out of their way to cooperate with new
entrants to allow them to take business away.
Now the flip side, the second half of the
conspiracy that the plaintiffs alleged here is our
failure to enter new markets. And it's important to
recognize that they are suggesting we should have
relied upon a regulatory regime that we were
successfully challenging in the courts. We got it
struck down three separate times, and it was simply
not a viable business opportunity in light of those
facts and there is no reason to suggest that it was
anything but in the self interest of the defendants
to decline to enter these markets. Even conscious
parallelism is not sufficient to state a claim under
the antitrust laws. And at best, that is what we
have here, and as a consequence they failed to state
a claim.
If the Court has further questions? I
have nothing further.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Kellogg. The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:02, the case in the
