IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JEFFREY H. BECK :
LIQUIDATING TRUSTEE OF
THE ESTATES OF CROWN
VANTAGE, INC. AND CROWN
PAPER COMPANY,
Petitioner
v. : No. 05-1448
PACE INTERNATIONAL UNION,
ET AL.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 24, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
M. MILLER BAKER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
MATTHEW D. ROBERTS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Petitioner.
JULIA P. CLARK, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
M. MILLER BAKER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MATTHEW D. ROBERTS, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting Petitioner 18
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JULIA P. CLARK, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondents 27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
M. MILLER BAKER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
[11:02 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 05-1448, Beck versus PACE International
Union.
Mr. Baker.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF M. MILLER BAKER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BAKER: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
After filing for bankruptcy, Crown Vantage
decided to terminate 12 over-funded pension plans. By
terminating these pension plans, Crown was able to
provide its plan participants with 100 percent of their
accrued benefits and at the same time recover almost $5
million in surplus plan assets for the benefits of both
Crown's creditors as well as plan members who made
individual contributions to those pension plans.
After Crown made the decision to terminate
these pension plans, it received a merger proposal from
the PACE union to merge the pension plan into the PACE
multi-employer pension plan. Crown rejected that
proposal. The Ninth Circuit held that Crown breached
its fiduciary duty by not sufficiently considering that
merger proposal.
This Court should reverse the Ninth Circuit
for two separate and independent reasons. First, merger
is a nonfiduciary plan sponsor function and Crown could
not have had a fiduciary duty to consider the merger
proposal by PACE. A series of this Court's decisions
beginning with Curtiss-Wright and continuing with
Lockheed, Hughes aircraft and Pegram hold that decisions
to create, to modify, to terminate, or to amend pension
plans are sponsor functions, settlor functions under
trust law, that are not subject to ERISA fiduciary
duties.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I could understand that
if the plan is being set up or if there's going to be a
change to the multiemployer plan while the business is
ongoing. But in this situation, you, you say if the
employer elects to have an annuity, then choosing which
insurance company is going to supply the annuity, that
would be a fiduciary function. Well, this is, the
termination, the merger that's proposed here, is instead
of having an annuity we'll put the assets into this
other plan. It's quite different from choosing a form
for an ongoing operation and saying, we're out of it and
we're now going to try to distribute the assets in the
way that will best protect the beneficiaries.
MR. BAKER: Justice -- Justice Ginsburg,
that's not correct. The answer to that question is that
a decision to terminate a plan or a decision to merge a
plan requires that a plan sponsor consider as a
threshold matter several factors. First, what will the
plan form be of the acquiring plan? And PACE's proposal
would have required the merger into a multiemployer plan
as opposed to a single employer plan. That goes to the
form of the plan. PACE's proposal would have resulted
in a new plan sponsor and a new plan administrator. It
would have resulted in a new dispute resolution
mechanism. That goes to the content of the plan. And
finally, most importantly, the PACE proposal would have
gone to the level of benefits provided by the plan and
the level of benefits, as this Court has repeatedly
recognized is a decision that is a plan sponsor
decision.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well if you're correct and
this was a sponsor decision, not a fiduciary decision,
let me ask you when you're wearing, when the company is
wearing its sponsor hat and says we're going to
terminate this plan, does it have a duty to consider the
best interests and the security of the employees, number
one, when it picks an insurance company? It can't pick
some flaky insurance company if there is a much more
solid insurance company, can it?
MR. BAKER: Justice Kennedy, it depends upon
the function at issue. If the function is the selection
of an insurance company to provide the annuity, that is
a plan administrator function and it is subject to ERISA
fiduciary duties. But you is to analyze it from --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But if have this duty to
consider the interest of the employees in selecting the,
the insurance company, in selecting the amount of the
annuity, etcetera, if you have that duty it seems to me
that that's a fiduciary duty.
MR. BAKER: It absolutely is, Justice
Kennedy, Kennedy. But it is only in the context of the
selection of the annuity that the plan sponsor, the plan
administrator, must purchase after the plan sponsor has
made that threshold decision to terminate the plan.
There is that threshold decision. And likewise, merger
is a threshold decision that goes to the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but that's I think our
sticking point. If the, if the plan sponsor decides to
purchase an annuity, it's accepted I think by you and by
everybody that there are two decisions being made.
Decision one is terminate the plan. Decision two,
distribute the assets by purchasing an annuity that
gives the beneficiaries what they should get. And so
But when we come to the question of merger,
you're saying there's only one decision, and I think
that's where I'm having trouble with your argument.
When we come to the question of merger, it seems to me
there are two decisions again. The first decision is
we're going to terminate the plan that we've got. What
do we do with our assets. We have decided to merge --
one possible decision as an alternative to annuities is
to merge the plan with, with another one. Why aren't
there two decisions in the merger case just as there are
two decisions in the annuity case?
MR. BAKER: There are two decisions in a
merger case and the threshold question, Justice Souter,
is whether to merge. Whether to merge is a --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why do you say that's the
threshold question? I thought the threshold question is
whether to terminate what we've got now.
MR. BAKER: That's a different question,
Justice Souter. The question is whether to merge, and a
question whether to merge goes to plan form, it goes to
the content of the plan and it also --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If they say, look, we're
not ending our plan. Let's assume you have an ongoing
business and they say, we're just sick of the form that
it's in now and we can get a good deal by letting
somebody else administer this, so we're going to merge.
I can see that as a single decision.  But that's not
what you've got here. As I understand it, the decision
to terminate was made, it was over and done with. The
question was what are they going to do with these
assets? It's at that point that PACE arrived and said:
Give them to us through a merger.
I don't see how you eliminate the, the
termination decision before the merger decision.
MR. BAKER: Justice Souter, there are two
different questions. One question is termination, one
question is merger, and they're not the same. And the
question whether to merge is a sponsor decision because
you have to make those threshold questions as to what
will the form of the plan be, what will the benefits
provided be.
JUSTICE SOUTER: The form of the plan is
going to be zero. Our plan is over. We are terminating
our plan. What do we do now? We have two choices
roughly, maybe three. We can either buy annuities, we
can give the assets to the beneficiaries or we can give
the assets to PACE in the form of a merger.
MR. BAKER: It's not a disposition of
assets, Justice Souter.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Are you saying you can't
have a merger of a plan that has already been
terminated, so that the merger decision is necessarily a
decision that has to be made before the termination --
before a termination decision.
MR. BAKER: It is -- once a plan decision,
once a termination decision has been made, and once that
decision has been executed, it's impossible to merge the
plan.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Baker, I thought your
position in your briefs, and I don't know why you do not
make this reply to this exchange, is that the merger
with another plan is not a termination, isn't that your
basic position?
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's what I keep
suggesting.
MR. BAKER: Absolutely, it's not a
termination.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Because if it were a
termination, in a termination, you must distribute the
assets to the participants. And here when you merge
with somebody else, the assets are not distributed to
the participants, but they are thrown into a pot with
other people.
MR. BAKER: That's absolutely correct,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I agree with Justice
Scalia, that that's one answer. On the other hand, you
have -- there are two arguments here. And what we are
exploring now is whether this is a fiduciary obligation
or a sponsor obligation.
MR. BAKER: That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So we will have to assume
for that -- if you can't do it by merger, then the whole
case goes away anyway. If merger is not permitted under
the statute, then we don't need to worry whether it's a
fiduciary response, correct?
MR. BAKER: That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So what we're asking in
the first part of this argument is whether or not it's a
fiduciary response. And that's what Justice Souter and
I are questioning. And it does seem to me, assume that
there is a meeting of the board of directors, we think
we are going to terminate this plan. At that point,
choices are made as to how to terminate it. And it's
difficult for me to see why the interests of the
employees are not uppermost in -- in your duties, i.e. a
fiduciary duty, when you decide how you're going to
terminate it.
MR. BAKER: The answer, Justice Kennedy, is
that it is a business decision to decide in what form
the benefits are going to be provided. And the very
choice between a termination and a merger goes to that
issue. For example, in a merger, there is no automatic
vesting --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why can't you say it's a
business decision as to which insurance company you're
going to select. Maybe you do say that.
MR. BAKER: Because at that point, it's a
mere execution of the prior policy decision.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but that's the way
you characterize it. I don't know why it's mere
execution, when it's an annuity and it's not mere
execution when it's a merger, once the determination
decision has been made.
MR. BAKER: Because the merger decision --
you have to ask those threshold questions, Justice
Kennedy, what are the level of benefits that are going
to be provided in the acquiring plan. In a merger,
there is no automatic vesting of accrued benefits as
there is in a termination.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm just listening to this.
It sounds to me as if you're saying, one, the employer
decides to terminate, okay? Now that's done. Then we
go to the next question. How would we terminate? And
in respect to that, I think Justice Kennedy was asking,
as I heard him, don't you have a fiduciary duty when you
decide how. And your answer, as I heard it, was yes,
you do.
And now there is a third question. Does
what happened in terminating mean that although you have
a fiduciary duty, you couldn't consider a merger,
because that's just not consistent with the basic plan
of terminating. Is that right? If it's wrong, don't
even bother to answer it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He doesn't like to hear
that he is wrong.
MR. BAKER: None of us do, Justice Scalia.
The answer to the third part of that question, Justice
Breyer, is yes. But where I disagree with you is in the
second predicate, which is that the -- the execution of
the termination is necessarily --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why did you answer yes to
his question, Justice Kennedy's, about the insurance
company?
MR. BAKER: Perhaps I was imprecise. If I
was imprecise, I apologize. The answer is, it depends
upon the function at issue. A broad generalization that
any decision taken after termination is necessarily a
plan sponsor function is just wrong. One has to look at
the function at issue, and the function in connection
with a merger is a plan sponsor decision, because you
can't get away from those threshold questions as to the
form, the content, and the benefits that are to be
provided in that plan.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why isn't exactly the same
point true with respect to purchasing annuities?
MR. BAKER: Because the decision has already
been made, usually it's in the plan document, to provide
for annuities. And the only question is providing the
annuity that is best suited to the interest of the
principals.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if the plan document
doesn't say anything about what will follow termination.
There is nothing in there about annuities. Is the
annuity -- the decision to purchase annuities a decision
subject to fiduciary obligation.
MR. BAKER: You mean the decision to offer
annuities? Yes, Justice Souter. The decision to offer
annuities, that is the provision, the actual selection
of the annuities -- and I note that the Internal Revenue
Service will require --
JUSTICE SOUTER: The decision to -- to take
the option of purchasing annuities or offering annuities
to the beneficiaries, that is a fiduciary decision.
MR. BAKER: No, Justice -- the -- if the
plan is silent --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If the plan is silent.
MR. BAKER: If the plan is silent, and the
plan sponsor -- and the question is, how do we
distribute, the mechanism of distribution. That is a
plan sponsor function in the absence of any provision --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if they say, we will
distribute by going to the top of the building and
throwing the money out on the street. Fiduciary
problem?
MR. BAKER: Well, that would not be
permitted by the, by the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right --
MR. BAKER: By operation of law, Justice
Souter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your
argument was, once you make a decision to terminate,
there are various rules that are triggered, you just
can't take the money and run with it. You've got to
make provision. And that merger was not one of the
permitted ways of terminating a plan. Is that wrong?
MR. BAKER: Well, that is a second argument,
an alternative argument, Chief Justice Roberts, that
merger is not a means of termination. But the threshold
question is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Maybe it's a simpler
argument than this first one we've been wrestling with.
MR. BAKER: Justice Scalia, they may have
different issues associated with them. But the
threshold question here is whether or not this is a plan
sponsor decision. And a plan sponsor decision is always
a decision that goes to the content and the form of the
plan, as well as to level of benefits to be provided.
JUSTICE ALITO: Is what's really involved in
this, who is going to get the $5 million reversion that
you would get if you purchased an annuity? Is that
what's really in dispute?
MR. BAKER: That's what's really in dispute,
Justice Alito.
JUSTICE ALITO: I mean, PACE would like it,
you would like it. I mean, how would a fiduciary decide
between those two, if it were a fiduciary duty.
MR. BAKER: Well, it's not a fiduciary duty.
This Court's cases are -- the PBGC and the agencies
recognize that the decision to terminate in order to
recapture a reversion is perfectly permissible, so long
as the plan sponsor complies with all the relevant
requirements of a termination.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But Justice Alito's
question, and I have the same question. Let's assume,
A -- I know this is not your position -- but the merger
is a permissible option. And B -- and I know this is
not your position -- that this is a fiduciary
obligation. I assume then you would lose, because the
extra assets must go, the reversion interest, must go to
the employees if it's in their benefit.
MR. BAKER: If we lose on both the issues
that we have argued, Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the point is the
$5 million is not going to these employees, it's being
thrown into this vast sea of all these other employees,
whose employers have not done as good a job of funding
their plans. This is to the benefit not to the
beneficiaries of this plan, but to other union members
who don't have the luxury of having an employer who has
overfunded their plan, and are trying to get that five
million to help them, not your beneficiaries.
MR. BAKER: Well, that's absolutely correct.
The money here would have gone not to the plan members,
but to another union.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But then you say that if
it's a fiduciary obligation, and the merger is a
permitted option, that the administrator, A, can, or B,
must still give the money back to you.
MR. BAKER: If it's a fiduciary obligation,
no. If it's a fiduciary obligation, the plan sponsor,
plan administrator -- because now we're talking about an
administrative function -- the plan administrator has a
duty to carefully consider that option. It doesn't
necessarily result in the money automatically flowing
over --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The administrator, as a
fiduciary, can consider the interest of the employer as
well as the employees?
MR. BAKER: No. The plan administrator,
acting as a fiduciary, can only consider the interest of
the employees.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. Reserve your time.
MR. BAKER: I'd like to reserve my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Roberts.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MATTHEW D. ROBERTS
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. ROBERTS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
An employer does not have a fiduciary duty
to consider merger as a means of terminating a defined
benefit pension plan. First of all, just like the
decision to terminate the plan, the decision to merge
the plan is a sponsor function, because it's a choice to
alter the design, composition and structure of the plan.
And because both the decision to terminate and the
decision to merge are sponsor functions, the choice
between the two is a sponsor function.
The plan administrator has a duty to carry
out the sponsor's decision to terminate the plan, not to
revisit that decision by considering whether to merge
the plan instead.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose the argument is
made very forcefully that the insurance companies with
these annuities haven't been doing so well, but there is
this multi-employer plan that has been just performing
so well, and so the -- an appeal is made to the company,
you're going out of business, you're not going to be
running a plan anymore. Put those assets, distribute
those assets to the place where they will serve the
employees best.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, that would be not be a
distribution of the assets as a means of terminating the
plan, but the employer as a sponsor could, of course,
decide to merge the plan instead of to terminate the
plan, if the employer made that choice.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You're making the same
rigid argument that Mr. Baker made, that whatever the
termination, even though the company is going out of
business, it's bankrupt, it's always -- a merger is
always characterized as a sponsor business, not
fiduciary.
MR. ROBERTS: Yes. There are two reasons
that I say that. First, even in the case of a sponsor
of a plan that's going out of business, and that isn't
going to be participating in any merged plan, the merger
still is a decision to alter the design and composition
and structure of the plan, as this case illustrates for
the reasons that Mr. Baker said. That it's going to
change fundamentally the plan from a single employer
plan to a multi-employer plan, that it's going to change
the -- who is the administrator, that it's going to
increase the pool of participants, that it's going to
affect the benefits, because the assets that were
available to pay the benefits are now going to be
available to pay benefits of other participants in the,
in the successor plan, that the PBGC's guarantee of the
benefits is going to be lower in a multi-employer plan.
So for all those reasons, it's going to
change, still change the structure of the plan. But in
addition to that, the employer of -- the sponsor of this
plan that would either terminate, or possibly merge, has
a legitimate interest in choosing termination rather
than merger, because in a termination, the sponsor can
obtain a reversion of the surplus assets, and still
fully provide all the benefits of the employees.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could an administrator
make that decision in its fiduciary capacity?
MR. ROBERTS: No, Your Honor, and that goes
back to a confusion that I think was -- was present
before, that the decision about the distribution options
at termination is a sponsor decision that the employer
makes in the plan documents, because those distribution
options are benefits under the plan.
And while Section 1341(b)(3)(A), in
isolation, might appear to permit the plan administrator
to choose which of those distribution options that are
in the plan to make available, other provisions of ERISA
and the tax code prohibit the plan from vesting that
discretion in the plan administrator.
So in other words, the way it works is when
the employer sets up the plan, the employer provides for
the forms of distribution that are going to be available
at termination. And those forms are just forms of
benefits, optional ways of providing the accrued
benefits to the participants. And then the participants
get to pick among those options at termination.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why are we having this
argument? Why isn't it simply a question of construing
the provision for options in the original plan.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, we think that one
requirement is that it's consistent with the plan, and
the plan didn't provide that here.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why isn't --
MR. ROBERTS: Held it was waived.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why isn't the simple
argument, you can't merge because the plan didn't
provide that as an option.
MR. ROBERTS: That would certainly be a
basis on which the Court of Appeals could have correctly
decided this case, other than the way it did.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Was that position
presented, I should have asked you --
MR. ROBERTS: It was presented. The Court
of Appeals held that Petitioner had waived the argument,
based on the terms of the plan, because Petitioner
hadn't made that argument in the bankruptcy court, even
though the district court had actually addressed the
terms of the plan, but mistakenly construed the plan to
permit merger, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So we've got to assume that
the plan is silent in the sense that, insofar as the
plan documents are concerned, merger is at least a
possibility.
MR. ROBERTS: I don't think that you have to
assume that, Your Honor. I think that because the Court
of Appeals vacated the district court's decision, you
know, there is no decision on it. And if it's necessary
to -- to resolving the questions presented, I think the
Court could address that question. We don't think it's
necessary to resolve the questions presented because we
think that merger is a, is a sponsor decision as a
choice to alter the design, composition and the
structure of the plan even if it arises in the context
of termination.
And in addition, we also think that
merger is not a permissible method of plan termination
under the statute or PBGC regulations which treat merger
and termination as distinct procedures. The statute
requires that the assets of a terminating plan be
distributed by allocating them among the participants of
that plan. That just doesn't occur in a merger.
Instead the assets are transferred to the successor plan
and in the successor plan they are commingled to fund
the benefits of all the participants in that plan.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could a plan document
provide that upon termination the employer is entitled
to a refund of any excess funding? And would that then
be binding on an administrator in a fiduciary capacity?
MR. ROBERTS: The plan document could
provide for a reversion for the employer and in fact
this -- it does. But the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I take it the
administrator would then have the duty to obey that?
MR. ROBERTS: That. Yes, because that would
be consistent with ERISA and the administrator has to
follow the plan in accordance with ERISA.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why doesn't the
administrator here take the position that it's going to
reserve the five million for itself and merge what's
left? If PACE wants a merger with what's left, fine; if
PACE doesn't, end of problem?
MR. ROBERTS: Well, an employer, not an
administrator could, could as a sponsor of the plan
decide to do a transfer of assets and liabilities of
some portion of the, of the plan assets and retain some
assets in the plan.
JUSTICE SOUTER: My question is why -- why
isn't it an option here to say all right, number one, we
got a $5 million surplus. We are going to terminate
this plan and we are going to take the five million.
Question number two, should we, should we use what's
left to merge into the PACE plan? Is that an option?
MR. ROBERTS: What the employer would have
to do would be make a sponsor decision to make a
transfer of assets and liabilities to the PACE plan
before terminating the plan. The employer could make
that decision but that, that decision and the decision
afterwards to terminate the remains of the plan would
both be sponsor decisions that the employer wouldn't
make in a fiduciary capacity.
JUSTICE SOUTER: By doing it in that
sequence could it reserve the five million for itself?
MR. ROBERTS: It -- it could conceivably do
that, Your Honor, subject to the fact that there are
guidelines that the agencies have put out, the 1984
joint guidelines that require in some cases, in order to
prevent circumvention of the termination requirements,
that require the purchase of annuities or the other
distribution of the assets, that those guidelines
require that if there is a spinoff or a transfer of
assets that's followed by the, by the termination of the
remains of the transferee plan, that in some
circumstances annuities have to be purchased for the
accrued benefits of the participants that are
transferred into the other ongoing plan and that are
going to be participants of that plan.
JUSTICE SOUTER: If we assume that, can they
keep the five million?
MR. ROBERTS: Yes, Your Honor but that would
be a decision that they make as sponsor of the plan.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't care how they make
it; I just want to know under the terms of the plan and
consistently with ERISA, could they keep the five
million and in some sequence provide for a merger with
PACE? And I think you're telling me yes.
MR. ROBERTS: Yes, Your Honor, subject to
the fact that here it's quite possible that the PBGC
would consider a transfer of assets and liabilities just
to leave assets in a plan as a reversion, that they
would be subject to that requirement. And so they would
have to annuitize the benefits of, of the participants
in the plan. Because the PBGC would -- would look at
that and they would say that looks like an effort just
to extract assets out of what's really an ongoing plan
because the employer is not going to be participating in
that other plan. The -- they are just stripping it.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then why couldn't the PBGC
say, you know, we are not quite sure how these insurance
companies work. So we'll buy the annuity and then the
five million is an extra guarantee to make sure the
annuities are paid and that also goes to the insurance
company?
MR. ROBERTS: If I could answer the
question. The -- the -- they could not -- the plan
administrator could decide to give the reversion to the
employees and not -- not take a reversion. It could
amend the plan to allow that but the point is it has a
legitimate interest in taking the reversion and that
that interest encourages plan sponsors to fully fund
their plan, and depriving it of that would prevent them
from that discourage full funding of plans.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Ms. Clark.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JULIA P. CLARK,
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MS. CLARK: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court. It's notable that neither the
Petitioner nor the Government in their arguments here
has referred at all to the definition of fiduciary in
ERISA. But that is the beginning point of every one of
this Court's decisions as to what is a fiduciary
function and what is not. The statute and I'm quoting
from 29 U.S.C., Section 1002(21)(A), it's in the first
page of the appendix to our brief, is that a person is a
fiduciary with respect to a plan to the extent that --
and then it goes on and there are three subparts, two of
which are relevant in this case.
One of them and I'm taking them out of order
because I think subpart 3 is the simplest way to resolve
this case, "to the extent that he has any discretionary
authority or discretionary responsibility in the
administration of the plan." The other one that's
relevant is subpart 1, which is "to the extent he
has" -- "he exercises any authority or control
respecting disposition of its assets."
The reason that the plan administration
subpart is the simplest way to resolve this case is that
Congress in Section 1341 of 29 U.S. Code, and that's
quoted just immediately below what I was just citing to
the Court, specifically assigned to the plan
administrator all of the decisions that must be made
with respect to implementing the termination of a
pension plan. Throughout that section, everything that
must be done is stated specifically to be done by the
plan administrator.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course this argument
would not have any force whatever if indeed,
transferring the assets to another plan does not
constitute a termination of the plan.
MS. CLARK: Justice Scalia, that of course
is the second major issue in the case, and the
Government's attorney admitted that in a two-stage
transaction, the assets and liabilities of a plan can be
transferred to another plan, and the plan can be
terminated and assuming the plan provisions are
correctly in place the employer can take the reversion
of any excess assets. And then --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the first step would be
the transfer. And at that, at that stage it would not
be a termination and therefore it would not be within
the authority of the administrator under this provision.
MS. CLARK: Justice Scalia, the
implementation guidelines which the Government attorney
also referred to have as their entire focus to make
certain that two-part transactions of just the sort that
you have referred to are treated as a single whole in
determining whether a plan has been legitimately
terminated or not. The entire focus of those guidelines
is, we are not going to permit an employer by separating
things out into two parts, first the transfer of assets
and liabilities, then a termination, to do in form what
in substance is simply the continuation of the same
plan.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's fine, but that still
does not convert the termination decision into, into a,
an administrator's decision, rather than a sponsor's
decision.
MS. CLARK: I agree completely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Sure, you can oversee it
and make sure that there is no hanky-panky going on in
the two-step process but the -- but the determination
whether to terminate or not is a sponsor's
determination.
MS. CLARK: I agree completely, Justice
Scalia. There is no question here but that the decision
to terminate a plan is the plan's sponsor decision. But
when the plan sponsor has made that decision and the
question on the table is how shall we implement that
decision to terminate, it does not matter whether that's
done through a two-step transaction in which assets are
first transferred to another plan and then the formal
termination of what's left remains. The implementation
guidelines make very clear that you can't tease those
apart and say no, we are only going to look at the final
step and that's a termination and nothing else is.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But they, but they don't
say that in, in looking at the two of them, you suddenly
transform the decision whether to, to transfer as -- as
a termination. You transfer that decision from the plan
sponsor to the administrator.
MS. CLARK: No, Justice Scalia. The
implementation guidelines did not address the question
of in what capacity these decisions would be made. My
point in referring to it is simply to say that it is, it
is a form over substance argument to say that there is a
difference between decision to terminate in which the
plan administrator then has a choice of implementing it
by either transferring the assets and liabilities to
another plan or purchasing an annuity, versus as the
Government and as the, I mean as the Petitioner would
have it, that that's a completely different transaction
from merger as a means of implementing --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm puzzled. Can I just
get myself straightened out a little bit?
If there is a decision to terminate you're
suggesting, you're suggesting that it's after that
decision made, is made, there can be a decision to merge
which would not be a termination?
MS. CLARK: That is correct, Justice
Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Your, your adversary --
MS. CLARK: -- that the termination decision
has been made.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I disagree with you on
that.
MS. CLARK: I'm sorry; I didn't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Your adversary takes a
position that the merger would be not a termination.
MS. CLARK: That is what my adversary says.
And if I might focus on the termination section itself,
U.S.C. Section 1341, their position has been that a
merger with another plan is completely different from
the purchase of annuities to provide those benefits.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It would seem to me that a
merger is a continuation rather than a termination. And
explain to me why I'm wrong on that.
MS. CLARK: The Government's regulations on
single employer plan mergers take the very clear
position, and we cited them in our brief, it's the
regulations under Section 414(1), the clear position
that any time there is a transfer of assets and
liabilities from one plan to another, whether a complete
transfer or not, that is treated as a spinoff of a plan
from the original plan and a merger of the spun off
assets and liabilities into the other plan.
So that merger is a more flexible concept.
It is not just the all-in kind of merger where two plans
merge and continue down the road as a single entity.
Merger also in the Government's own usage describes a
transaction in which all or some portion of liabilities
and all or some portion of assets are separated from the
original plan and transferred to the second plan.
Now, that being the case, the question
really as to whether this is the proposed, the proposal
of any merger -- and the question presented to the Court
is in the abstract, is any plan merger an acceptable
means of terminating a plan under Section 1341?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. And -- and the
argument your adversaries make is that termination
requires that the plan assets be distributed to the
beneficiaries.
MS. CLARK: Yes, Justice Scalia. That's
what it says.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that in the case of a
merger the assets are not distributed to the
beneficiaries, they are distributed to this new plan,
which benefits not only the beneficiaries of this plan
but the beneficiaries of other plans.
MS. CLARK: Justice Scalia, we disagree for
the following reason. Section 1341 specifically
provides that the plan administrator implementing a plan
termination may -- and here I'm referring to the
language that's again in the appendix to our brief; this
is the last page of that appendix, right at the top --
plan administrator may purchase irrevocable commitments
from an insurer, that's an insured annuity, to provide
all benefit liabilities under the plan, or, in
accordance with provisions of the plan and any
applicable regulations, otherwise fully provide all
benefit liabilities under the plan.
Now, this Court just last week in James vs.
United States construed a similar statute that had a
list of crimes followed by the phrase or otherwise
involves a serious risk of potential harm to persons --
I'm paraphrasing. I didn't get it exactly right. Both
the majority and the dissenting opinion in that case
agreed that an "otherwise" structure of this sort means
that what precedes the "otherwise" phrase is taken as a
baseline against which to judge what follows it, and
that it tells you what Congress had in mind as something
that satisfies in this case the distribution
requirements of the statute.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. But now, does
indeed the transfer here meet the requirement of little
(i)? Does the transferee plan undertake an irrevocable
commitment to provide to these beneficiaries all that
they're entitled to, even at the expense of some of the
other beneficiaries of that plan? In other words, if
the plan's investments go south does that plan have the
authority to say, oh, you know, our first payments have
to go to the beneficiaries under this plan that was
transferred and the rest of you will get, will get the
leavings? I don't think that the plan has the authority
to do that.
MS. CLARK: Well, Justice Scalia, it does it
in exactly the same way the purchase of an insurance
policy to provide annuities from an insurer does. In
each case the assets are commingled with the entire
assets of the financial institution to which these
liabilities are transferred.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I thought we
just heard that the PBGC might look at it a little
differently, that they are more comfortable with the
annuity insuring that these beneficiaries get their
benefits as opposed to just throwing the beneficiaries
into a pool with your other union members.
MS. CLARK: Mr. Chief Justice, it's very
clear that if as we are correct -- I mean, as we argue
here, if we're correct that it is a fiduciary
responsibility for the plan administrator to select the
option on the table that is most secure for providing
the benefits in the future to the participants, that if
the multiemployer plan in question were poorly funded or
shaky for any other reason and there is a solid
insurance company offering an annuity, that the plan
administrator would --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Doesn't this put you
in an awfully difficult position? I mean, you're
representing the union, which has other members besides
these beneficiaries, and you're saying even though under
their plan the beneficiaries are fully protected with
irrevocable annuities, we think they're going to be
better off if they're thrown in with our other members
and we get the $5 million to spread out, not to these
beneficiaries but among all these other members. Isn't
that an awkward position to be in?
MS. CLARK: The plan administrator is the
one that ultimately makes the determination. The union
may advocate for what it believes to be in the best
interest of its members, but the party that makes the
decision is the plan administrator wearing a fiduciary
hat under which it can make no decisions --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why would the
beneficiaries be better off if there were a merger?
What would their benefit be, as opposed to an annuity?
MS. CLARK: Probably the single advantage to
participants in a multiemployer plan is portability,
which is to say some of these participants were working
for employers that purchased facilities from Crown and
if their employer participated in the multiemployer plan
in the future they would be able to add to the benefits
that they had accrued and perhaps to reach something
like an enhanced benefit at 25 years of service or the
like. In terms of advantage to the participant in
comparison to an annuity, that would be the major one.
But I want to come back to why it is that
the multiemployer plan distributes the assets in
precisely the same way that the purchase of an annuity
from an insurance company does.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does it make a commitment,
a commitment to fully provide all benefit liabilities
under the now deceased plan?
MS. CLARK: Yes, it does, Justice Scalia.
The law requires that. In any plan merger or transfer
of assets and liabilities from one plan to the other,
the fundamental requirement is that all benefits earned
to the date of the transfer must be protected on both
sides of the transaction for all participants.
JUSTICE BREYER: What's the -- I'm trying to
work this out now. Suppose I buy the annuity for these
employees from the X insurance company, all right, and
so the insurance company promises when they retire we'll
pay them a thousand dollars a month. Suppose the
company goes bankrupt. Does the, what is it, the PGPB,
what do you call it, the Pension Guarantee --
MS. CLARK: PBGC.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Do they pick up any
of that?
MS. CLARK: They do not.
JUSTICE BREYER: They do not, okay. So I'm
trying to understand this, then, the reg under this, and
it says: Administrator, you buy the, the annuity from
an insurance company, for example, or do the same thing,
get an irrevocable commitment in another permitted form.
So one question is when they do that the administrator
doesn't have to have any fiduciary thought in his mind.
The second position is -- that's their
position. The second position is, even if that's so,
this is not another permitted form because a merger
isn't a determination. And the third position is,
that's what we were just getting to, is that we don't
see any way in which this could help the employee. Now
you say, oh yes, there is a way.
Now suppose we're choosing between two
insurance companies. Insurance company A says: We will
pay precisely what is owed, precisely; we're as solid as
a rock. Insurance company B is hungry for business, so
it says: We'll give those employees exactly what's owed
and we'll write each of them a check for $500. Now, is
that something that means then -- remember, this statute
says you have to get what they promised them and not a
penny more. Is that something that the insurance, the
administrator then has to do? He has to take B because
the insurance company is promising him a bonus?
MS. CLARK: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well then, if not that why
this?
MS. CLARK: No. The Department of Labor has
made clear that when making a fiduciary choice among
annuities that are offered by an insurer, it is the plan
administrator's fiduciary duty to look to the security
of the benefit. That is its sole guiding concern.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And beyond as well?
I mean, let's say we have 5 million extra dollars here.
See, that's what I don't understand. If you're saying
it's a fiduciary, I mean, how can they make a decision
ever to do anything other than just give the five
million to the beneficiaries?
MS. CLARK: That would depend on the plan,
Mr. Chief Justice. If the plan --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the terms, the
plans terms here, did not provide for merger in the
event of termination, right?
MS. CLARK: No, we disagree. The district
court determined that they did authorize the merger for
this purpose.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The other side said that
the district court found that the argument was waived,
or the court of appeals did.
MS. CLARK: Justice Scalia, it was the court
of appeals that held that the argument was waived. The
court of appeals said that because this was not
presented in the bankruptcy court that the argument
would not be considered by the court of appeals in
Petitioner's urging the court of appeals to overturn
what the district court had done.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even though the
district court decided it? Usually in a waiver
situation it's whether you argued it or whether it was
addressed by the court.
MS. CLARK: In this case, I could see a
reason why that would make sense, because in the
bankruptcy proceeding both parties presented evidence,
and the interpretation of a plan document is like
interpreting any other contract. You may have the
opportunity to present evidence on what it means.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you're -- if you
prevail here -- I mean, the reason we have a case is
because the employer overfunded the plan to the tune of
$5 million. If you prevail and they cannot get that
back even after fully insuring the benefits for the
beneficiaries, employers in the future will be very
careful not to put in one penny more than what's
required to fund the plan; isn't that right.
MS. CLARK: Mr. Chief Justice, I don't
believe that that's the case, because the funding rules
of ERISA do encourage employers to fund well at times
when times are good. But --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, if you prevail won't
plan documents or shouldn't plan documents be amended to
say that merger is not an option and any reversion goes
to the employer?
MS. CLARK: That may well be the case,
Justice Kennedy. Or they may say whatever the method of
implementing the termination that the plan administrator
chooses, it must provide for a reversion to the
employer.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What possible
equitable basis does the union have to claim this extra
$5 million?
MS. CLARK: The actual --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not for these
beneficiaries. It's for all the others. It's spread
out among this pool in the multiemployer plan. These
are the employer excess contributions. What -- looking
at it as an equitable matter, what claim do they have to
the extra money?
MS. CLARK: Mr. Chief Justice, I could
answer that on two levels. One is that the record of
this case does not preclude the possibility that this
would have been negotiated to leave the reversion for
the employer. But that's speculation because, since the
fiduciary didn't go down that path, we don't know where
it could have taken it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are there a lot of
plans that look like that, that if there's extra money,
we've overfunded that it goes back to the union, not
back to the company?
MS. CLARK: It never goes to the union.
That would be violation of a different section of
Federal law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The union plan.
MS. CLARK: But to a plan. The reason --
and plans simply don't address this, except for
authorize merger --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, how could the
administrator, how could the administrator negotiate
with the employer to give the $5 million back if it's
with a fiduciary?
MS. CLARK: If the employer had said, had
amended the plan to say, whatever you do by way of
terminating this plan, you must protect our right to the
--
reversion, then the plan administrator would have been
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I suppose if it
would have been amended. But what happens, what happens
if the employer wants to continue in business, but
simply turn the plan over to a multiemployer plan? Is
that a fiduciary -- and you have an employer that wears
two hats. The employer is also the administrator. Is
that a fiduciary decision?
MS. CLARK: No, Justice Kennedy, it is not,
because there there really is an impact on the form and
the amount of benefits that will be accrued in the
future under an ongoing plan, as well as --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So then it's the ongoing
significance of the decision to the employer that
determines whether there's a fiduciary obligation?
MS. CLARK: No, Justice Kennedy. It's the
ongoing significance to the participants, because then
what you have is truly a plan design decision, which
does not come within plan administration, while in the
case of a merger as a means of implementing termination
the law fixes those benefits. They are what they are.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I can't see why it's a
fiduciary obligation in case A -- a sponsor obligation
in case A and a fiduciary obligation in case B. That
just depends on the sequence of timing.
MS. CLARK: Again, it's not, it's not the
timing. It's the context. In a case like this one,
where the employer is clearly going out of business,
it's talking termination, it's got annuity quotes on the
table, it's, everything is the implementation of the
termination of the plan. If instead this employer
remains in business and is continuing to employ people
who are going to be accruing benefits in the future,
then that is the question of what are the benefits they
are going to be accruing in the future.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. But what about the
employees who are on board at the time the merger
decision is made? Are you saying that an, an employer
who continues to operate can say, I'm going to merge my
sound plan, I'm sick of having to worry about it, I'm
going to merge this financially sound plan into plan A
out here, which is very, very shaky, and I know
perfectly well that plan A, you know, may very well
collapse, but I don't care. I just want to get rid of
what I have. Is that an option for the plan sponsor?
MS. CLARK: That would be a plan sponsor
decision, but the plan sponsor would be subjecting
itself to obligations for future enhanced funding of the
plan that it joins.
JUSTICE BREYER: Could you go back for just
one second to Justice Alito's question, because that's
what I'm having trouble with, because I think the
question is what, assuming you're right on all the other
points for argument's sake, but what is the advantage to
the worker here? And the answer I heard you give was
the advantage is, well, maybe the worker if he goes and
works in the right place will get some more money.
Well, and I wonder is that relevant. And
you told me in respect to the two insurance companies it
wasn't relevant. So if it isn't relevant in respect to
the two insurance companies, how can that be relevant
here, and if that isn't relevant here what is the
possible advantage to the worker?
MS. CLARK: Justice Breyer, I believe I was
cut off and didn't finish my answer to your question
when you asked it before. In determining which of two
annuities on the table are to be chosen, the Department
of Labor's instructions to employers have clearly said
if they're equal on the basis of safety and security of
the benefits, then it's appropriate for the fiduciary to
take other considerations into account. So our position
here would be that, by parallel to that, if the
fiduciary were to conclude that the multiemployer plan
is of equal safety and security to the participants
benefits that they have earned to date, it would then be
able to take into consideration in the interest of
participants any other difference.
JUSTICE BREYER: So then you're saying that
the answer -- we have annuity company A and B, they're
identical, the worker has a pension that promises them
$1,000 a month, not a penny more, and company A says,
we'll give you $500 extra. Then in your opinion under
the current regs and so forth, the administrator must
choose that company; is that right?
MS. CLARK: Only if the two companies are
equivalent in terms of their security.
JUSTICE BREYER: I said they are equivalent
in terms of -- of the security and so forth; they are
each good companies and one will write out a check for
$500, which is what I thought my example was. And now
you're saying under the law the fiduciary must choose
the first but you're hesitating on that which means I
think I don't understand it fully.
MS. CLARK: I'm trying to make sure that I
understand your question fully, Justice Breyer.
The, the choice must be made and the
Department of Labor's instructions to employers are very
clear on this, in the interest of the security of those
benefits which have been accrued, that's the guiding
principle, (i) single to the rights and interests of the
beneficiaries. If they are equal, then the Department
of Labor guidelines permit the fiduciary to take other
factors into consideration. So that the first decision
has to be made in terms of the security of those
benefits that the individual has already earned.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I don't think, I just
don't read 1341 the way you do. It seems to me that
little (i) at the top of your page 2a is a safe harbor.
I don't think that the, even if it is a fiduciary
decision that he has to, once he has found an insurer
that is rock solid, that is willing to provide all the
benefit liabilities, I don't think he has to look
throughout the rest of the world to see if there is
anything that might be better for his plan participants.
I think that's a safe harbor and if he purchases an
irrevocable commitment from an insurer and then that
insurer is as solvent as any other insurer he is home
free. You're saying he is not home free. He has to
consider little (ii) and see what other ways of fully
providing all benefit liabilities might be better for
the plan participants. I -- I think that's, that's
placing on him an obligation that I don't see there.
MS. CLARK: Well, Justice Scalia, a safe
harbor doesn't necessarily mean that it isn't
appropriate for the fiduciary to consider other
alternatives. It would mean I believe if he chooses an
annuity that is a safe and secure way to provide the
benefit and is equally good with anything else, he would
be solidly protected from any challenge that a
participant might make.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well -- excuse me. Excuse
me. I'm just not sure I understand your answer.
If the employer finds the rock solid
insurance company under -- pardon me, the administrator
finds the rock solid insurance company under Justice
Scalia's hypothetical under (i) he must consider all
other options under (ii)?
MS. CLARK: If -- if options have been
proposed and they are of equal or better security for
the participants, yes, Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And you're saying in this
case, this is sort of the square one question that I
want to be clear on. You're saying in this case simply
that the employer had to give consideration to PACE's
proposal rather than cutting off consideration, we
presume in part, because of the issue of the $5 million.
It had to think about it some more. Is that correct?
MS. CLARK: Yes, Justice Souter.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, your little
(ii) that you're relying on begins by saying in
accordance with the provisions of the plan, the other
solution otherwise provides. Where in the provisions of
the plan does it say that they will consider merger?
MS. CLARK: That was what the district court
found, that the provisions of the plan authorized the
merger, as an option.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you know, is
there a particular provision in the plan that says that?
Or --
MS. CLARK: The district court cited what it
was relying on; I don't have those at my fingertips.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was it specific in the
plan or it just didn't exclude, the plan didn't exclude
the possibility of merger?
MS. CLARK: Well -- the usual reading of a
term in accordance with means that it must not violate.
It must be consistent with the terms of that plan.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So that could be if they
just didn't say anything so it would be a choice. Just
like it doesn't say, may not say anything about a lump
sum, which would be an alternative. But your point --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't read in
accordance with the way you do. I read in accordance
with to mean provided by the plan.
MS. CLARK: Certainly if the plan has a
provision then it must be followed. If the plan is
silent, Mr. Chief Justice, your -- your question
suggests that there must be an affirmative authorization
in the plan. The district court found there was
sufficient authorization here in whatever form that the
district court found satisfactory. And because that
issue was not raised in a bankruptcy court there was no
opportunity to present evidence on that matter.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do I understand that your
position is twofold? One is you say you -- you put this
on the table, the board was bound to consider it with
their fiduciary hat. So it's not just that they were to
consider it. But they had to consider it as a fiduciary
and not as a sponsor?
MS. CLARK: Precisely, Justice Ginsburg.
Now, I have -- my time is up. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you Ms. Clark.
Mr. Baker, you have three minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF M. MILLER BAKER,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. BAKER: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I'm going to turn -- cover a couple points on function
and then turn to the statutory question.
First, I would like to return the Court to
the factual context of this case. In this case, PACE
made not a two-step proposal, PACE proposed an outright
merger in which all assets and liabilities would be
transferred to the PACE union. That's in the record.
It's Plaintiff's trial Exhibit 25. And what's
significant about the merger proposal that PACE sent to
Crown is that this is PACE's merger proposal. It had
Crown signing the merger in Crown's planned sponsor
capacity not as a, not as an administrator but as a plan
sponsor. That's what PACE proposed, recognizing that
the decision whether to merge the plan was a plan
sponsor function.
I'd like to turn now to the question of the,
also the second stage issue here. Even, even if this
was a two-stage transaction, which was not proposed,
each stage of that transaction is a plan sponsor
decision. A plan sponsor has to make the decision
whether to transfer assets and then a plan sponsor has
to make the decision whether or not to then terminate
the plan. Each separate stage is a plan sponsor
function.
In terms of the plan sponsor function
changing because the company is going out of business,
that simply cannot be. A plan sponsor function depends
upon what the function is, and it doesn't matter whether
the business is going out of business or whether the
business is an ongoing concern. If anything, because
it's going out of business, it's important to protect
the, the discretion of a plan sponsor.
In terms of the contextual argument it's
very important to note that nowhere -- that Section 1341
which governs standard termination does not
cross-reference mergers and the Section 1412 governing
mergers does not apply to terminations. In fact the
only place in the statute where the two words appear
together is in Section 1058, in which the two procedures
are actually compared to each other.
There are some significant differences
between termination and merger. In a termination, there
is a reversion to the company. There is also reversion
to employees based upon their individual contributions.
There is no similar reversion in a merger. That is why
a merger simply cannot be a method of termination. The
two are different. You might have a two-stage
transaction but they are two separate transactions each
of which is a plan sponsor function.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure I understand
what you mean by a reversion to the employees who have
made contributions. They get their cash back?
MR. BAKER: Yes. If employees, under 1334,
if employees have made individual contributions to the
plan, it's not merely paid for by the employer --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. BAKER: -- the employee has a right to a
pro rata percentage of the surplus plan assets in the
event of termination. There is no similar right of
reversion to the employee in the event of a merger.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if the plan, the plan
provides that in the event of a merger there will in
fact be a reversion to the employees, if they've paid in
too much or to, or to the sponsor if the sponsor has
overfunded, and there will be no merger except on those
terms? Is that enforceable?
MR. BAKER: I'm not sure I -- I understand
your question.
JUSTICE SOUTER: If the plan document says
look, if we decide to merge, anybody who has paid in
more than he has to, employee or employer, gets the
money back or there's no merger. In other words it's
going to be the terms of the merger that there is a
reversion. Can a plan provide for that?
MR. BAKER: A plan cannot provide for that
because it would be contrary to ERISA, Justice Souter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the case in the
