IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
EMPIRE HEALTHCHOICE ASSURANCE, :
INC., DBA EMPIRE BLUE CROSS
BLUE SHIELD,
Petitioner
v. : No. 05-200
DENISE F. MCVEIGH, AS
ADMINISTRATRIX OF THE ESTATE
OF JOSEPH E. MCVEIGH. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 25, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ANTHONY F. SHELLEY, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
SRI SRINIVASAN, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioner.
THOMAS J. STOCK, ESQ., New York, New York; on behalf of
the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ANTHONY F. SHELLEY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner
SRI SRINIVASAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States,
as amicus curiae, supporting the Petitioner 18
THOMAS J. STOCK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 30
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ANTHONY F. SHELLEY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in 05-200, Empire Healthchoice Assurance v.
McVeigh.
Mr. Shelley.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANTHONY F. SHELLEY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SHELLEY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Empire's complaint in this case raises a
Federal claim. As a result, it arises under Federal
law. This case involves fringe benefits for Federal
employees provided by the Federal Government. The case
involves enforcement of a Federal Government contract.
The same contract is rooted in a Federal statute, and
the money collected here will go to the Federal
Treasury. Nonetheless, the court of appeals held that
this case belonged in State court to be governed by
State law. The court of appeals should be reversed.
In particular, this case concerns the
reimbursement of health benefits by a Federal employee
to his Federal Government health benefit plan, which is
known as the service benefit plan. That plan is
governed by the Federal Employees Health Benefits Act,
FEHBA, and is established through a Federal Government
contract.
In this case, Empire paid approximately
$157,000 in benefits for certain injuries suffered by
Joseph McVeigh, but the plan conditioned the payment of
those benefits on reimbursement in the event that a
recovery was made from a third party. Those terms are
part of the Government contract, the reimbursement
terms.
Thereafter --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you go back and
because the -- the parties seem to have different views
about it? I think you said it was required by OPM to
have this reimbursement term, and the other side said
that there was no requirement from the Government
agency that you include the reimbursement term.
MR. SHELLEY: Under the statute -- Justice
Ginsburg, under the statute, the Office of Personnel
Management is charged with selecting the benefits and
exclusions for this particular program and for this
particular plan. The statutory section is 8902(d).
And those terms are -- OPM has the final authority over
those terms and those terms are placed in a statement
of benefits which the -- which this statute also says
shall become part of the contract and are attached and
incorporated into the contract. So the final authority
over the benefits and the exclusions --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that -- all that says
is that OPM looked at these terms and it thought they
were okay. It's not -- it doesn't show that OPM
required these -- this as a condition for Empire to
serve as the insurer.
MR. SHELLEY: Well, it's -- our obligations
are through the contract, and our only obligations here
are the ones in the contract. And that contract --
that provision is in the contract. And as a result of
that, we were -- we were mandated to enforce that
provision. If the Government wanted that provision
out, it had the final authority to take it out, and it
would only have been included if, as a matter of
authorization, OPM wanted it in there.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's different from
putting it in. I mean, you want to change what you --
what you allege, that -- that it's mandated by the
Government to simply the Government, although it had
authority to eliminate it, did not do so? If -- you know,
that's a different -- different assertion.
MR. SHELLEY: The -- I think it makes no
difference. The fact of the reality is that it's in
the contract.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'll assume it's the latter
then.
MR. SHELLEY: The reality is that the --
these reimbursement terms are in all the contracts
essentially of the FEHBA carriers, and as a result, I
think it can be assumed that it's the policy of the
Government that they should be in here. And the result
of them is that they save the Government money. So it
does make good Government policy to have these
provisions in -- in the contracts to begin with.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But this is a fairly
indirect way of establishing a Federal cause of action.
I mean, it -- it's a preemption provision. Why isn't
it reasonable to assume Congress thought there was no
need for a Federal cause of action? Because it's a
contract action. State courts handle those every day,
and they assumed they'd be handled by State court.
MR. SHELLEY: I think the Court's decision in
Jackson Transit sets up the framework for that, and
that is, that Congress did assume there would be a
contract cause of action, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I noticed you
referred in your brief to the Jackson Transit line of
authority. Do you know how many times Jackson Transit
has been cited in the last 20 years by this Court?
MR. SHELLEY: It has not been applied again
since then, but we would say it's settled law as a
result.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not been cited.
I think it's never been applied and it's not been
cited once in 20 years. So what's the line of
authority?
MR. SHELLEY: Well, it's four or five cases
that Jackson Transit was built on, for instance, the
Machinists case v. Central Airlines, which came out of
the 1960's. In those cases, for instance, they -- the
principle is simple and it's a strong one, and that is
that Congress assumes that a -- when it calls for the
creation of a -- a contract in a statute, that it will
be enforceable just as with ordinary contracts.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Those cases came from the
days when we were also quite willing to imply Federal
causes of action in statutes that had nothing to do
with the Government, you know, 10b-5 and things of that
sort. I thought we had put all of that behind us. You
want us to go back to that bygone age.
MR. SHELLEY: No, I don't think so, Justice
Scalia. The -- the Court in Jackson Transit
specifically differentiated between Congress assuming
there was a contract cause of action whenever it calls
for the creation of a contract and separately implying
a cause of action. That's different because that --
that has to -- in doing that, the Court has to create a
cause of action in the first place, but Congress is
assumed to want contracts to be enforceable when it
calls for the creation of the contracts in a Federal
statute.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We're not talking
about the contract between you and the Federal
Government. We're talking about some other agreement
between you and an individual employee.
MR. SHELLEY: No. We're talking about the
contract between us and the Government because it's
that contract that contains the reimbursement terms,
and when the enrollee enrolls in the Federal program,
he or she takes on the obligation of complying with all
the terms of the Government contract.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that may give
rise to a separate agreement, a related agreement, if
you will, between you and the employee. But it's not
-- it's not a -- you're not the Government. The
employee is not the Government, at least not for these
purposes. So why is it a Government contract?
MR. SHELLEY: Because the -- the underlying
terms are part of the Government contract and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if the Government
says -- Congress says, we think OPM should have a
recreation center for its employees and it should have
all these things, and then OPM enters into a contract
with a company that runs recreation centers -- okay --
that's a contract with the Government. And then that
entity enters into a contract with somebody else to
supply the basketball hoops. Would you say that that
last contract is a Government contract?
MR. SHELLEY: The subcontract?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. SHELLEY: I would not say it's a contract
with the Government, and that's not our situation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if the provision
-- even if at some point Congress said, and besides,
you know, the basketball hoops should be -- you know,
made in America as opposed to somewhere else and, you
know, specifies the terms of the subcontract.
MR. SHELLEY: It's not a Government contract.
The Government contract is the contract between the
party with the Government, and that's what we have here
and that's what we're seeking to enforce.
But I would point out that cases like Jackson
Transit and the Central Airlines case -- the case --
the party suing wasn't really suing on the contract
even. It was -- the case emanated from the contract,
and as a result, the Court, nonetheless, held it arose
under Federal -- Federal law. In this case, the -- the
case is directly on the contract itself. So it's a
much closer connection to the Government terms.
Under the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there's nothing in the
statute that speaks about a Federal forum. And if you
look at this entire picture, you're seeking
reimbursement, and you're seeking reimbursement based
on a tort recovery. And why wouldn't the most
sensible, the most natural thing for a legislature, if
they thought about it, be to say, well, that claim for
reimbursement ought to come in on the coattails of the
tort claim? You don't need to make a whole separate
Federal case out -- out of it. Why would Congress want
these claims to be subject to a separate Federal case?
MR. SHELLEY: Justice Ginsburg, every other
type of claim under this program is in Federal court
already, denials of benefits cases, disputes between
the carrier and the United States. Only a sliver of
lawsuits, these reimbursement suits, are -- are left.
And it would be anomalous to -- for Congress to have
wanted those to be in State court.
But even aside from that, a Federal forum
offers the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, it's because there's
an anterior lawsuit that everything rides on that State
court suit. There wouldn't be any recovery from which
you could claim reimbursement were it not for that
State court lawsuit.
MR. SHELLEY: The reality is that a
straightforward Federal lawsuit and a Federal rule that
these -- these reimbursement provisions are
straightforwardly enforceable through Federal claims
means that they will -- the reimbursement will be
collected efficiently and correctly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could you --
following up on Justice Ginsburg's question, could you
intervene asserting rights of subrogation in the
underlying tort suit that your covered beneficiary
brought in State court?
MR. SHELLEY: Conceivably, but the Federal
question statute allows us to raise Federal claims in
Federal court, and through it, Congress has determined
that if the case turns on Federal law, that the Federal
forum is an appropriate forum for that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, wouldn't it be
more efficient for you to intervene in the pending
State suit and get it all resolved at once rather than
waiting until your beneficiary gets a recovery and then
starting a whole other Federal suit over this somewhat
subsidiary subrogation point?
MR. SHELLEY: No, because in many States --
many States don't allow reimbursement altogether. They
have anti-subrogation policies as well, and the reality
is, is that what --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, at that point,
you'd be able to assert your argument under the Federal
preemption provision that says, in my view somewhat
surprisingly, that these contract terms preempt State
law.
MR. SHELLEY: Yes, and we've fought many
battles on those fronts in the State courts. And the
reality is that the Federal forum with its familiarity
with Federal law, its solicitude towards Federal law is
the appropriate forum in these cases, more so than the
State court. And what may seem like an efficient --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You don't have any
such problem here. There's no conflict between the New
York law -- you certainly could have gone into that
lawsuit and --
MR. SHELLEY: Well, no conflict is required,
for instance, under the Jackson Transit analysis. The
analysis is, is this a pervasively Federal regime to
start with, and if so, it's a Federal claim whether
there's a conflict or not. And so a conflict is really
unnecessary.
But the other point is that with the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I could see if this were
-- what we were talking about everything is -- the
insurance of a Federal employee and questions about
coverage, questions about benefits, all of that between
the employee and the carrier. But this comes up
because we have a third party who enters the picture in
an estate law claim. So I don't think you can just
say, well, everything is -- this whole thing is -- is
all a Federal contract.
MR. SHELLEY: Your Honor, there is no --
there's no requirement in the preemption provision
either for a conflict. I mean, Congress went back to
the -- to the drafting table in 1998 and said, we want
State law to be preempted whether or not there's a
conflict in this particular situation. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That would have been
a good time for them to say we want a Federal --
Federal court jurisdiction over these causes of actions
if that's what they had in mind, but they didn't do
that.
MR. SHELLEY: Well, first of all, there have
-- there was no dispute whatsoever that these types of
cases could be brought in Federal court in 1998.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, there sure was.
For those who like to look at the legislative history,
the House report said that -- again, it's very curious
language. It said, this change will help strengthen
the case in favor of Federal jurisdiction, or something
like that.
MR. SHELLEY: Yes, Mr. Chief Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, since when is
Congress trying to strengthen -- they either decide
it's going to be Federal jurisdiction or not. They
don't try to make arguments.
MR. SHELLEY: There had been no dispute about
whether reimbursement claims could be brought in
Federal court. The courts -- the courts were in
agreement on that. What there was a dispute about was
whether denials of benefits cases could be removed from
State court to Federal court. And what Congress did
was it followed the ERISA model and changed the
preemption provision because the preemption provision
was what had been giving the courts problems about the
removal issue. And so Congress did, I think, what the
courts told it to do, was get rid of some language in
the preemption provision that is hampering Federal
jurisdiction. Congress did that and created Federal
jurisdiction.
Nonetheless, now we come up with a new
dispute that had never been a problem before --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's sort of queer
terminology anyway. When Congress has already decided
that there should be Federal jurisdiction. It would seem
very strange for Congress to say this strengthens the
case for Federal -- what do you mean the case for
Federal jurisdiction?
MR. SHELLEY: I don't think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We prescribe Federal
jurisdiction. I -- you know, I'm not a fan of
legislative history, but I -- I don't find that
particular piece very much against you. In fact, it
may be just -- just the opposite. It may be -- it's
lawyers' language, you know. We don't know whether
there's Federal jurisdiction or not, but this will make
a better case for -- you know, for the other side.
MR. SHELLEY: I think Congress enacted the
statute in 1995 against the backdrop of -- of settled
law that Federal programs are typically litigated in
Federal court.
What happened, though, was that the States
started -- started enacting provisions in the area and
Congress went to work in 1978 and enacted a preemption
provision to reemphasize what I -- what it believed in
the first instance.
Then in 1998, after courts continued even to
interpret the preemption provision narrowly, they went
back to the -- they went back to the -- to the statute
and they strengthened it even further to make it
absolutely clear. So I think what we have is a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that the -- the
purpose of the preemption provision in this statute was
related to benefits and coverage. Some States have
mandatory coverage for this or that. The case that was
mentioned is the chiropractor. And the -- in the
Federal scheme, the Federal administrator didn't want
to be saddled with whatever the particular packages
that the States had. So the coverage and the benefits
-- those were to be determined on the Federal level,
and you weren't supposed to be saddled with whatever
the State thought would be good to have in the plan.
MR. SHELLEY: But the provision doesn't read
simply that State laws defining benefits shall be
preempted. It reads State laws relating to the extent
of coverage or the nature or provision of coverage,
benefits, or payments with respect to benefits. And so
it covers a broad array of things other than simply
mandated benefit statutes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but -- but -- I'm
sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there any
comparable situation where a contract between two
private parties has the effect of preempting State law?
Suppose all you have to do in your service benefit plan
is agree with your beneficiaries that in the case of
subrogation, you're entitled to, you know, 10 times
actual damages, if they don't pay up right away or
something like that. And -- and that would override
all sorts of State law. You could specify you're
entitled to interest at 20 percent and that would
preempt State usury laws?
MR. SHELLEY: Well, I believe there are many
other statutes in the benefits area involving the
Federal Government from long-term care to miliary
benefits which have a similar preemption provision. I
think it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's a sloppy way to put it,
don't you think? Maybe what Congress should have said,
although Congress doesn't always speak precisely, is
that any -- any State law which contradicts a provision
of the contract on these particular subjects is
preempted.
MR. SHELLEY: It said that originally, and
the courts interpreted that so narrowly that
Congress took that out. Took the contradiction part
out. There was an inconsistency requirement in the
statute. Congress took it out specifically to knock
out even supplementary or --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay, I'll put it differently.
All State laws relating to subjects that are covered
in the contract are preempted.
MR. SHELLEY: And I would say that that's --
that Congress, when it enacted the provision, I think
intended something on those lines. The provision is,
in fact, the result of several different amendments and
it reads the way it does as a result of the amendments.
And if I could reserve the remainder of my
time for rebuttal, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Srinivasan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SRI SRINIVASAN
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. SRINIVASAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
An action to enforce the terms of a FEHBA
contract is a Federal action because the rights and
duties in FEHBA contracts are Federal in nature under
the Jackson Transit inquiry.
The Federal nature of the rights and duties
comes both from the context in which FEHBA operates and
also from the terms of the express preemption
provision. Briefly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Isn't there -- isn't
that a big leap? I mean, even if we agree with you
that there are Federal rights and duties, is it
irrational for Congress to determine, since they arise
in a normal breach of contract action, we're going to
assume they're going to be brought in State court? The
cause of action is for breach of contract that every
State recognizes.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I guess that seems
like an unlikely outcome, given that under the express
terms of the preemption provision, it's clear that the
contract terms are matters of Federal law in the sense
that Federal law dictates that they govern over State
law. And if we know that Federal law provides a
substantive rule of decision with respect to the
construction of the contract, it seems anomalous to
impute to Congress the intention that those Federal
rights and duties should be litigated solely in a State
court action.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But wouldn't it have
been the easiest thing for Congress to say, as it does
countless times when it creates Federal rights, that
Federal courts have jurisdiction to enforce these
rights? And they didn't do that here.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, they didn't do that,
but I think as Jackson Transit explains, it's -- it's
different in the contract context than in your standard
implied cause of action context for the following
reason. When Congress specifically contemplates the
construction of contracts, as it did in FEHBA, it
clearly contemplates that those contracts will be
enforceable somewhere. So there is a cause of action
for breach. The only question is whether that cause of
action sounds in State law or instead in Federal law.
And on that question, when Congress
prescribes, as it did in the preemption provision, that
the rights and duties are matters of Federal law, it
seems most likely that Congress intended there would be
a Federal cause of action that could be brought in
Federal court to litigate those terms. And that's what
Congress did in the terms of the preemption provision.
That --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What -- you -- you might
follow along with that perfectly well if you're talking
about the beneficiary, the Federal employee, saying I'm
entitled to a certain coverage or I'm entitled to
certain benefits. You would expect that suit to be in
Federal court. But why would you expect what piece of
the tort recovery the carrier will get to be in Federal
court?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, this is part and
parcel of benefits, Justice Ginsburg, because you're
right that when -- and when an employee asks for
benefits, you'd expect that issue to be litigated in
Federal court. But this is a condition on benefits.
That's how the reimbursement obligation is framed in
the contract. It's that if you get benefits from the
Federal Government and then later on get the same
benefits from a third party, a condition on the
Government benefits is at that point you have to
reimburse the Federal Treasury. So I don't think that
one can easily draw a distinction between benefits qua
benefits and benefits that are at -- at one point
issued to the employee but then are subsequently
returned pursuant to the terms of the reimbursement
obligation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Suppose there's a dispute in
the -- in the lawsuit about whether a particular
benefit to which one - the party was entitled under the
contract has been waived. Okay? That's the issue. Is
that issue to be decided by Federal law or by State
law?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, do you mean in an
underlying tort action or --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. SRINIVASAN: No. In the underlying tort
action, that generally would be governed by State law.
Now, on the question of whether a benefit is something
that the individual is entitled to or, conversely,
whether the benefit is obligated to -- whether the
individual is obligated to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, I'm not talking about
the -- I'm talking about the claim, the claim made by
an individual against the carrier. And -- and it is
asserted that this claim should have been made sooner.
It has been waived by not having been brought forward
sooner. Okay? That's -- that's the hypothetical. Do
-- do you think that that -- that is governed by
Federal law?
MR. SRINIVASAN: I'm not sure --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whether waiver occurred or
not.
MR. SRINIVASAN: I -- I think that -- that
when it's a claim for benefits, it probably would be
governed by Federal law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why?
MR. SRINIVASAN: But even --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, the text -- the text
only -- only says, shall -- which relate to the nature,
provision, or extent of coverage or benefits. Extent
of coverage or benefits. I don't know that that
relates to any of them. It relates to whether the
benefit that was covered has been waived.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, it depends on whether
the contract speaks to the issue. Now, insofar as the
contract --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. SRINIVASAN: -- insofar --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't speak to it.
MR. SRINIVASAN: -- insofar as the contract
doesn't speak to an issue, there obviously would be a
stronger argument for the operation of State law. But
that's not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So you're not saying
that -- that Federal law is -- is pervasive here, that
it covers the -- the entire -- the entire suit between
the claimant and the insurer.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Not necessarily.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. In that respect,
doesn't it differ from ERISA?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, it -- it differs from
ERISA in the following sense, that in ERISA, ERISA sets
forth a cause of action. And so the Court has
concluded that that cause of action is exclusive of
State court causes of action. And we're not taking
that position here. We -- we don't say that the
Federal action is the only action -- excuse me --
that's available. State court actions for breach of
contract might also be available. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you're gong to make a
lot of trouble for us. We're going to have to sort out
which of these things are covered by State law and
which aren't.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I don't know that it's
going to be a -- a terribly difficult inquiry because
of the precision with which the terms of the preemption
provision speaks. And it's certainly not difficult
with respect to the reimbursement obligation because it
fits --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, ERISA has a
very clear preemption provision too, and that's
generated a fair amount of work for us.
MR. SRINIVASAN: It has, but in terms of --
in terms of the relate-to requirement, that's true, and
I think the Court would apply exactly the same
standards that it applies in ERISA.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you think there's any
constitutional difficulty with the preemption provision
in this statute?
MR. SRINIVASAN: I don't. I think --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You can make a contract
preempt State law. Is there any precedent for that?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I think Boyle somewhat
stands for the same proposition in this --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You don't have Boyle for
that.
MR. SRINIVASAN: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE STEVENS: I didn't think Boyle went
that far.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, Boyle at least
establishes that the terms of a contract preempted
State law because it was a procurement contract and the
idea was that by complying with the terms of the
procurement contract, the contractor asserted
essentially a federally compelled defense to the State
court action.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I thought -- I
thought it defined a duty. I -- I agree with Justice
--
Stevens. I -- I've never seen it -- are there other
statutes where the contracting parties can decide
whether or not they're going to oust Federal law -- or
State law?
MR. SRINIVASAN: I don't know that there are
other statutes, but what this particular -- particular
provision indicates is that Congress thought it was
very important that FEHBA contracts would control over
State law, and I don't think there's any constitutional
limitation on Congress' ability to do that. After all
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I wrote Boyle and what
I thought I was saying was that the common --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- was that the common law,
Federal common law precluded, preempted any State law
which contradicted this contract. Now, you can -- you
can put that in a sloppy fashion by saying that the
contract preempted State law, but it wasn't --
MR. SRINIVASAN: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that we thought it was
the contract that preempted State law. It was Federal
common law which said that the contract -- that any
provision in State law which contradicts the contract
is preempted by Federal common law.
And you can read this statute the same way.
It's a sloppy way of putting it, but what it means is
Federal law preempts any State provision that is
contrary to a provision of the contract --
MR. SRINIVASAN: That -- that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- which -- which is
certainly constitutional.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Absolutely that's
constitutional, and that's -- that's what I mean to be
saying because it's Federal law --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Congress isn't always
precise, is it?
MR. SRINIVASAN: No, they're not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any significant
variation among the different carriers as to the terms
of the contracts they use in different places for
Federal employees?
MR. SRINIVASAN: On which particular --
JUSTICE BREYER: Under this program.
MR. SRINIVASAN: There's -- there's
variation, sure. Now, on -- on --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there a lot or a little?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, there's -- it depends
on what you're talking about.
JUSTICE BREYER: What I'm thinking of is a
--
statute. The statute has fairly close detail as to
what the contracts must contain. It gives authority to
OMB or -- to write regs. And they have written regs
that have very detailed provisions as to what the
contracts must contain, and then there is the contract
with the individual carried -- when the -- when the
carrier is implementing these rules, regulations, and
statutes.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: And I'm trying to figure out
is --
MR. SRINIVASAN: The statute doesn't give a
great deal of specific --
JUSTICE BREYER: It gives some.
MR. SRINIVASAN: -- direction on the
terminology.
JUSTICE BREYER: It gives some.
MR. SRINIVASAN: It gives some, but it's only
bare bones, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, I know, but I'm trying
MR. SRINIVASAN: But I think that's important
because what -- what Congress has done is essentially
to leave it to OPM to negotiate the terms of these
contracts.
JUSTICE BREYER: Insofar as the individual
carriers write contracts with their covered employees,
i.e., me and you and other people, and there's a lot of
variation, I would say there's a lot of private going
on. But insofar as those contracts are dictated by
what OPM says, then it looks more to me like a regular
Federal program.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, those --
JUSTICE BREYER: And I'm trying to get a
handle on that.
MR. SRINIVASAN: The contracts between the
individual and the carrier are dictated by OPM in some
sense because OPM negotiates the terms that bind the
individual. So, the contract that you and I enter into
when we sign on for health insurance is a part of the
-- of the program, if you will, that's negotiated by
OPM with the carrier.
JUSTICE BREYER: So in other words, when I
sign a contract, or anyone who's a Federal employee,
it's OPM who effectively sets those terms?
MR. SRINIVASAN: That's right, in negotiation
with the carrier, and the statement of benefits is
essentially the program. It tells you what benefits
you're entitled to and it tells you what obligations
you're encumbered by when you take on those benefits.
And one of the obligations that you're encumbered by
under the clear terms of this contract is the
obligation to reimburse the carrier in the event --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I understand.
MR. SRINIVASAN: -- that you receive benefits
and then subsequently receive benefits from a third
party.
And one thing that I don't want to lose sight
of is that ultimately this concerns money that will be
reimbursed to the Federal Treasury. And so the fact
that this case happens to involve litigation between
two private parties shouldn't obscure the strength of
the Government's interest in the area, given that
Federal funds are involved.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Srinivasan.
Mr. Stock.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THOMAS J. STOCK
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. STOCK: Mr. Chief Justice, may it please
the Court:
I must confess that I continue to be
perplexed by the claim that Congress intended
reimbursement claims of this type to be handled and --
and to be dealt with in the Federal courts when that
same Congress, in enacting the FEHBA statute, did not
provide for that cause of action or that right in the
first instance.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's quite possible no one
in Congress thought about this --
MR. STOCK: It -- it --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which is common. So if
it is common, why is it that we would not use the same
approach that the Court used in Clearfield Trust, in
Kimbell Foods, and really look to the nature of the
contract? Whereas here, the rights at stake are really
those of the United States in that they are going to
get the money. We have a statute. We have all those
things I just listed. It covers only Federal
employees. Should -- there are strong interests in
uniformity throughout the Nation, et cetera, et cetera.
So what is the difference between this case,
other than a technical difference? I concede that one.
The title is not United States. It's Blue Cross Blue
Shield or whatever.
MR. STOCK: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: Empire, et cetera. But
aside from that, why is it different?
MR. STOCK: Because, Your Honor, in the first
instance, number one, uniformity really is not a -- a
legitimate claim in this -- in this instance by Blue
Cross and Blue Shield.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why -- why?
MR. STOCK: Because --
JUSTICE BREYER: The obvious reason for
uniformity would be you are a Federal employee, whether
you're in Alaska or whether you're in Virginia.
MR. STOCK: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it's unreasonable to
think Congress would want the rights of those different
Federal employees to differ just because of where they
live. And so what's the answer to that?
MR. STOCK: It -- the fact of the matter is,
is the way Blue Cross has written this reimbursement
provision, they will differ. The reimbursement
provision, which -- by the way, to start with, the
reimbursement provision that is in the Blue Cross Blue
-- Blue Cross Blue Shield contract with the employees
is different than the reimbursement provisions which
are described in the contract between OPM and Blue
Cross Blue Shield. It is markedly different in several
ways, the first way being that, with respect to
procurement costs and the issue of this $157,000, who
pays to obtain that. In the OPM Blue Cross Blue Shield
contract, it provides for attorney's fees and
disbursements to be paid by the Government and the --
and the claim -- the reimbursement claim to be
reduced by that.
In the Blue Cross Blue Shield version of that
between Blue Cross Blue Shield and the -- the litigant
here, that provision is changed. And this is why I say
they then undercut their own claim for uniformity.
They basically say that we'll allow you attorney's fees
if we feel like it in a particular case. That's not a
uniformity provision.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, you're saying that
there is a uniformity between a master contract between
the United States and Blue Cross on the one hand, and
Blue Cross and the subscriber on the other hand. But
doesn't the United States approve the latter contract?
In other words, doesn't it -- well, I forget the
initials -- OPM or whatever it is. Doesn't it have a
-- a requirement of approval going to the terms of the
contract between Empire and -- and the employee before
that contract goes into effect?
MR. STOCK: I'm not sure what the mechanics
are of it, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But isn't that -- isn't that
crucial, though, in your answer to Justice Breyer?
Because if the United States -- if OPM approves the
Empire employee contract, maybe you can say, well, gee,
there's something strange going on at OPM that they don't
require exactly the same terms in the contract with the
employee that they -- that they require in their master
contract with -- with Empire. But it doesn't say
anything one way or the other about the interest of the
United States in having uniformity in which the -- in
the -- in the interpretation and application of
contracts, which they do approve, between Empire, other
Blue Cross Blue Shield entities, and their employees.
MR. STOCK: Well, I think when we're talking
about uniformity, Your Honor, because this is a statute
designed to benefit Federal employees, that we're
talking about uniformity in the context of all Federal
employees are treated the same. The provision that
Blue Cross Blue --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And the United States is
treated the same in relation to all Federal employees.
I mean, there's -- there's an interest in uniformity
for fairness among employees, and there's an interest
in the United States in having the same expectation, in
this case a reimbursement expectation, no matter where
the employee is.
MR. STOCK: That's correct. But in -- in
terms of uniformity, the provision that Blue Cross --
several provisions that Blue Cross Blue Shield has
added to this reimbursement clause undercut the
uniformity aspect of it. And when you say in a
particular case, we'll decide, well, the fellow from
Alaska -- we'll give him his attorney's fees and
disbursements, but the fellow from New York, we won't
give it to, you undercut any -- any --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's uniform in both
Alaska and New York, they are subject to the -- to the
Blue Cross waiver of attorney's fees or not. They're
being treated uniformly. I don't see that that's
disuniform.
What is disuniform, it seems to me, is that
you have an employee who wins a judgment in Alaska and
he gets to keep all his money because Alaska law says
the reimbursement provision is -- is invalid, and then
you have a Federal employee in Texas who -- who gets a
-- wins the same tort lawsuit, and he has to turn over
to Blue Cross all the -- the portion of his recovery
that would cover the outlay that Blue Cross has made.
That's disuniformity.
MR. STOCK: The -- the uniformity which we're
seeking, relative to these benefits, and the -- and the
argument as to uniformity I would submit to you, at
least as to how we treat the Federal employees, is
illusory in this case because no matter how this Court
decides in this particular case, whether there's
Federal jurisdiction here or not, the employees are
being treated differently State to State based upon the
provision that Blue Cross Blue Shield has enacted.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And I suppose that
the preemption provision would apply equally if this
were brought in State court or Federal court. Correct?
MR. STOCK: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm curious --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Your -- your answer to -- to
Justice Scalia -- I'm sorry -- just did not register.
I don't understand --
MR. STOCK: Well, it was incomplete, Your
Honor, because I -- I had turned around to answer the
Chief Justice.
The -- the way they have this set up with the
right of reimbursement and the -- and the kickers that
Blue Cross Blue Shield puts in the statement of
benefits creates a situation. They -- they add that
these rights of reimbursement apply no matter how the
cause of action for damages is delineated, in other
words, whether it's seeking damages for medical
benefits or damages for pain and suffering. And what
Blue Cross Blue Shield has introduced is that -- that
kicker.
And -- and what that does, in effect, from
State to State is change the outcome for the employee
because, for instance, in New York where we have a
collateral source rule by statute that says, you may
not prove medical damages in a personal injury case for
which you've collected insurance. So, for instance, in
Denise McVeigh's case, I can't prove her medical bills.
Yet, Blue Cross Blue Shield is going to come in and
pick Denise Finn's pocket on her claim for pain and
suffering for the $157,000 in medical bills that they
say they've paid.
Whereas, if I go across the river -- and I
don't know the law in New Jersey, but assuming that New
Jersey uses the older rule where, if I had the good
sense to buy myself medical insurance and I collected
medical insurance for the benefits that were -- if I
collect the medical payments for the medical bills, I
can still go into court and prove those medical bills
as against the tortfeasor. In that particular
instance, Blue Cross Blue Shield comes in and it takes
money at least that I've gotten from the other side as
opposed to in New York where they take money that I
haven't gotten from the other side.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but do they take money
in New York that you haven't gotten from the other
side?
MR. STOCK: Absolutely. They're looking to
assert a claim. I don't have a claim for medical
benefits in the underlying court --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but there's
uniformity because the Government wins in both cases.
MR. STOCK: I'm sorry, Your Honor?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There's uniformity because
the Government wins in both cases.
(Laughter.)
MR. STOCK: I have to concede that that's
true, and if that is the uniformity that we seek and
the only --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, that's the kind of
uniformity the Government loves.
MR. STOCK: I'm sure they do.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: I -- I wasn't thinking of
that kind of uniformity.
(Laughter.)
MR. STOCK: I assure you, Your Honor, that
Denise Finn doesn't.
JUSTICE BREYER: I was thinking of the
contract -- the contracts that the carriers enter into
with the individual Federal employees in different
places. And I'm trying to get an idea of whether those
contracts all read the same or they don't. And so far,
you have found one example of where they read
differently. Some contracts apparently say when you
reimburse us, you can subtract attorney's fees, and
others say when you reimburse us maybe you can subtract
attorney's fees, depending on how we feel about it.
And I grant you that is a difference.
And I am curious, as was Justice Souter, as
to whether you have to get OPM approval for that
difference or whether OPM can tell you, knock it off,
we want the same. And also I'd like other examples.
What I'm trying to do, to be clear about it,
is I'm trying to see how similar this is to the
instance of the Federal employee checks, which this
Court many, many years ago said, when you pay your
Federal employees and you write a check, it's Federal
law that's going to govern the interpretation of the
endorsement. I want to see how similar it is and how
different.
I have two differences. One is the name on
this case is Empire, not United States, and the second
difference is the one you just mentioned about may
rather than must. Now, are there others?
MR. STOCK: There are differences in my
understanding, Your Honor, from State to State between
the different Blue Cross entities. I couldn't tell you
what exactly those differences are, but my
understanding is that these Blue Cross policies vary
from State to State.
Do they vary -- I -- I think, Your Honor,
although it supports my contention, that you may have
misunderstood what I said about the -- the difference
between the reimbursement clauses, honestly. What I --
what I indicated was the -- the reimbursement clause
that is in the OPM/Blue Cross contract is different
from what Blue Cross then enters into with its members.
That differs. I was not asserting that it differs
from State to State. What I'm saying is that the
effect of that differs from State to State certainly.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May -- may I ask this?
Because I think your example overlooks the fact that at
least your opponent claims that the Blue Cross contract
provision would preempt the New York law that denies
your client recovery for health benefits.
MR. STOCK: It does --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I think that would be their
answer to your example.
MR. STOCK: It -- it would be in error, I
believe, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, if we -- if we think
Congress can provide that a contract provision would
preempt a State law, it seems to me the example you've
given is the precise example that that statute was
intended to cover.
MR. STOCK: The -- at the -- at the very
essence of that, I don't believe that a contract can
preempt State law. The constitutional laws of the
United States can preempt State law. If somehow you
can bootstrap a contract into that by some theory, I
suppose you could argue that it -- that it --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But if -- if it does, it
would eliminate the lack of uniformity on which you
rely.
MR. STOCK: It -- it would not, Your Honor,
in this instance because the -- the operation of that
statute does not affect their right to reimbursement
under their contract provision. It affects the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, but it affects the
amount that your client can recover. And they would
say that they -- because it assumes an absence of -- it
assumes a payment by the carrier, and under -- I -- I
think they would take the position that they have, in
fact, the -- they have not, in fact, paid that
insurance cost.
MR. STOCK: Your Honor, I don't think we
would ever --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm not stating it very
well, but I --
MR. STOCK: The -- the situation with the --
the term of New York law that I am -- that I had
indicated would occur during a trial of the case and in
terms of my cause of action. It would not affect Blue
Cross' lawsuit against my client.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No. But the defendant
would say, we don't have to pay those damages because
they're covered by insurance. And the response would
be, well, they're not -- they -- they are only covered
by insurance if they can be reimbursed. I don't want
to take up too much of your time on this.
MR. STOCK: Yes, they wouldn't be a party to
that suit at that time, though, Your Honor, in -- in
terms of raising that issue.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But -- but the
preemption provision, at least with respect to the
rights of Empire, would ensure uniformity. In other
words, if the contract terms preempt State law, then
any impediment to recovery by Empire that varies from
State to State would be overridden.
MR. STOCK: Right, but that wouldn't affect
-- that wouldn't override the net -- the net effect on
the -- on the person. The -- the real world effect on
Denise Finn and other people like her would still be
different.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I understand
that. But to the extent people are concerned about
disuniformity from the point of view of the Federal
recovery, the preemption provision is going to apply
whether this action is in State court or Federal court.
MR. STOCK: That's correct.
JUSTICE ALITO: What's your --
MR. STOCK: And if the only -- if the only
interest in uniformity we have, again, is whether the
-- whether the Federal Government gets its -- its money
back, then -- you know, then the uniformity argument
may fly. But if we're also interested in the -- in the
uniformity argument in the manner in which Federal
employees are treated and in the manner in which ladies
who -- such as Denise Finn are treated, then uniformity
is -- is out the window under these -- under this --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the only question
that we're considering today is whether or not Federal
question jurisdiction exists to authorize bringing this
suit in Federal court.
MR. STOCK: And I would submit to Your Honor
it clearly does not because this case, involving Blue
Cross suing Denise Finn for these benefits involves not
issues of the construction or interpretation of a
Federal statute, but issue -- the issues involved in
our case are whether they're entitled to collect the
money that they paid three times to the same doctor for
the same service on the same day. They paid a
particular Dr. Brown $17,500 for the same service on
three occasions.
In addition, our dispute involves whether or
not some of the benefits that they claim they paid and
which were medically a result of this accident were in
fact or whether they were taking other benefits they
paid and trying to be a little cute and collect those
under saxony.
Those are the issues. Those issues --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I would have thought
the issue is whether Federal law governs this --
MR. STOCK: Well, yes, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and they come to Federal
court.
So what is clearly -- maybe I -- maybe you've
-- I don't think you've said this. We know this. That if
the United States issues checks to all of its employees
throughout the country and then it seeks to recover
from one of the drawees or one of the people who
endorsed the check on the ground it was fraudulent, we
know that it is Federal law that must govern those
checks. Right? From Clearfield.
MR. STOCK: Yes, Your Honor, which --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now, what is the
difference in this case? In this case, we have a
private administrator of this Federal -- of this -- of
this Federal program. There are Federal employees
throughout the country. They are supposed to receive
uniform -- reasonably uniform health insurance, and the
private administrator wants to obtain money that it
thinks it's entitled to to put into the Federal
Treasury. Now, aside from the name, what's the
difference?
MR. STOCK: The difference is, is in the
instance of Clearfield Trust, you had the Government
involved in a dispute over their own commercial paper
that they issued and a uniquely Federal interest and a
uniquely Federal item.
Here, these -- Federal employees aren't the
only employees in America who get health benefits, and
they are -- these disputes that arise under this
statute are most frequently not of the -- not seeking
to answer the grand questions. They're most frequently
involved in dealing with issues such as we have here.
Whether the --
JUSTICE ALITO: If the Federal Government
were running this program itself, would you make the
same argument?
MR. STOCK: I'm sorry, Your Honor. I missed
the first --
JUSTICE ALITO: If the Federal Government
were running the program itself, rather than having
it -- private entities administer the program for it,
would you make the same argument?
MR. STOCK: I don't know that I would, but I
think the caveat to that is if the Federal Government
were running it themselves, pursuant to a different
statute than we have here, the first thing I think I
would look at is what jurisdiction or what the Congress
had to say about where they wanted cases arising from
that. It may well be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they've already
said that. I mean, there would be Federal jurisdiction
there because the Federal Government would be a party
to the case. Right?
MR. STOCK: Yes, Your Honor. But they're not
a party to this case.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's exactly what I'm
trying to find out. That's -- that's what I'm -- I'm
trying to figure out in my mind how close this is to
the Federal Government running a uniform program. I
mean, everybody agrees Federal law governs questions
involving the rights of the United States --
MR. STOCK: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- arising under nationwide
Federal programs. And here, we have not the United
States. We have Empire. And so how close is Empire to
being simply an instrument of the United States in this
respect, and how close is it to being really an
independent company that sets up its own insurance
contracts? That's what I'm trying --
MR. STOCK: Interestingly enough, the
Government has told us that. And what they told us --
and it's at page 4 of -- and in a footnote number 3
from the amicus curiae's briefs from Cruz. And the
Government has told us in Cruz's pending certiorari
petition that that -- Blue Cross Blue Shield carriers
do not perform outsourced Government tasks, are not
agents of the Government, and do not act on behalf of
OPM. Rather, they function as independent economic
entities that offer and run their own health insurance
plans, performing a role that is not governmental in
--
nature.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's quite good. What are
you reading from?
MR. STOCK: I'm sorry, Your Honor?
JUSTICE BREYER: What are you reading from
there?
MR. STOCK: We're reading from the footnote
number 3 of the amicus curiae's brief at -- at page 4.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Government -- the
Government as amicus? The Government as amicus.
MR. STOCK: No, no. The -- the amicus from
the -- representing Cruz.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Isn't -- isn't that --
MR. STOCK: And their -- but it is --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- isn't that -- isn't that
MR. STOCK: -- their statement in their -- in
the certiorari -- this is the Government's statement. This
is the Department of Justice's concession that Blue Cross
has sole authority over reimbursement decisions, and that
is their language. That's the way they describe --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But at the end of the day, the
money, every penny collected, minus any service fee, is
going to go into the Federal Treasury. Isn't it?
MR. STOCK: That's true.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, you could say the
same about -- about any recovery, that a certain
percentage in taxes will go to the Federal Treasury I
-- I --
MR. STOCK: Well, we can also say -- we can
also say that irrespective of whether the Federal
courts collect it or the State courts collect it, it's
still going to end up in the Federal Treasury, and that
these are --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But whether it's collected
or not may -- indeed, may vary depending on whether
State law or Federal law applies. And if Federal law
applies, then you have the jurisdictional consequence.
MR. STOCK: The problem in this case, in
terms of asserting arising-under jurisdiction, is --
and -- and in terms of Boyle also, is that the -- the
Petitioner has failed to point out any difference in
how it would occur. There is absolutely no difference
pointed out by the Petitioner as to how the law would
differ --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, presumably it didn't
do that because the preemption provision does not rely
upon conflict.
MR. STOCK: The preemption provision doesn't
apply to reimbursement provisions either, Your Honor.
It applies to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it doesn't apply to
reimbursement provisions, you say, but it does apply to
benefits. And -- and the value of a benefit is going
to vary from the -- the policy limit to zero depending,
in a case like this, on whether a third party payment
has to be given to the Government with -- with -- isn't
-- isn't that a question of benefit?
MR. STOCK: No, it is not, Your Honor.
And with all due respect, this Court has
consistently held that words used in one place in the
statute should mean the same thing as in other places
in the statute. Coverage and benefits, as it's defined
in this statute, does not include reimbursement claims,
and to stretch that preemption clause --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Will you quote the language
that you're referring to?
sure.
too --
MR. STOCK: If I can find it, Your Honor,
I'm sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I -- I don't want to take up
MR. STOCK: Yes, I'm sorry, Your Honor. I'm
flipping around. I have it here.
JUSTICE SOUTER: My -- my concern simply is
that you've made a conclusory statement that elsewhere
there's a definition that doesn't --
MR. STOCK: There is.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And -- and --
MR. STOCK: And it's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: After the argument, just
give me a cite so I know exactly what you're -- you're
getting at.
MR. STOCK: No problem, Your Honor. The --
the punch line to it is or to paraphrase it, you know,
benefits are described as payments for medical --
medical payments for this, that kind of thing. But
there is a very specific description of what benefits
means in the plan. It doesn't include reimbursement.
And I -- and I think it really stretches it to include
reimbursement as a -- under that benefit setting.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But how do you answer the
question that I think Justice Breyer was -- was getting
at, that it's -- it's a -- the -- what's in it for the
carrier? Nothing. As -- if -- if every penny that the
carrier collects is going to go into the U.S. Treasury,
then why does the carrier care?
MR. STOCK: Being a cynic, I'm not so sure of
that, Judge. But -- Your Honor. I'm sorry. I'm not
so sure of that because early on in the -- in Blue
Cross Blue Shield's summary of the facts, they indicate
--
that Blue Cross' fees in the matter are determined
based upon performance. I don't know what performance
means, but I suspect it has something to do with how
much money ultimately ends up being spent.
I don't think it's necessarily relevant to
the inquiry that we're involved in. The fact that --
that all of the money may ultimately go to the
Government, though, I don't think changes the issue as
to whether or not this Court should confer subject
matter jurisdiction upon the district courts in this
case. There -- the -- the issues here can be resolved
in the State courts and more efficiently than in the
Federal courts. And certainly I think that the Federal
courts would not look forward to an influx of cases
dealing with issues in -- in essentially personal
injury issues involving whether or not particular
doctors were paid properly, whether or not particular
payments need to be made in connection with and are
reimbursable to the Government, or the types of issues
that we have here.
And to be perfectly honest, most of the cases
are not of the magnitude of this one where we're
talking about $150,000. Most of the cases involve
$5,500 and $6,500 and things like that. The Government
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but this is a claim
for $150,000 out of a settlement of $3 million or $4
million.
MR. STOCK: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What was your defense on
the merits?
MR. STOCK: To this claim?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. STOCK: Our defense on the merits to this
claim, were we to get there, is that the Government has
paid the same doctor $17,500 three times for the same
service, and that Denise Finn should not be required to
reimburse Blue Cross Blue Shield when they have
incompetently, in effect, paid out more money than they
should have.
The second defense involves the fact that
some of the benefits which Blue Cross Blue Shield is
seeking reimbursement for are not connected to the
accident that injured Mr. McVeigh. They're part of his
normal health care type of services which wouldn't fall
under the reimbursement claim.
Those claims are -- are not the type of
things that I think that the Federal district courts
want to deal with. This case --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I take it you're not
foreclosed from making your defense or your claim in
the Federal court.
MR. STOCK: No, absolutely not. But --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. -- Mr. Stock, we have
one loose end. I think we do. Both Justice Breyer and
I have -- have asked the question whether OPM has to
approve of the terms of the contract between Blue Cross
and -- and the -- the insured. Is -- does OPM have to
approve?
MR. STOCK: I don't believe they do, Your
Honor. I think the terms of OPM and Blue Cross'
contract provide that Blue Cross will enter into a -- a
contract with the -- with the policyholders that is
consistent with its contract with OPM. But I don't --
I don't believe -- and -- and honestly, I -- I did not
look before we -- we talked about this. I don't
believe it requires their approval. They don't get a
copy of the contract and read it over.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Assuming the consistency
term, that supports an argument that the Government has
an interest in -- in uniformity of -- of
interpretation, doesn't it?
MR. STOCK: Only if the -- if in uniformity
of interpretation of the contract?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, yes.
MR. STOCK: I think the Government has an
interest in uniformity of the manner in which the --
the employees are ultimately treated, and I think when
we talk about uniformity, that that's what we ought be
talking about.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I guess you can be --
depending upon how detailed the OPM contract is, you
can be consistent with that contract and still have an
enormous amount of variation from one to another. It
depends entirely upon whether the OPM contract is
entirely comprehensive. If it covers every jot and
tittle, then I guess you can't be consistent with it
and different. But if it's -- if it's sort of bare
bones, you -- you could be consistent with that and
have a lot of variation, couldn't you?
MR. STOCK: Yes, absolutely. And -- and my
understanding is that -- is for that reason that OPM
does not review the contracts and approve the contract
language of Blue Cross Blue Shield.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if -- if --
MR. STOCK: But I don't know that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if, in fact, there were
consistently only in this remote sense so that the
interests which are meant to be protected in the -- in
the OPM Blue Cross contract aren't being protected at
the next level, then OPM could bring an action against
-- against Blue Cross saying it's not consistent
enough, couldn't it?
MR. STOCK: It could.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. STOCK: It could. But in this particular
instance, the contract provisions that Blue Cross are
-- and Blue Shield are seeking to enforce, as regards
reimbursement, are markedly different. I mean, it's --
it's not a small variation. It's a very substantial
matter in terms of, first, the procurement costs and,
second, in terms of what kind of a cause of action Blue
Cross Blue Shield can take the money from. But that's
not an -- an incidental. That goes to the heart of --
of the matter.
If there's no other questions, Your Honors,
thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you very much,
Mr. Stock.
Mr. Shelley, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ANTHONY F. SHELLEY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SHELLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I wonder if you could
focus on one question for me. If you have a State law
cause of action and the law to be applied to some
aspects of that cause of action is Federal law, is that
sufficient to establish Federal question jurisdiction
or not?
MR. SHELLEY: It is, Your Honor, under the
Grable case that the Court issued last year. A State
law claim that turns on the construction of Federal
law, a substantial question of Federal law, is
removable to Federal court and arises under Federal law
in the first place.
I wanted to address Justice Souter's question
of whether OPM does approve the contract. There's no
individual contract -- excuse me -- between Blue Cross
and any individual enrollee. The statement of benefits
is part of the Government contract. It is attached at
appendix A and the terms of the contract, the master
contract, specifically say that in sections 2.2 and
.5, that the benefits shall be -- and -- and
reimbursement terms as well -- shall be consistent with
and incorporated by the statement of benefits, which is
attached. And so it is part of the contract. There's
no separate contract here. It's one --
JUSTICE BREYER: You mean everybody in the
entire United States gets the same piece of paper.
MR. SHELLEY: The same brochure.
JUSTICE BREYER: So it's identical. There is
no difference between every individual's contract,
every Federal employee's -- I guess it's a contract
with the Federal employee. Isn't it? I mean, he's
bound by it you say.
MR. SHELLEY: They -- by enrolling, they bind
themselves to the contract.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So I am -- in
Alaska, Virginia, everywhere, they get the same piece
of paper. They enroll and then they're bound by it.
MR. SHELLEY: Absolutely.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the question here is
whether that should get different interpretations
possibly in different places.
MR. SHELLEY: Under State law, and it should
not.
And we are -- it is a uniform system across
the country, and the -- the carrier is bound to apply
those terms, particularly the reimbursement terms,
consistently and equitably across the country.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel --
MR. SHELLEY: Section 4.1 of the contract
says that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- the -- the Grable
case said, though, that the Federal question had to be
a necessary element of the State law cause of action.
That's not always the case in these cases, is it?
MR. SHELLEY: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's only -- the --
the Federal question comes up only on issues of
preemption. They may or may not be presented in a
particular case.
MR. SHELLEY: In the first instance, our
claim is an enforcement claim for the contract. The
contract itself and the common law that surrounds it
are -- are Federal law, and as a result, we --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that kind of --
that begs the -- that's not the question I asked and it
sort of begs the question. I mean, you have the State
law cause of action to enforce your contract claim, and
if there's some State law that's asserted against you
that's inconsistent with the contract, then you have
the Federal question issue. But that's the only
Federal question I see in the case.
MR. SHELLEY: Well, but there are, for
instance, seven States that wouldn't allow us to bring
the cause of action in the first place, and that's why
we need to go back to the question of whether the claim
itself is Federal in nature. And under the Jackson
Transit or Clearfield Trust analogies, the law at the
start, the cause of action, the claim itself is Federal
in nature, and you don't need to get to the question of
whether the vessel of a State law claim --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: My hypothetical that
I started with was assuming you have a State law claim,
a State law cause of action. So do you have any
authority other than Grable for the proposition that a
State law cause of action which -- in which the law to
apply may or may not turn on Federal law in particular
aspects presents a Federal question?
MR. SHELLEY: Well, the contract itself is
Federal law. It -- it is a -- it is tantamount to a
regulation that the Government has selected the terms
of, and as a result, it should be treated as Federal
law. And -- and cases, Franchise Tax Board, on which
-- on which Grable relies and the earlier cases -- we
-- we would say those reach a similar result.
One other point I wanted to address was this
issue of whether this attorney's fees question is
different than the master contract or the statement of
benefits. It's not. The master contract addresses the
question of whether we can deduct our own attorney's
fees from the recovery before we give the money to the
Federal Treasury. The statement of benefits governs
the question of whether we -- we will deduct for
attorney's fees when we collect the claim from the
subscriber.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you very much,
Mr. Shelley.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the case in the
