IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JEANNE S. WOODFORD, ET AL.,
Petitioners,
: No. 05-416
VIET MIKE NGO. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 22, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States at
:00 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JENNIFER G. PERKELL, ESQ., Deputy Attorney General, San
Francisco, California; on behalf of the Petitioners.
DAN HIMMELFARB, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for the
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting the
Petitioners.
MEIR FEDER, ESQ., New York, New York; on behalf of the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JENNIFER G. PERKELL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners
DAN HIMMELFARB, ESQ.
For the United States, as amicus curiae,
Supporting the Petitioners 20
MEIR FEDER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JENNIFER G. PERKELL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 53
P R O C E E D I N G S
[11:00 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument next
in 05-416, Woodford versus Ngo.
Ms. Perkell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JENNIFER G. PERKELL
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MS. PERKELL: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The question presented in this case is whether,
in enacting the Prison Litigation Reform Act's exhaustion
requirement, Congress intended to require inmates to
comply with administrative grievance procedures or whether
Congress intended to permit inmates to ignore those
procedures.
Petitioners submit that Congress intended to
require inmates to comply with administrative grievance
procedures, for three principal reasons:
One, the established principle of exhaustion in
the administrative law context requires a grievance -- a
grievant to timely comply with administrative agency
proceedings.
Two, in enacting the Prison Litigation Reform
Act's exhaustion requirement, Congress was responding to
this Court's decision in McCarthy v. Madigan, in which
this Court presumed that an express or mandatory
exhaustion requirement for prisoners would necessitate
compliance with prison filing deadlines.
And, three, Congress's objectives in enacting
the Prison Litigation Reform Act's exhaustion requirement
are directly facilitated by a rule in which inmates must
comply with administrative grievance procedures, including
filing deadlines; whereas, those objectives are invariably
subverted when an inmate is permitted to ignore those
procedures.
In the administrative law context, the
established principle of exhaustion generally requires
that a grievant comply with administrative agency
proceedings in a proper and timely manner in order to be
able to proceed to Federal Court. In this case, Congress
has, indeed, enacted an administrative exhaustion
requirement. Even the court of appeals agreed that in so doing
Congress was attempting to bring the exhaustion rule for
prisoners more into line with established administrative
exhaustion rules that apply in other contexts.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What do you say to the argument
that that really is an inapposite argument because the 1983
proceeding is de novo?
MS. PERKELL: I would suggest -- I -- we concede
there's that distinction. However, I would suggest it's
irrelevant for purposes of how Congress would have
understood the term "exhaust" in enacting the statute.
The definition of the "principle of exhaustion" in
administrative law is one in which there's an obligation
to comply with the agency's grievance proceedings. And
so, that is the definition of exhaustion that Congress was
presumably -- I would suggest was presumably invoking in
this context.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's the -- a function
of -- you want the first-line decisionmaker -- you need
that decision, because, at the second rung, in -- at the
court level, deference is owed to it. But in the prison
setting, there's no deference owed to it. So, I would
think that this kind of requirement, that you must file
someplace else first, a place that won't get deference, is
more like the EEOC example and the Age Discrimination Act.
MS. PERKELL: Well, Your Honor, in the first
instance --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry, Ms. Perkell,
could I ask you to speak up just a bit?
MS. PERKELL: Oh, sure. I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thanks.
MS. PERKELL: -- I apologize.
Again, we're submitting that Congress understood
the term "exhaust" in a particular way, given how it's
just generally used in the administrative context. And
with respect to the EEOC context, we think that that is
inapposite, because primarily that -- the relevant
statutes in those contexts invoke the word "commence,"
which --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Invoke what?
MS. PERKELL: The word "commence" instead of
"exhaust," which this Court has expressly, again,
distinguished from an exhaustion requirement.
Moreover, under those statutes Congress has
limited the meaning of "commencement" in such a way that
this Court has interpreted Congress to expressly preclude
the possibility of a procedural default by virtue of a
failure to comply with State filing provisions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you -- are you saying,
then, that those two go together, they're inextricably
tied together? If you've got an exhaustion rule, then
embedded in it is always a procedural default rule?
MS. PERKELL: I'm suggesting in that -- in the
-- excuse me -- in the administrative law context, which
is the context in which Congress was legislating under
this statute, that that is, indeed, the established
conception of that term.
JUSTICE BREYER: They're saying that it's
special here. If you look at the language of the text,
the language talks -- is almost identical to the language
that was in CRIPA, or whatever is -- you know, CRIPA. Is
that the correct pronunciation of the concatenation of --
MS. PERKELL: I'm sorry, I'm not sure what Your
Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm think -- oh, well, I guess
it isn't -- unlike IIRIRA, it is apparently unknown.
MS. PERKELL: Oh.
JUSTICE BREYER: There was a predecessor act,
and the predecessor act used this same language, just
about. And what it said was, "Judge, you may require
exhaustion of such remedies as are available." And, given
that language, nobody thought that was a procedure default
rule; it just meant the judge, if there's a remedy
available, can say, "Prisoner, go do it," in an
appropriate case. And all that happened here, if you look
at the history, is, they changed the "may" to a "must."
And all the people that wrote in were writing in about
that. Nobody dreamt, nobody said, nothing suggests, that
what Congress intended to do was to bring in the
procedural default aspect of it. And there would have
been a lot of objections if they had. So, that's the
argument the other way.
Now, I'd like to know what do you have at all
that overcomes what I just said?
MS. PERKELL: Well, I would suggest that, in
part, the language of the CRIPA, which is -- I believe, is
-- that's how I pronounce it; I believe that's what Your
Honor is referring to -- in part, precluded the
possibility of a default -- procedural default bar largely
because it required a continuance of a case for 90 -- or I
believe it started out as 180 days, and then became 90
days. And -- in order to permit the judge to order the
inmate to go back and exhaust -- and under those
circumstances, even if he had been untimely by virtue of
the continuance language, he was, nonetheless, permitted
to return to Federal Court. So, I think by virtue of the
language of the statute, it's at least possible that
Congress had a -- deliberately excluded that possibility.
Moreover, I think that the statutory history and
the statutory purposes in this case support the conclusion
that Congress intended inmates to require with applicable
grievance proceedings.
And if I may refer to the statutory history, in
this Court -- excuse me, in Booth v. Churner, this Court
recognized that this Court's prior decision in McCarthy v.
Madigan constituted a substantial portion of the statutory
history from the PLRA's exhaustion requirement. And, in
relevant part, for purposes of the question presented here,
that decision observed that -- or assumed that an exhaustion --
a mandatory exhaustion requirement for prisoners would
necessitate the compliance of administrative filing
deadlines.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that was a comment made
when the decision itself held that there was no
exhaustion. The -- wasn't that so? I mean, the holding
in Madigan was in favor of the Petitioner.
MS. PERKELL: That is so. This Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean McCarthy.
MS. PERKELL: This Court made that observation.
It was one of two grounds upon which this Court relied in
holding that this Court would not judicially impose a
mandatory exhaustion requirement for prisoners under that
decision. So, the first part of the decision evaluated
the text of the former version of 1997(e), and, in the
second part of this decision, this Court said,
"Nonetheless, notwithstanding that the statute doesn't
expressly require exhaustion, we will not judicially
impose exhaustion in this case for the reason that such a
requirement would, indeed, represent a possibility of
forfeiture of a claim for an inmate's failure to comply
with deadlines."
And, again, as this Court recognized in Booth v.
Churner, that decision is a significant part of the
statutory history of this provision, and this Court
presumed that Congress was responding to that decision
when it revised 1997(e).
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, there was -- in
McCarthy, itself, the wording was something that -- of the
kind proposed. And so, it's not clear whether it's
referring to -- what was proposed was a rule that would
incorporate a procedural default motion. It's not clear,
just from the -- reading that opinion.
MS. PERKELL: Your Honor, I would respectfully
dispute that, in that our reading of the opinion, as well
as the Government's brief in that case, seemed to propose
no unusual rule of exhaustion. It appeared that the rule
of exhaustion that was being discussed was an ordinary
rule of exhaustion. So, I don't believe that there was
anything unusual about the exhaustion concept that was at
issue in that case.
Finally, I would submit that Congress's purposes
in enacting --
JUSTICE BREYER: Before you get to the purposes,
you quote in your brief -- the only legislative history I
could find here -- you said that Congressman LoBiondo
referred to McCarthy, which you find relevant, because
McCarthy indicated that the word "exhaustion" would carry
along with it a procedural default rule. So, what did the
Congressman say?
--
MS. PERKELL: What did Representative LoBiondo --
JUSTICE BREYER: Uh-huh.
MS. PERKELL: -- say?
JUSTICE BREYER: Uh-huh.
MS. PERKELL: The significance of excerpting
that provision was to, in part, demonstrate that Congress
was, indeed, aware, consistent --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, I take it from
your answer he didn't really say anything helpful to you
MS. PERKELL: He --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- except to refer to the name
of the case --
MS. PERKELL: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in which case, what we have
on the -- all right. Is that right?
MS. PERKELL: Your Honor, I think there are two
relevant things about that statement. First is the
significance of his referencing the McCarthy case and
demonstrating affirmatively that Congress was, indeed,
aware of that decision when it revised the statute. But,
moreover, it was another iteration of the purposes that
Congress sought to achieve through enactment of the
statute.
So, speaking to the third point, which was
purposes of the statute, our position is that those
purposes are directly served by a rule in which inmates
are required to comply with administrative grievance
proceedings.
By contrast, those rules are subverted by a rule
in which an inmate is permitted to file an untimely
appeal, which is rejected on procedural grounds, and
which, therefore, receives the benefit of no prior
administrative review.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In thinking --
MS. PERKELL: It's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- of what Congress might
have meant, one part of the picture is, we're not dealing
with statutes of limitations enacted by legislatures.
We're dealing with grievance procedures that vary from
State to State, and maybe even from prison to prison. And
some of them have a very short span. I think the brief
said some of them are 2, 3, 5 days.
MS. PERKELL: That is correct. Those were
proceedings that were noted on one of the briefs. I think
it's reasonable to presume that Congress was aware of the
variety of prison filing deadlines when it enacted this
statute. And I also think that it's reasonable to presume
that Congress intended for those -- for whatever grievance
procedure the State sets forth to be governing in this
instance. And this is because, under the former version
of the statute, the CRIPA, Congress had required that
grievance proceedings comply with specified standards,
specified Federal standards. And in the new version of
the statute, Congress dispensed with those requirements.
And I think that the obvious conclusion to draw from that
change was that Congress was intending for -- whatever
prison procedures are established in any given situation
are those that are going to govern the inmate's appeal
process.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So, you would treat a State
with a 2-day statute of limitations just like your State,
with a 15-day statute.
MS. PERKELL: I think the -- always, the
relevant inquiry, especially in light of the statute -- or
precisely because of the statutory language, the inquiry
is whether or not remedies are, indeed, available and
capable of use by the inmates. So, without any further
facts, yes, I would treat a 2-day --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It was --
MS. PERKELL: -- filing period.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- available for 2 days, so
that satisfies -- so, I suppose it would be okay for 6
hours, too.
MS. PERKELL: It could conceivably be. As
long as remedies are, indeed,
available to the inmate, there is an obligation under the
statute that he exhaust --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I suppose --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- plausible?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I suppose there can
always be a specific objection to the reasonable
availability of a particular remedy. I mean, if this --
the prison remedy is, you know, within 5 minutes you've
got to file a complaint or something. But that's not the
question here. The question here is what the PLRA
requires, as a general matter, with respect to prison
remedies.
MS. PERKELL: Yes, Your Honor, that is correct.
And as -- we are submitting that it does, indeed,
require compliance with the administrative grievance --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would you agree that there's a
requirement that the exhaustion period be reasonable?
MS. PERKELL: I'm -- I -- the requirement that I
think is relevant under the statute is whether or not the
procedure is available.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Conceivably, if it's too short,
it's not reasonably available. I guess --
MS. PERKELL: That is -- yes, Your Honor, that
is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MS. PERKELL: -- that is a conceivable --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's conceivable.
MS. PERKELL: -- conceivable --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well --
MS. PERKELL: -- scenario.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- what do you --
MS. PERKELL: I --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- what do you make of the fact
that there was prior law that required -- I forget its
exact words, but something like "reasonable procedure,"
and that language was repealed?
MS. PERKELL: I presume, from that, that
Congress had shifted its focus in the new statute to the
purposes that we have articulated in the brief, one of
them being --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, if that's -- if that's
the case, then, on your own reasoning, you can't assume
that there's -- that availability requires any reasonable
availability. It's got to be availability as, I guess, a
physical possibility, and that's all.
MS. PERKELL: I would agree with that, Your
Honor. That is our --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Do you find --
--
MS. PERKELL: -- position.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- it plausible that Congress,
in effect, would have intended these -- the statute of
limitations on 1983 to be truncated in that way?
MS. PERKELL: Yes, Your Honor, I do believe
that. Congress was legislating, enacted this statute for
the purpose of addressing a particular category of section
83 actions in which it appears that Congress reached the
conclusion that there was be -- there was an abuse of that
process under 1983. And so, the purpose of -- what this
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but the abuse was not
coming from people who filed -- or the -- let's say the
line that identifies the abuse was not a line between
those who file a grievance within 2 days and those who do
not. I mean, that's -- that -- it's true, if you -- if
you have a 2-hour statute of limitations, you're going to
keep out a lot of cases, but it's not a tool that is
particularly suited to the problem that Congress was
dealing with, which is frivolous actions.
MS. PERKELL: Well, Your Honor, I would first
dispute that a 2-hour time limitation would necessarily
keep out a lot of cases. As long as it's an available
remedy --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Wouldn't you like to have a 2-
--
hour time limit?
[Laughter.]
MS. PERKELL: Your Honor, it --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You'd have a lot -- you know, a
lot more time at the park.
[Laughter.]
MS. PERKELL: Your Honor, it wouldn't
necessarily be my preference, but I certainly wouldn't
suggest that it was a remedy unavailable or incapable of
use by anyone, if you take into consideration other
aspects of the prison grievance procedure.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May I --
MS. PERKELL: So --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May I ask you just one thing
MS. PERKELL: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- about how this operates
and who reviews what? One of the claims that was made --
this prisoner filed twice. And, the second time, as I
recall, he said, "Every day that I'm here, the clock
starts running again, because this is a continuing
violation. I'm restricted today, and I'll be restricted
tomorrow." And there was no -- is that something that
would be reviewable in court?
MS. PERKELL: I think what -- in this -- as
occurred in this case, the inmate has made this contention
that there was a continuing violation. It would be
incumbent upon the district court to evaluate that
question under the grievance proceeding at issue and under
the facts --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, what --
MS. PERKELL: -- as presented.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- role would govern whether
a continuing violation occurred? Would it be --
MS. PERKELL: I would suggest that the law of
the prison grievance proceeding.
If there's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And what is the law of the
prison grievance proceeding on that point?
MS. PERKELL: Well, in California the
requirement is that an inmate must file a grievance within
working days or 3 weeks of the event or decision at
issue. The facts in this case --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, he -- that -- his point
is that the event at issue happens every day.
MS. PERKELL: Well, I would submit that the
facts of this case actually show that the events at issue
are the two decisions that were made which resulted in
consequences with which the inmate was dissatisfied.
Those two decisions were the first decision --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But your -- but your point --
your -- whatever the internal grievance procedure is,
there's no judge that would decide that, which you said,
this is all for the internal procedure.
MS. PERKELL: That is correct. And, again, the
district court could be called upon to address that
question, as appears to be the case here, and the district
court would endeavor to apply the rules of the grievance
proceeding to the facts regarding exhaustion. If, in the
event the grievance proceeding didn't, for instance,
sufficiently put the inmate on notice, didn't provide
clarity on whether or not -- on what he had to do under
circumstances where there's a continuing consequence to a
decision, perhaps in that instance it would be appropriate
for the district court to decide, yes, indeed, he had
exhausted, given the ambiguity on that point in the
regulations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. --
MS. PERKELL: If --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- Perkell, perhaps
you'd like to save your remaining --
MS. PERKELL: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- time for rebuttal.
MS. PERKELL: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you.
Mr. Himmelfarb, we'll hear now from you.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAN HIMMELFARB
FOR THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS
MR. HIMMELFARB: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The United States agrees with Petitioners'
submission that the Ninth Circuit's decision is
inconsistent with the text, history, and purposes of the
PLRA exhaustion requirement. We would add that the Ninth
Circuit's decision has consequences that Congress could
not have intended.
To begin with, under the Ninth Circuit's
interpretation, a prisoner can wait years to file an
administrative claim, such that it is virtually certain
that the prison will reject the claim as untimely and not
decide the claim on the merits. That is hardly different
from not requiring an exhaustion requirement -- not
requiring exhaustion at all. Indeed, Respondent candidly
concedes -- this is on page 43 of his brief -- that, under
his interpretation, if the prison system does not give
prison decisionmakers any discretion to decide an untimely
claim, the prisoner would not have to file an
administrative claim at all. All he would have to do is
wait for the filing deadline to pass.
In addition, if the Ninth Circuit's
interpretation is correct, the PLRA would be the only
context in the law in which a claimant who is required to
exhaust would be able to get into Federal Court by virtue
of untimely exhaustion; that is, without complying with
filing deadlines. It would be odd, to put it mildly, if
Congress intended to adopt such a uniquely forgiving
exhaustion rule as part of a statute whose very purpose
was to combat abusive litigation by prisoners.
Respondent's submission is that the
administrative law principle, the established
administrative law principle, that exhaustion requires
compliance with the agency's procedural rules, is
inapplicable here, because what we're dealing with is what
he calls an original proceeding rather than a review
proceeding.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is his best case, your
brother's best case, in your view -- and you probably --
may not think of it as a very persuasive case -- Fay and
Noia, is that the closest Respondents can come?
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, probably, Justice
Kennedy. And that is a habeas corpus case that involves
exhaustion under the habeas corpus statute. It doesn't
involve administrative exhaustion. And, of course, the
Court abandoned that principle, which was the deliberate
bypass exception to the procedural default rule, years
ago, I believe in 1977, in favor of the cause and
prejudice exception in Wainwright versus Sykes, which was
subsequently codified by Congress in AEDPA. But there is
no administrative exhaustion context, of which we are
aware, where untimely exhaustion is sufficient.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You --
MR. HIMMELFARB: Respondent places --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could --
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- heavy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would Respondent tell us,
well, that at least in some administrative law schemes,
generally there is a requirement that the exhaustion
period must be reasonable?
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, the -- this Court has
made clear, in various cases, including in the very
context of the exhaustion provision at issue here, in the
Booth versus Churner decision, that there are no
exceptions to the exhaustion -- to an administrative
exhaustion requirement when Congress provides otherwise;
that is, in the context of statutory, as opposed to a
judge-made, exhaustion requirement. It is the case that
what is required under the PLRA is exhaustion of available
administrative remedies. So, under some of the
hypotheticals that the Court was suggesting -- for
example, if there were a 6-hour filing deadline; and, as
far as I'm aware, there is no prison that has a 6-hour
filing deadline -- but, if there were, and in that
particular case, for some reason, the prisoner were unable
to comply with the deadline, because, for example, forms
were unavailable or he was in a hospital bed,
incapacitated, or he was in solitary confinement, I think
it would be appropriate for a Federal Court to conclude
that the remedy at issue was not available; and,
therefore, that he didn't have to pursue that remedy; he
would be able to get into Federal Court, assuming he had
otherwise complied with the prison's procedural
requirements.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, wouldn't it go --
wouldn't that apply -- that principle apply to reasonable
-- unreasonable remedies? You have to have a reasonable
remedy. I don't see how you can decide to import half of
administrative law and not the other half.
MR. HIMMELFARB: No, I don't think -- I don't
think reasonableness is the right way to think about it,
Justice Breyer. It is not a -- in our view, it's not a
categorical question of whether a particular filing
deadline is reasonable or not in the view of the Court.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's not just a filing
deadline. It's the whole procedure. I mean, Rehnquist --
Chief Justice Rehnquist, in McCarthy, lists a bunch of
reasons in cases where the process subjects the plaintiffs
to unreasonable delay, to an indefinite timeframe. And
there could be others. The normal thing is, you excuse
exhaustion where the exhaustion requirement was such that
the person couldn't reasonably comply.
Now, either you do want to import that into this
statute, or not. And if you do not, then I think you're
asking us to say we import what goes normally with the
word "exhaustion," where it favors the Government, but not
what normally goes with the word "exhaustion" where it
doesn't.
MR. HIMMELFARB: Our only point, Justice Breyer,
is that it wouldn't be appropriate for a court to look at
a particular filing deadline in a prison. Most of them,
incidently, are somewhere between 14 and 30 days. But if
there were, for example, a 24-hour filing deadline, our
submission is that it wouldn't be appropriate for a court
to look at that deadline and say, "We think that that's
just too short, and, therefore, unreasonable." It would
only be appropriate to say that the remedy wasn't
available if -- regardless of the length of the filing
deadline -- in a particular case, the facts were such that
literally the prisoner were unable to pursue that
administrative remedy. If he were literally unable to do
so, the remedy would not be available under the PLRA
exhaustion provision.
The case on which Respondent places --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Would that apply to a prisoner
who claimed he'd been raped by a guard or something, but
was afraid to bring the proceeding, for 2 or 3 weeks,
until the guard was transferred to another facility? And
he alleged those facts, and then he was denied relief
because it was over 15 days. Would that be --
MR. HIMMELFARB: Justice Stevens, I think there
would be cases -- and that might be one of them -- that
would present difficult questions. Under your
hypothetical, for example, if the -- if it were clear that
there were explicit threats --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, those are --
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- from the guard --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- his allegations. These are
just his allegations. And when that -- and they then
said, "No, it's -- you're out of time." Could a Federal
Court take that case?
MR. HIMMELFARB: If a prisoner filed a 1983 or
Bivens action, and the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, he -- first he files a
prisoner complaint, 17 days late, but makes the
allegations I describe, and he's just denied because he's
too late. Could a Federal Court take that case, under
your view?
MR. HIMMELFARB: Well, I would think --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And then he'd have to file a
second -- subsequently file a 1983 case.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That could be an issue that
would have to be litigated in connection with a motion to
dismiss for failure to exhaust. If the prisoner alleged,
and could prove, for example, that he received explicit
threats from the prison guard that, if he filed this
administrative claim, harm would come to him, I would
think that a court could permissibly find that that wasn't
an available remedy. But short of -- short of explicit
threats, I think he would -- it would be a more difficult
issue --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So even --
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- and a much harder --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- if it was seven --
MR. HIMMELFARB: -- case.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- even after the 17th day,
the Federal Court could hear a -- have a factual hearing.
MR. HIMMELFARB: There would have -- if the
remedy was not available, because the prisoner --
JUSTICE STEVENS: He's just alleged it isn't -- in
-- and the only -- the only response from the State is,
"You're 2 days late." That's all -- that's all the State
has said.
MR. HIMMELFARB: That's right. But there -- you
would -- you would often have factual issues in connection
-- maybe not "often" -- you would sometimes have factual
issues in connection with a motion to dismiss which might
transform it, in effect, into a motion for summary
judgment when there is an exhaustion defense raised by the
prison. And that might be an example -- I think that
would be a rare case, but that might be an example of
where that would happen.
I do want to respond to Respondent's reliance on
the Oscar Mayer case. The distinction between Oscar Mayer
and this case is that that case did not involve an
exhaustion provision. The Court explicitly stated, in
Oscar Mayer, that the provision at issue, a provision of
the ADEA, does not stipulate an exhaustion requirement.
The requirement was one of commencement. It obligated the
claimant to go to a State administrative agency, wait 60
days, and then he was free to go into Federal Court.
Exhaustion requires a claimant to go to an agency and
complete his remedies. In Oscar Mayer, the Court relied
on features of the provision at issue there that are not
present here, and it said, correctly, that the provision
at issue there had the purpose of providing a claimant
with a limited opportunity to obtain relief in the State
administrative process.
The PLRA exhaustion provision was enacted to
give the prison a full and fair opportunity, not a limited
opportunity, to provide relief before a prisoner is
entitled to go into Federal Court.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why did they use the word
"until," instead of the word "unless"?
MR. HIMMELFARB: There are lots of statutory
exhaustion requirements that are framed in lots of
different types of language. Some say "until," some say
"unless," some say "before," some say "after," some say
"only if." But, in every single context of which I am
aware, they incorporate the settled administrative law
principle that a claimant has to comply with the agency's
procedural requirements.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Himmelfarb.
Mr. Feder.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MEIR FEDER
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. FEDER: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
There are three basic reasons that a procedural
default rule should not be read into the PLRA. The first
is, the text of section 1997(e) is most naturally read as
requiring simple exhaustion, which is satisfied once --
when there are no remedies available at the time the suit
is filed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would -- I would not describe
"exhaustion" that way. I would -- I would describe a
failure to file within the prescribed time, not as an
exhaustion of remedies, but as a failure to exhaust
remedies. I mean, I guess I'm having a terminological
problem in this case, as I did in the previous case.
MR. FEDER: Well, Your Honor, I think -- I think
that in the habeas cases the Court has consistently read
"exhaustion" as referring simply to "no remedies presently
available."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, well, we're talking about
administrative law, which is a field I used to know
something about, and I've never thought "exhaustion"
included "failure to exhaust," which --
MR. FEDER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- which is --
MR. FEDER: -- first --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- what happens when you simply
don't file within the prescribed period.
MR. FEDER: Well, first of all, Your Honor, I
don't think we're -- that administrative law is the
--
--
appropriate analogy here. There are a number of reasons
why habeas provides a much closer source of meaning for
the word and concept of "exhaustion" here, both because of
the similarity of the language in the exhaustion provision
here, and the habeas exhaustion provision, because of the
fact that both are prisoner litigation. There is an
overlap between habeas cases and section 1983 cases in
this context. And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm not sure. It seems
to me, as Justice Scalia's question indicates -- I was
surprised that we're talking about procedural default. I,
too, thought this was an administrative law case. And
it's an administrative law case, because we want the input
of the administrative -- of the administrative body. In
the habeas cases, we're simply giving deference as a
matter of comity and courtesy to the State Courts. Is it
MR. FEDER: Well, actually, Your Honor, I don't
think there's any indication that Congress was focused on
input from the prison grievance system. In fact, the way
-- the way it works is that once the prison grievance
system addresses the claim that's of no effect in the
subsequent Federal suit, which starts over from square one
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, not so much maybe input,
but so that they can -- they can resolve the program --
the problem within the institution, and not have to come
to the courts.
MR. FEDER: Well, two things. First, as I say,
there are a number of reasons why, in looking at the
language Congress was using, it's more reasonable to look
to the habeas statute. But even in the administrative law
context, this is dramatically different from most
administrative law circumstances, because in those
situations you have an administrative decision that is in
some way being reviewed, the administrative agency record
may have some effect. Here, you don't have that aspect of
review, and the administrative context that is close to
this, if you're looking for an administrative analogy, is
the Title VII and Age Discrimination Act cases, because
those cases, similarly, provided for invocation of State
remedies that were designed to give the State an
opportunity to resolve the case voluntarily, if that would
satisfy the prospective plaintiff, but if the plaintiff
were not satisfied, he'd be able to move on.
And I think that both opposing counsel have made
a point of saying that the Oscar Mayer case pointed out
that it was not an exhaustion requirement in Oscar Mayer,
but, rather, that it used the word "commence." But I
think it's important to look at what the Court said it
meant by saying it wasn't an exhaustion requirement. And
this is at 441 U.S. at 761, and the Court said, "section
(b) does not stipulate an exhaustion requirement. The
section is intended only to give State agencies a limited
opportunity to settle the grievances of ADEA claimants in
a voluntary, localized manner so that the grievants
thereafter have no need or desire for independent Federal
relief." So, the sense in which the Court was saying that
that's not an exhaustion requirement is basically saying
that that scheme is like this one, where the PLRA does not
approach attempting to reduce the Federal prisoner claims
by kicking cases out of court indiscriminately or by
defaults; it aims to reduce it by raising the degree of
difficulty for the prisoner in getting to Federal Court in
various ways --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But how does it do that? I
mean, if there's any object that Congress had in mind,
surely it was to reduce the number of frivolous prisoner
claims that are coming into Federal district courts. And
it hoped to do this by sending the -- making sure that
they went through the prison system first. Whether we
looked at what the prison system did or not, we hoped that
the prison system would get rid of a large -- a large
number of these frivolous claims.
Now, can you tell me how that purpose is
possibly served --
MR. FEDER: Certainly, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- by saying, "Do nothing. So
long as you don't even try to go through the prison
grievance system, you can come directly into court." It
seems to me this --
MR. FEDER: Well, we're not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- this --
MR. FEDER: -- we're not saying that, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, no, "You -- you have to go
there late. You" --
MR. FEDER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- "you just sit around until
it's too late, file a grievance that you know will not be
accepted, because it's too late, and then you can come
into Federal Court." This is going to cut back
considerably on the number of frivolous claims?
MR. FEDER: Your Honor, I think that -- there
are a few points to respond to there -- I think that the
provision does make sense that way. I mean, first, it's
worth noting that the PLRA was working very well before
procedural default even came into the picture. The first
court of appeals decision recognizing procedural default
under the PLRA was in 2002. The Petitioner has statistics
-- Petitioners have statistics in their brief showing that
between 1995 and 2000 there was already a nearly 50
percent drop in the rate of inmate filings. But going
specifically --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Maybe because they thought they
had to file on time.
MR. FEDER: But there is no -- there is no
indication anywhere of there being widespread defaults.
But I should address your question about how this advances
-- why the provision wouldn't be meaningless without
procedural default. And there are least three ways that
it is still meaningful. The first is, it removes any
rational incentive for the prisoner to evade the grievance
system. I'll come back to that in a second. I just want
to say the second and third things are, it gives the State
an opportunity to address the grievance, if it wants to,
and, at a minimum, it delays and raises the degree of
difficulty for the prisoner.
But going back to the incentives, there are two
basic reasons why an inmate might rationally want to evade
the grievance process. And, I mean, there's this notion
here of prisoners scheming to get around the grievance
process and deliberate bypass. And it's completely
overblown, because the -- there are two basic reasons the
prisoner might want to. First, if proceeding with the
grievance and having it adjudicated in the prison
grievance system could somehow harm his later Federal
suit. Second would be to get to Federal Court faster.
Neither one of these things happens under the PLRA, even
without a procedural default rule being read into it.
On the first thing, the prisoner is not affected
in Federal Court, unlike, say, a habeas case, where a
prisoner may want to evade a State Court decision, because
that decision will get deference in the later Federal
habeas proceeding. Here, the grievance decision is of no
force and effect. That incentive is not there.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes it is. Because the
whole -- one of the reasons you have reasonably short time
is that you get the witnesses there, they remember it.
If you have to file within 15 days with the
prison, the prisoner does that, the guard is there, "Do
you remember what happened?"
"Yes. This, this, and this."
"Who else was there?"
"These people were there."
You wait 3 months, the prisoner files a
complaint, they ask the guard, "Do you remember?"
"Not really. It was 3 months ago."
"Who else was there?"
"I'm not sure."
Then he has -- you know, the evidence against
him is much weaker when he files his claim in Federal
Court.
MR. FEDER: I -- Your Honor, I don't -- I don't
think it really makes sense to say that, within this kind
of time periods that we're talking about, that that's
really going to help the inmate's claim, because -- I
mean, we're dealing here within --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, the point is that if
he complies with the time limit, it's going to hurt his
claim; therefore, he doesn't want to comply with the time
limit.
MR. FEDER: I understand, Your Honor, but
everything here is within the framework of the section
83 statute of limitations. And -- which is set,
presumably, to be able to adjudicate claims with -- on the
theory that it's fresh enough -- reasonably fresh if it's
within whatever that period is in the particular State; 2
years, in many States. So, the idea that something --
that the guard is not going to be able to testify 6 months
later is, I think, you know, maybe at the margins. It's
not likely to affect this.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you were
suggesting that the prisoner had no incentive not to
comply and go through the State grievance procedure. And
it seems to me that the reason you have the short
procedures are to maintain a fresh record that more
accurately reflects the truth, and, since Congress was
acting against the backdrop in which they thought there
were too many frivolous cases, they thought that might be
one way to limit those.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the more frivolous the
case, the more likely it is that it won't be remembered by
a guard. I mean, you know, the suit is, "A guard spat on
my painting," or something like that, you know. Who's
going to remember anything like that 4 months later?
MR. FEDER: Well, Your Honor, again, I think
that, at a minimum -- even if you grant that there may --
the prisoner may see some advantage in that, there is, at
a minimum, a substantially smaller incentive than you
would -- than you would have in, for example, a habeas
case. But I want to get to the second thing, which is, I
think, the more likely incentive that existed before the
PLRA.
Before the PLRA is passed, if a prisoner wants
to get to Federal Court as quickly as possible, the
prisoner, the day after he suffers whatever injury he
feels he has suffered, can go about filing his Federal
claim. The PLRA, with or without a procedural default
rule, prevents that. He can't do that, because, first of
all, he has to wait until -- if he's going to avoid the
grievance system for some reason, he has to wait until
that time has run. But he then can't just go and file in
Federal Court. If he just files in Federal Court, he's
going to get bounced back, because he still has a
potential remedy in the grievance system that he hasn't
filed.
The United States says that we've conceded that
in systems where there isn't some sort of discretion that's
clear to consider a late claim, that, in that case, the
prisoner is not going to have to file. We do not concede
that at all. I don't -- you can look at our brief, at
page 43 -- I don't think we concede that. We do refer to
the fact that California and many other States provide for
discretion. But the fact is that, in any event, we're not
talking, here, about -- with -- in -- with grievance time
limits, we're not talking about something like a notice-
of-appeal requirement that's jurisdictional, that's going
to bar it from being appealed. If -- there's always a
possibility, particularly since many of these systems are
internal rules of the grievance system, that, one way or
another, it can be considered. And I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, all right, but the thing I
don't understand in this, which is hard -- Is there any
answer to this point from the other side? What this
statute does seem to be about is exhaustion, which
normally does carry with it the notion, "If you don't
exhaust, you lose." Dozens of cases say that. And it
seems to make it a requirement, not leaving it to the
discretion of the prisoner. Well, your interpretation
leaves it up to the prisoner. If the prisoner doesn't
want to do it, he doesn't do it. He pays a price, he has
to wait, but it's up to him. Now, that's the point that
is bothering me the most, frankly.
MR. FEDER: And what I'm saying now, Your Honor,
is that he can't just wait and not file.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not?
MR. FEDER: Because he will not have exhausted
until he files and has --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, but, I mean, that's a
-- that sounds to me like a verbal gimmick, to tell you
the truth. If he waits, and he waits to past the
deadline, sure, he'll put a piece of paper in, but it'll
be denied.
MR. FEDER: Well, two things about that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Isn't that true? So, I'm not
counting he puts a piece of paper in, and it's -- in my
way of speaking, if what's left for him to do in the
system, because there is this deadline, 6 months, it's
passed, it's now 9 months, so he says, "Here's my paper.
I'm exhausting."
MR. FEDER: Part of --
JUSTICE BREYER: Denied.
MR. FEDER: Part of --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, I'd say that's --
means he isn't exhausting. He's failed to exhaust, as I'm
using the term.
MR. FEDER: Well, Your Honor, I think -- again,
first of all, it's a -- it's important to understand that
we are saying he will have to file, in all circumstances.
It's not necessarily clear --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MR. FEDER: -- that the State --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, I want to get rid of that
argument. Use my --
MR. FEDER: I understand.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- terminology --
MR. FEDER: Putting that --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and now answer what I am,
frankly, bothered by the most --
MR. FEDER: Yes, certainly.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which is what I just said.
It leaves it up to him.
MR. FEDER: First of all, there is always the
possibility, depending on the nature of the grievance,
that the prison may address it. For instance, if the
complaint is a failure-to-protect claim, and the prisoner
is being harmed by being placed with another prisoner, who
is -- who's dangerous to him, if the State gets that
complaint late, they may -- they may very well still want
to act on it and ameliorate that situation, and that's the
kind of thing that could, in the end, satisfy the prisoner
and have him not sue. But the other thing is, even if the
State -- assuming the State doesn't address it, the
prisoner, again, has to not just file that; there is an
appeals process that normally he'll have to go through,
although, in this case, the California -- the -- excuse me
-- the prison appeals coordinator just said, "I'm not even
going to file it, so you can't appeal." Normally, though,
you would think you would be able to appeal. He'll have
to go through the entire system. At best, for him, he's
delayed a long time. And the way Congress approached this
was to -- by provisions like for costs and fees and so
forth -- was to attempt to dissuade prisoners from filing.
This, at a minimum, is going to help to dissuade him from
filing, coupled with the fact that, because he is not
getting to court faster, he doesn't have what, before the
PLRA, would have been the main incentive to bypass a
system that otherwise isn't going to hurt him.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me you're
understating the amount of time that he's saving by
failing to exhaust. It's not just if he waits six months
and then puts it in. If he had filed within the right
period, he would get a hearing at one level. And there
may be as many as two other levels of review before he's
fully off -- before he's fully exhausted. Now, here's a
guy who -- you know, he's lying around in jail. He's --
this is a frivolous filer. He wants to get out of the
jail, downtown, you know, to the district court in L.A.,
where he can look at the beautiful people and relieve the
humdrum of prison life. He wants to get to district court
as soon as he can.
MR. FEDER: Yes, there are a lot of provisions
in the PLRA that may prevent him from actually attending,
but --
[Laughter.]
MR. FEDER: -- in -- in any event, I guess the
point here is, first of all, he has -- there are appeal
levels, whether or not -- no matter what the grounds
something is rejected on, there are -- normally would be
an appeal through the entire system. There is nothing
requiring the State to speed it through the appeals
process if the State feels that it's important for the
prisoner not to be able to get to Federal Court as quickly
as possible.
And, also -- I mean, one thing that we're not
getting to here, that I think is important -- well, I
should state one more thing before leaving that. I mean,
Booth also tells us that Congress did see value in
requiring prisoners to file, even when it seemed very
unlikely that they would get the relief that they were
seeking. And the ways in which this requires a prisoner
to file, and delays him, are significant in many of the
same ways.
But the other very important point here is that
in considering the reasonableness of doing this with or
without a procedural default requirement, sure, with
procedural -- excuse me, a procedural default rule -- with
that, of course, you're going to make the provision
somewhat more effective, but there's a tradeoff. And the
tradeoff is, you're going to make it more effective by
kicking prisoners out of court on a nonmerits ground. And
Congress -- the sponsors of the legislation made it clear
they were not meaning to kick out potentially meritorious
claims. You also are creating another bad incentive,
which is, with this procedural default rule, the prison
officials have the incentive to try to get rid of cases on
nonmerits grounds, because if they rule on a -- on a
procedural ground, then the prisoner can't file. If they
rule -- if they address it on the merits, then the
prisoner has the chance of going there. So, in that
respect, the -- a procedural default rule makes it less
likely something gets affected on the merits.
But the point is, there's a policy tradeoff
here, that there is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but --
MR. FEDER: -- no indication --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- but as I interpret your
argument, you're saying that there is some merit, some
benefit, to avoiding the State administrative procedures.
What you're saying is that, "You know, these" --
MR. FEDER: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- "administrative procedures
aren't all that -- they're cracked up to be. There's a
good reason to avoid them." I --
MR. FEDER: No, I'm --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's a --
MR. FEDER: -- saying --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that's a -- that's a
difficult argument for us --
MR. FEDER: To --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- to accept.
MR. FEDER: No, to the contrary, Your Honor.
I'm saying there's -- there is -- there is no good reason
to avoid them. I certainly don't mean to be suggesting
that, if I -- if I misspoke.
But I think -- the important point here is,
though, there's a real policy tradeoff. There is no
indication anywhere in the language of the Act, or
anywhere in the legislative history, that this is a policy
tradeoff that Congress actually was willing to make. And
I guess I didn't touch on the language, but there are
numerous textual indications, as we argue in detail in our
brief, even aside from getting to the word "exhausted,"
that Congress contemplated simple exhaustion, and there's
no sign of any contemplation of a procedural default rule.
The word "exhausted" itself, again, I think that habeas,
for a number of reasons, is a much closer analogy,
including the fact that this was passed practically
contemporaneous with AEDPA. There was -- at one point,
there were provisions in the same bill that -- one of
which was an exhaustion provision in AEDPA, and one of
which was the early version of this. There's no
indication that exhaustion was used in different contexts
there. And the habeas cases make clear that a defaulted
claim is exhausted, and it's a timely requirement.
On the legislative history, if there was an
expectation that there would be this sort of procedural
default rule and prisoners would forfeit claims -- and, as
you can tell with 2- or 3-day filing deadlines some
places, and other technical requirements elsewhere --
there would be expected to be a number of forfeitures, no
indication in the legislative history that Congress
thought one of the ways the PLRA would reduce suits was by
causing forfeitures.
And, in addition, it's important to understand
that, although, as we concede, the provision will be --
it will not be as effective without a procedural default
rule, but it still does have some effect without the
procedural default rule, the problem with imposing a
procedural default rule is that the consequences of that
are very troubling, because what you'd be doing then is
essentially incorporating every State, and local jail
facility, for that matter, filing deadline as a de facto
statute of limitations --
JUSTICE BREYER: Not necessarily.
MR. FEDER: -- for section 1983 --
JUSTICE BREYER: That -- that's what I find
interesting. It might be, if you're representing the
interests of defendants here, you'd love this to have the
procedural default rule, because it will end up with the
Federal judges all over the country systematically
reviewing the exhaustion procedures -- or the -- yes, the
remedies in the prisons. And where those remedies are not
right or unfair or too short or have other problems with
them, the judges will say, "You can't have this kind of
remedy. If you want me to apply exhaustion principles,
you can't do it."
MR. FEDER: I would like --
JUSTICE BREYER: And, therefore, we'll get a
force for improvement. And that's, I thought, maybe why
nobody wanted, really, to bring it up.
MR. FEDER: I would like to think that, Your
Honor, but, actually, as opposing counsel has indicated,
Congress eliminated the language -- the pre-existing
language that placed some sort of requirement -- it
removed the "plain, speedy, and effective" language,
removed the "minimum standards" language. The indication
was that they wouldn't be reviewed for the adequacy of the
standards.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I suppose you could add to
that, that Mr. Himmelfarb wouldn't even accept
"reasonable." He said it has to be "impossible" to comply
with.
MR. FEDER: I think -- I think that's right.
And I think that that's actually an indication that
Congress was not expecting it to have this sort of harsh
consequence, where you're taking whatever procedural rule
from whatever State.
Another thing about the PLRA, aside from
removing the old language, is that one of the goals of the
PLRA was to remove intrusive Federal judicial oversight
from prison systems. And if you were going to be in a
position of reviewing everything for reasonableness, you
have exactly that kind of oversight saying, you know,
"Your procedure is adequate. Yours isn't adequate." And
that's what -- that's what Congress removed.
The consequences also mean that if this
procedural default rule is accepted, you could have even
continuing violations, continuing unconstitutional conduct
that would not be challengeable, could be insulated from
Federal review after the passage of a short deadline or
violation of whatever other procedure, fair or unfair,
that a State -- that a State creates --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me be sure --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Feder --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- I understand one thing
about your position. You do agree, do you not, that in
order to exhaust, even if the time has run the 15-day
period, there is an obligation to go to the State and ask
them to hear the case, even though it's untimely?
MR. FEDER: Yes. I think there clearly is.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So that you do say that you at
least will give the State the opportunity to decide
whether it wants to try and remedy it in an informal or
hasty manner.
MR. FEDER: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And is that true even if the
State does not have a procedure for reopening for late
claims?
MR. FEDER: Yes. I think -- I think it is.
Because I think that until it becomes absolutely clear
that the State --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, suppose --
MR. FEDER: -- or the grievances --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- the State says, "We don't
consider late claims." As they do here.
MR. FEDER: Sorry?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the State says, "We
don't consider late claims."
MR. FEDER: And may -- and if it does it as a
binding rule that's not -- that's not subject to change, I
suppose that that -- that that would be possible. But the
fact is -- actually, a good example is, in one of the
administrative cases that the United States cites in their
brief, the United States versus L.A. Tucker Lines, what --
the argument there is, "We didn't need to present this
argument to the Interstate Commerce Commission, because
they had a rule that meant that they couldn't accept our
claim, and the court -- and the court says no to exhaust.
You do have to present the claim. They may change it."
JUSTICE ALITO: What if the claim is presented
in a way that's gibberish, it's impossible to understand?
MR. FEDER: Then it'll -- then, presumably, if
the State rejects it on that ground, if he tries to file
in Federal Court, he'll get sent back for having failed to
actually complete his exhaustion obligations until he
manages to file a --
JUSTICE ALITO: But he can --
MR. FEDER: -- claim that would satisfy --
JUSTICE ALITO: But it can never be procedurally
defaulted, because the claim isn't presented in a
comprehensible form to the -- to the prison grievance
officials?
MR. FEDER: I think that maybe it's possible, in
some cases, as a sanction for bad-faith conduct.
Conceivably -- I'm not sure where that would come from --
but if he fails to present the claim in a -- in a way that
it can be addressed, he has to -- he can't come to Federal
Court until he presents it to them in a way in which it at
least could have been addressed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that procedural rule
binding on him, but the time procedural rule not binding
on him? I don't know why. I mean, if --
MR. FEDER: It's only binding --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- they're procedural rules,
you have to set it forth in a comprehensible manner, and
you have to be on time.
MR. FEDER: Well, Your Honor, I think that if
the State were to say that you -- that, "This is
definitively rejected, and we're not going to let him
amend it," then, in that case, you would have satisfied
exhaustion, as far as the -- but only if it's definitive.
Otherwise -- well -- and I should just go back to the --
to the point I was making about a continuing violation.
For instance, let's say there is a failure-to-protect
claim. Someone is in danger, doesn't file. He's in --
he's in one of the States where it's 2 days. I think
Michigan is one of those. He doesn't file within 2 days.
The State has -- after that, can say, "You can't go to
Federal Court, because you haven't met our deadline."
In this case, here, there was a continuing
violation that was alleged, and the -- and the State
basically said, "Our rule is, even if it's continuing, you
have to file it within 30 days -- or 15 days of when it
first arose." And, I mean, you can imagine a number of
circumstances where this rule here would mean -- again,
any prison or local jail procedural rule, no matter -- is
a -- presumably, until you get to the point of violating
due process, would be a basis for saying that prisoners
don't have to go to court. There is nothing in the words
of the statute that suggest that, nothing in the
legislative history of the statute that suggest it. The
only real argument on the other side is that Congress must
have meant to include it, because that's what "exhaustion"
usually means.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Feder, there is one
anomaly that the Government points out. And I -- before
you sit down, I'd like to know what your answer is. They
said, "Imagine one prisoner who begins the grievance
process on time, he goes to step two, goes to step three,
then he stops. And then another prisoner who waits til
the time has come and gone, she files. The prison says,
'We don't take late filings.' The second prisoner gets to
court, and the first, who did go through three steps, but
stopped short of the fourth, doesn't have any access to
Federal Court."
MR. FEDER: Well, except that he's not
permanently barred, because if he -- if he hasn't
exhausted, he gets sent back and has to at least file the
last appeal.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Feder.
Ms. Perkell, you may have a minute for rebuttal.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JENNIFER G. PERKELL
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MS. PERKELL: Three quick points, Your Honors.
It's not so much that the Ninth Circuit's rule
creates an incentive for an inmate to file untimely, it's
that it doesn't create the incentive to file timely.
Moreover, Respondent is relying on the habeas
corpus analogy, but, at the same time, he wants the
results under the PLRA to be different from under the
habeas corpus statute.
And, third, untimely -- the rule of untimely
exhaustion adopted by the Ninth Circuit undermines the
purposes of the statute, because, first, prisons will
usually enforce their deadlines, and grievances will not
receive any merits review before they reach Federal Court.
And, second, because grievances filed untimely, and
particularly months or years untimely, deprive prisons of
a genuine opportunity to investigate and respond to
prisoner -- or they do deprive prisons of a genuine
opportunity to investigate and respond to prisoner
grievances, because oftentimes witnesses, evidence, and,
in particular, recollections, are no longer available.
Unless the Court has any --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
MS. PERKELL: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the case in the
