IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MEDIMMUNE, INC.,
Petitioner,
: No. 05-608
GENENTECH, INC., ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 4, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOHN G. KESTER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of the
Petitioner.
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioner.
MAUREEN E. MAHONEY, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JOHN G. KESTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States,
As amicus curiae, supporting the Petitioner 17
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MAUREEN E. MAHONEY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOHN G. KESTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
[10:03 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in MedImmune, Incorporated, versus
Genentech.
Mr. Kester.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN G. KESTER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. KESTER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
As of this morning, it is exactly 70 years ago
to the day, minus 4 months, that this Court heard argument
challenging the new Federal Declaratory Judgment Act of
34, in an action to construe an insurance contract.
And exactly 25 years -- 25 days later, in a
unanimous opinion written by Chief Justice Hughes, joined
by Justices Stone, Brandeis, and others, the Act was held
fully consistent with Article III of the Constitution.
This morning, you are here because an action was
brought for a declaratory judgment that a biomedical
manufacturer need not play -- pay large sums, under a
license as patent royalties, under a patent it contends is
invalid, unenforceable, and not infringed, but is paying
royalties under protest in the meantime. That complaint
was ordered dismissed by the Federal Circuit as outside
the Article III judicial power of the United States.
In detail, the Petitioner, MedImmune, is a
biotech company, formed in 1988. During the 1990s --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Kester, would it --
MR. KESTER: Yes?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- would it -- would
your position be different if the contract contained a
specific -- the license -- a specific provision specifying
that the licensee may not sue?
MR. KESTER: No, it would not, Your Honor,
because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You -- do you think such
a provision would be enforceable?
MR. KESTER: I doubt it would be enforceable.
It would be a matter -- under the Lear case, Lear against
Adkins, it would be an -- it would be an affirmative
defense if such -- if such a claim were raised. This case
is here at the level of subject-matter jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me, I don't -- I don't
understand what you just said. You mean, it would be
enforceable; that if such a suit were brought, the
licensor could raise that contractual provision as a basis
for dismissing the suit. Is that --
MR. KESTER: Under 12- -- under 12(b)(6) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. KESTER: -- perhaps.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, then it is enforceable.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but --
MR. KESTER: No.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- your point is, it's not
jurisdictional.
MR. KESTER: It's not jurisdictional, exactly,
Justice Souter. This is a jurisdictional ruling. And
that's all that this Court granted certiorari on.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but as a matter of
policy, we, at some point, either in this case or some
later case, may have to address the question of whether or
not such a provision is enforceable. If it is, we may be
-- not be talking about much. It's just going to be
boilerplate in every license agreement, and that's the end
of it. And it --
MR. KESTER: And so --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- but it -- on the other
hand, it may be that there are reasons not to enforce
this, so that we don't have courts flooded with lawsuits,
et cetera, et cetera.
MR. KESTER: And those reasons, I would suggest,
Justice Kennedy, were taken care of in Lear, for the most
part, in 1969. Provisions in license contracts that
prevent challenges to the contracts are not enforceable
under the patent laws of the United States. But then, I
-- as I was saying, that is a matter of patent law.
That's not a matter of jurisdictional law. We're here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, let's look at what
might be a matter of jurisdictional law. I take it, from
your position, there's nothing preventing Genentech from
suing, either, is there? In other words, to establish the
validity of their patent.
MR. KESTER: It has -- it has happened, on
various occasions, that patentees have brought suit to
establish the validity of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Against licensees?
MR. KESTER: Against licensees and others. And
the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Against licensees who are not
claiming that the patent is invalid? And where is the
controversy?
MR. KESTER: The controversy could arise in any
number of ways.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean, I can see, if the --
if licensee says the patent is invalid, that the patentee
says paying its royalties -- how does it --
MR. KESTER: The patentee could be paying his
royalties. The patentee could also be putting ads in the
paper saying, "This is not a valid patent." It could --
it could have acquired a lot of publicity. And, in the
end, there could be reasons, and there have been such
cases -- which we cited, 47 of, our brief -- where such
suits have been brought. But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If it -- if the -- if the --
if the licensee came into court and said, "I'm not
contesting this patent," that would be the end of it,
wouldn't it?
MR. KESTER: If the licensee said, "I am not
contesting that patent," that could be.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, but the patentee
would just say, "Look, we have a license. I think the
patent's valid, and you owe me a dollar a unit." The
licensee said, "Well, I don't think they're -- it's valid,
so I owe you nothing." And they settle on a license for
cents. Why can't the patentee say, "You know, if I get
a judicial decision establishing that the patent is valid,
I can charge a higher license, either when this agreement
expires or for other licenses"?
MR. KESTER: That -- I agree with that, Mr.
Chief Justice. But the practicality is that a patentee
starts out with, essentially, a judgment that the patent
is valid. There is a presumption of validity. And to
challenge that patent -- that presumption of validity, is
a very difficult undertaking. Most of them don't bother.
Why would they? If they are receiving -- if they're
receiving --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm trying to see how
far you want -- are willing to push your argument that
just because there's been an agreement, or perhaps even a
settlement, that that somehow or another doesn't moot the
controversy, the underlying legal dispute. And it -- I
gather your answer to me is that Genentech, or a patentee,
can sue, even though they have an existing -- they're
getting royalties from the licensee, they can still sue
the licensee.
MR. KESTER: A settlement does not deprive a
Federal Court of subject-matter jurisdiction. That's the
narrow point that is before this -- before this Court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why aren't you -- you said,
"The only question before the court is jurisdictional."
If that's so, why isn't your position that the Federal
Circuit put the wrong label on this, that license is
listed in 8(c) as an affirmative defense; so, whatever the
outcome should be, the wrong label should -- is -- was
used. It shouldn't be a subject-matter jurisdiction,
shouldn't be 12(b)(1); it should be an 8(c) affirmative
defense. And then the -- you're out of the jurisdiction
box, but you're left with the same underlying question.
MR. KESTER: But not the same underlying
question, Justice Ginsburg, with respect, because then you
are in a situation like the business forms case in the
Seventh Circuit, which came out shortly after the Lear.
There was a settle -- settlement, and the -- and it was
argued that the settlement was not effective because of
the Lear decision, and parties can't settle themselves out
of the Lear decision. But that is all under 12(b)(6), and
not 12(b)(1). This case involves a 12(b)(1) motion, not a
(b)(6) --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what --
MR. KESTER: -- motion.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- good would it do? Suppose
we said, "Federal Circuit, you put the wrong label on it.
It should be 12(b)(6), not 12(b)(1), or perhaps even 8(c),
affirmative defense"? Then you go back to the Federal
Circuit, and they'll come up with the same decision, that,
as long as you are licensed and are paying your royalties,
you have -- and they just put a different label on it --
you have --
MR. KESTER: They --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- you have no -- you have
not stated a claim.
MR. KESTER: That would be effectively
overruling Lear, which is what, I think, is what many of
the parties in this case actually seek to do.
Lear does not allow inhibitions of challenges to
patent licenses. A licensee can challenge the validity,
the enforceability of the patent. That's because there's
a public interest in this, as well.  Parties cannot simply
contract with each other and prevent a challenge to a --
to a patent --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then --
MR. KESTER: -- license.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the Federal Circuit
distinguished Lear, and said what -- in Lear, the licensee
had stopped paying royalties. Isn't that so?
MR. KESTER: That -- those were the facts of
Lear. But -- it happened that way in Lear, but that
wasn't the reasoning of Lear. Lear would not totally
cover that situation, but we would submit to this Court,
it shouldn't make any difference. The reasoning of Lear
is the same. The licensee cannot, by contract, be
estopped, licensee estoppel, from challenging a patent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, there's no way, I --
under your view, that a patent holder can protect itself
from suit through any license arrangement or any agreement
of any kind.
MR. KESTER: I suspect there are many ways, Mr.
Chief Justice, but not by throwing them out on a
jurisdictional basis at the very first moment of the
lawsuit.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How about --
MR. KESTER: There may be ways this could be
arranged at the second level, through --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, what are those ways --
I mean, the ones that have been mentioned as possibilities
in the Government brief -- one, you rejected, and the
other that was mentioned was: if you sue -- if the
licensee sues, then the royalty fees will be upped. Would
that be effective?
MR. KESTER: That is a question that would arise
under Lear against Adkins. And the question before this
Court in that situation, if it got to this Court, would
be, Is that kind of a provision compatible with the policy
that was so firmly expressed by Justice Harlan in Lear,
and has been reiterated in so many subsequent cases of
this Court?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, you have rejected both of
the Government's suggestions on what the patent holder
might do to protect itself. Do you have anything concrete
that you would concede the patent holder could do?
MR. KESTER: I don't think that I have rejected
both the Government's suggestions. I've said that they
raise problems on -- as to the scope of Lear.
JUSTICE SOUTER: With respect to -- whether we
are talking about a jurisdictional defense or whether we
are talking about an affirmative defense, assuming
jurisdiction, is there any -- is there any reason for us
to accept your position, other than the reason that you
have mentioned a number of times, and that is the adoption
and encouragement of a public policy that allows patent
challenges freely? Is that the nub of our reasoning, if
we were to support your position, either jurisdictionally,
in this case, or in recognizing -- or the -- in dealing
with the affirmative defense in another case?
MR. KESTER: Not quite, Justice Souter. I would
say the nub of your position is the Altvater case, the
Aetna case, the Maryland --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, Altvater is difficult for
you, isn't it? Because there was an injunction in
Altvater, wasn't there?
MR. KESTER: That -- but that -- but was --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Which raises an entirely
different policy issue?
MR. KESTER: Well, I would say what it -- what
it raises is simply an extra fact, but it wasn't a
necessary fact. Because this Court, in Altvater,
specifically pointed out that even if there weren't an
injunction there, there would be -- there would be the
danger forced on the licensee, of an infringement suit;
and an infringement suit means, possibly, an injunction of
the patent, treble damages, any number of sanctions. An
injunction suit can put a company out of business,
especially like a company like my client here. And --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that is -- that is a good
reason. And, I take it, it's your logic that that is a
good reason to recognize a fairly broad right on the part
of the licensee to challenge.
MR. KESTER: Right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: In other words, the nub of your
position, as I understand it, is the public policy that
favors relative --
MR. KESTER: It --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- freedom to challenge --
MR. KESTER: It's more -- it's more than public
policy, it's Article III. Article III says that you can
bring a lawsuit in this situation. And that was settled --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No --
MR. KESTER: -- in Aetna.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I realize that. But, I
mean, what we've got in this case, and in any of these
cases, is a question of line-drawing under Article III.
And your argument is, you want to draw the line where you
want it drawn primarily because there are practical
reasons to favor a public policy of free challenge.
MR. KESTER: What we are presenting in this case
is a dispute about money. It's not abstract. It's not
hypothetical. It's not conjectural. It is concrete,
immediate. All the facts are in. It's definitely
adversarial. It's legal.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- well, you can have such
a dispute on a theoretical question between, I don't know,
the ACLU and the National Rifle Association, but that
doesn't create a case or controversy. What is the injury,
the imminent injury to your -- to your client that is the
basis for the case or controversy?
MR. KESTER: The --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it anything other than, "I
have to pay the royalties that I agreed to pay."?
MR. KESTER: It is the -- it is that, "I am
having to pay the royalties -- that I say I did not agree
to pay, because this is an invalid patent." Money is
being paid by my client every quarter, large amounts of
money. That is a major injury.
JCHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if you don't --
MR. KESTER: And if --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- think --
MR. KESTER: And if --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- if you don't think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it -- is it unlawful to
agree to pay somebody money who does not have a patent?
MR. KESTER: It is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, you're speaking as
though somehow that -- such a contract is contrary to
public policy, and void.
MR. KESTER: No, we're saying that that isn't
what we agreed to. We're saying this is a contract
dispute. And the whole purpose of the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then why are you
paying it, if you -- if you don't think you owe it?
MR. KESTER: Because the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Because of the threat of
treble damages --
MR. KESTER: The threat --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and injunction.
MR. KESTER: -- of this --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If we're trying to
figure out where the public policy is here, why don't we
give some weight to those congressional enactments that
obviously fortify the strength of the patent? In other
words, Congress passed these provisions providing for
treble damages for attorneys' fees. And --
MR. KESTER: But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and to respond that
there's got to be a public policy to counterbalance that,
Congress can always do that, if it wants; but it didn't --
it thinks that you need these provisions to protect the
patent holders.
MR. KESTER: But, Mr. Chief Justice,
Congress can also amend the Declaratory Judgment Act, if
it wants. And Congress was proud of the Declaratory
Judgment Act when it was passed in 1934. And the
legislative history of it -- and nothing in the text is
contrary, says the purpose of this is so that contracts
can be resolved without breach, and judicial
determinations can be had. It's like a noninvasive, a
less invasive kind of surgery.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Kester, may I ask you this
question? Is it your view that Gen-Probe represented a
change in the law?
MR. KESTER: Absolutely.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Were there -- before Gen-Probe
was decided, were there any cases, like this case, that
were decided?
MR. KESTER: There were many, Your Honor, and
they were decided --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Where the -- where the
licensee brought suit challenging validity while the
license was still in full --
MR. KESTER: We --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- force?
MR. KESTER: We had suits in the Third Circuit,
the Seventh Circuit, the Second Circuit, and even in the
Federal Circuit, in its early days, where it quoted those
cases which said, "It is not necessary for the licensee to
stop paying payments in order for Article III to be
satisfied."
This case came as a shock in 2004. And, in
fact, the judges below, in this series of cases, all said,
"We thought it was settled law the other way." All this
case represents, from our point of view, is, "Let's go
back to the way it has always been."
I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Kester.
Ms. Maynard.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DEANNE E. MAYNARD
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MS. MAYNARD: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
There is a concrete dispute between the parties
about their legal rights and obligations. If that dispute
is resolved, money will change hands. That is an Article
III case or controversy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How do you ever end
these things? Let's say they have this dispute, they
bring the litigation, and they settle it. They're saying,
"Okay, we're going to settle it. Instead of paying a
license fee of 50 cents, it's going to be 40 cents, and
we'll go on." Then they can sue again, I take it.
MS. MAYNARD:: In that situation. Recognizing
that's not the situation we have here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can they settle that, by
the way? Is it all right to settle it, or is -- that
interfere with the policy that patents have to be open to
challenge?
MS. MAYNARD: May I -- if I can answer the first
question first.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Either one.
MS. MAYNARD: If there were to be a settlement,
in the second case, the -- it would not be an Article III
case or controversy problem with the second case. And
that suit should not be dismissed under 12(b)(1).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MS. MAYNARD: The -- in that case, the patent
holder might have a valid 12(b)(6) defense, and the suit,
laying aside enforceability issues that you raised, may be
easily resolved, on that ground. But, in terms of the
question before the Court today, that wouldn't be an
Article III matter.
I think, as a policy matter -- so, moving off
--
the question before the Court right now -- as a policy
matter, the -- it's not clear from this Court's cases
exactly what types of agreements would be enforceable. I
think there's a spectrum of cases one can imagine, ranging
from Pope -- the type of promise that was extracted in
Pope, which this Court held was unenforceable --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I think you
overread Pope. All Pope said was that they're not going
to grant specific performance. In fact, they've said,
"Whatever you may think of the policy here, we don't --
specific performance calls on the equitable discretion,
and we're not going to do it." But, I don't read Pope as
holding that the clauses are otherwise unenforceable. In
MS. MAYNARD: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- other words you're
maybe entitled to damages. And that may be measured by
the license fee that you agreed to pay.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, there certainly would be a
question, though, the way that Lear read Pope, and under
Lear, about whether a bare agreement not to challenge
licenses, especially ones like in Pope, where they agreed
not to challenge the license, even beyond the term, would
be enforceable. And the Government thinks there's a
spectrum. One -- at one end of the spectrum would be
licenses like those in Pope, and at the other end of the
spectrum would be a consent decree entered after
settlement of a bona fide patent infringement suit where
the -- which included an agreement not to settle. Now,
that's clearly not what we have here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, is -- if -- I guess there
are three possible positions on the question of whether a
licensee can attack a contract, a patent where he has a
license and wants to keep the contract. One, he can never
do it. Two, he can always do it. Three, it depends on
what the contract says. Now, do any of those questions
have anything to do with the question before us, which is
whether it is a case or controversy?
MS. MAYNARD: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. If we were to reach
the question, which is very interesting, "What is the
Government's position as to which of those three positions
is the right position?" -- were we to reach it -- I agree
with you, I don't see it in front of us; but maybe it is
-- if it were, what would be your view?
MS. MAYNARD: The Government's view is that
there's a spectrum along the spectrum, and it would have
-- you would have to consider each case on its terms. And
it's not clear, from this Court's cases, where the
policies in that --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, basically,
though, you're not certain. The Government's view would
be, it is a matter as to whether you can sue claiming the
patent is invalid, whether the licensee can do it, that
probably -- but you're not certain, and you haven't made
up your mind definitely, because it is not in this case --
but you think it's going to be something they could
regulate themselves by contract.
MS. MAYNARD: It's certainly not foreclosed by
this Court's precedent, and it's an open question where
the policies -- how they would weigh out. There's no
language in this license, however, suggesting any type of
settlement. And, moreover, I think it's important to
recognize that the parties here actually have a concrete
dispute about what the licensing agreement means. Count
one in the complaint is asking for a declaration --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you don't think
that matters, though, do you? I mean, even if they all
agree there's no dispute about what the license agreement
means, your position is still the same, right? There is
an Article III controversy because they challenge the
validity of the patent?
MS. MAYNARD: If the parties have a concrete
dispute about the validity of the patent, and it would
affect their rights and obligations in the way that it
would here -- in other words, that money will no longer be
due to the Respondents if the patent's invalid --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is --
MS. MAYNARD: -- and the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- that always the case?
I mean, could -- can you enforce a license agreement based
on an invalid patent? You thought it was valid -- parties
had a dispute about it -- whether it is valid. You
entered into agreement, say, "Well, let's split the
difference. We'll -- you know, 50 cents rather than a
dollar or nothing." It's determined that the patent is
invalid. Can the patentee then still say, "Well, you
still owe me the money. We've, kind of, cut -- split the
difference. That was part of the agreement"?
MS. MAYNARD: It might depend on whether there
was consideration beyond the patent itself. In the -- in
this -- in this case, though, the Petitioner claims that
if the -- if the patent is invalid, they no longer owe
licensing fees, and, under Lear, they would be entitled to
the licensing fees, that they've paid since they began
challenging, back. So, it's clear that under either the
contract or a question of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Contractually? They say that
that's their contractual right?
MS. MAYNARD: They claim that, under the
licensing agreement, they only owe royalties on valid
claims. That's count one of the complaint, in the (j) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where does that appear in the
licensing agreement? Or --
MS. MAYNARD: Where does it appear in the
licensing agreement?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, I took them as just
asserting a general proposition of law -- that, where
they've agreed to pay royalties because of a patent, if
the patent is invalid, they don't have to pay royalties --
not because there's some special provision in this
contract.
MS. MAYNARD: The parties actually have a
concrete dispute about the meaning of the licensing
agreement in that regard, Justice Scalia. On page 399 of
the joint appendix is the provision about which they have
a dispute. And the language in there provides that they
will pay on substances which would, if not licensed under
this agreement, infringe one or more claims of either or
both of the Shamir patents, or coexpression patents, which
have neither expired nor been held invalid by a court or
other body of competent jurisdiction. There was similar
language in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, there's really not much at
issue in this case. And that's clearly a case of
controversy, isn't it? There is a dispute over the
meaning of that provision of the agreement.
MS. MAYNARD: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Gee, there's less here than
meets the eye.
MS. MAYNARD: That's what the Government
believes, Your Honor.
It's also -- the licensee also does not need to
breach the licensing agreement in order to create a case
or controversy. The licensee is currently paying
royalties that it does not believe it owes and that it
believes it would be entitled to have back if it should
prevail on its interpretation of the -- of the patent and
the licensing agreement. It doesn't have to make that
injury more severe by breaching. That's clear from this
Court's decision in Altvater. In Altvater, royalties were
being demanded and royalties were being paid, but,
nevertheless, this Court held --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that -- it's
been pointed out that was pursuant to an injunction.
MS. MAYNARD: Yes, it was pursuant to
injunction, but that was not important to the Court's
reasoning. What the Court said is, "You need not suffer
patent damages in order to bring the suit." Not a
contempt. "You need not breach the injunction and put
yourself at risk of treble damages for infringement." It
was the patent damages that put the licensee at risk, and
that's the same risk that the Petitioner faces here and
should not have to bear in order to bring suit.
The case or controversy is whether or not the --
they owe the royalties. The whole point of the
Declaratory Judgment Act was to allow contracting parties
not to have to sever their ongoing contractual relations
in order to get disputes resolved between --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you think --
MS. MAYNARD: -- themselves.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you think there would
be a case or controversy if Genentech were suing to
establish the validity of its patent?
MS. MAYNARD: In the situation that we have
here, Your Honor?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MS. MAYNARD: Yes, I do. Where the Petitioner
claims that the patent is invalid, that they could -- that
the Petitioner's claims unsettles their right, damages
their property value, potentially, and that they could
bring a declaratory judgment action of validity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And what would their -- what
would their concrete injury be? What is the threatened
imminent injury that they would assert in that -- in that
action?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, right now --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have a licensee who's
paying the license fees. What is their concrete injury?
MS. MAYNARD: It -- from the moment -- the
Petitioner has an argument that from the moment it ceased
-- it starts claiming that the patent is invalid and pays
under protest, that it is entitled to those royalties
back.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But --
MS. MAYNARD: The --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- so long as they're still
paying the royalties, isn't that sort of an abstract
disagreement? I mean, it's sort of like the ACLU saying
that the patent's invalid. You know, it's a nice
theoretical question that we can argue about, but as long
as they're paying the royalties, where's the concrete
injury?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, I think, technically,
Justice Scalia, they probably have a claim for patent
infringement, to which the defense, as Justice Ginsburg --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I --
MS. MAYNARD: -- points out --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I find it --
MS. MAYNARD: -- would be an easy defense.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I --
MS. MAYNARD: So, there's not an Article III
lack of case or controversy, which is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I find it --
MS. MAYNARD: -- what's the question before --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- very difficult --
MS. MAYNARD: -- the Court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to see how there would be a
proper declaratory judgment action brought by the patentee
here. It's just not the kind of a situation where you can
have a mirror-image suit. I don't see what the --
MS. MAYNARD: Well, you need --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- patentee --
MS. MAYNARD: You -- may I answer that question?
You need not have a mirror-image suit, in that sense,
Justice Scalia. And Altvater makes that clear. In
Altvater, the patentee's claim was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's fine.
MS. MAYNARD: -- much narrower than the
counterclaim; and, nevertheless, the Court allowed that
counterclaim to proceed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Ms. Mahoney.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MAUREEN E. MAHONEY
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MS. MAHONEY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I'd like to start with the fact that there are
four counts in the complaint for declaratory relief. The
first one is styled as a -- contractual relations claims.
The other three are styled as patent law claims. And it's
important to emphasize, at the outset, that this Court, in
Skelly Oil, in Calderone, and in, really, all of the
cases, has said it's very important to look behind the
labels that a Declaratory Judgment Act plaintiff puts on
their claims. We need to actually see what is the cause
of action they're trying to adjudicate so we can do an
accurate assessment of justiciability -- standing,
ripeness, Federal-question jurisdiction.
I want to start by explaining why there is no
contract claim at issue here. You heard today, they're
trying to salvage this, say that there's a contract
dispute, a dispute about the terms of the contract. They
didn't argue that below, and with good reason. And I'd
just point you to the briefs in the Federal Circuit.
Roman numeral I, which is all about the improper dismissal
of the Declaratory Judgment Act claims, refers to the fact
these are, quote, "patent-law claims," end quote, at page
. Nowhere do they say that there is a dispute about the
proper interpretation of the contract terms. And let me
explain why.
The contract terms, which were just read to you,
is Section 110 of -- 1.10 at JA-399 of the license -- says
that there is an obligation to pay royalties for Synagis
on any claim -- not any valid claim, any claim -- that has
not been held invalid by a court or other competent
jurisdiction from which no appeal has, or may, be taken.
Now, they never said, below, "That clause means that we
can come to court and have the court decide whether this
patent is valid, and, depending on whether we win or not,
then we can stop paying." And the reason they didn't make
that argument is, it was rejected by this Court a hundred
years ago, in United States versus Harvey Steel. Very
similar clause. The United States says, "This means that
we don't have to pay if the patent is invalid." And, in
an opinion by Justice Holmes, this Court rejected it out
of hand by -- and said, "This was a conventional proviso.
We don't even need to look to evidence of the party's
intent, because this is the standard proviso. It does not
mean" -- and they said it was a "twisted interpretation"
that the Government was offering -- it doesn't mean that
the licensee, quote, "thought the patent bad and would
like to have the Court say so now," end quote. Yet that
is exactly --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was that a case about Article
III case or controversy?
MS. MAHONEY: It is, in the following sense,
Your Honor. They can't just show up here today and say,
"Well, there really is a dispute about the contract." But
they never argued, below, and is foreclosed --
JUSTICE BREYER: Shouldn't we send that back? I
mean, I thought we were here to decide one question, that
the Federal Circuit has said that, "Unless there is a
reasonable apprehension of a lawsuit, you can't bring a
declaratory judgment action, because of the Constitution
of the United States." Now, I have to admit, I've looked
up, or I've had my law clerk look up, probably now
hundreds of cases, and we can't find, in any case, such a
requirement. Indeed, the very purpose -- as I -- we've
just heard the SG say, of this act, the Declaratory
Judgment Act, seems to be to allow people who -- a
contract -- who are in a real concrete disagreement, to
get a declaratory judgment without getting rid of the
contract. But I might be wrong about that.
But you've now argued a different point.
MS. MAHONEY: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, isn't the right thing for
us to do, to decide the issue in front of us and then send
it back? If you're right that they have to pay, whether
they win or lose; if they're right that they promise not
to sue; if you're right on 14 other grounds, you might
win. But should we decide those grounds today? Why?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, first of all, with respect
to this issue, whether there would be jurisdiction over a
real live contract dispute, they never argued it, Your
Honor. It's not part of this case. The Federal Circuit
didn't address it, because they didn't argue it, because
it's foreclosed by --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the question --
MS. MAHONEY: -- a precedent a hundred --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The question that is
presented to us -- whatever they suggested at this oral
argument that wasn't in III, the question it presented to
us is, Was the Federal Circuit right when they said, "You
have no access to a declaratory judgment unless there is a
reasonable apprehension that you will be sued"?
MS. MAHONEY: Your Honor, that is the right --
that is the right starting point for a test, depending on
the cause of action they're seeking to adjudicate. In
here, what the Federal Circuit properly understood is that
they are seeking to adjudicate affirmative defenses to an
infringement action under the patent laws.
And, just like in Steffel, if you're trying to
adjudicate, on an anticipatory basis, an enforcement
action, you have to show that you would reasonably fear
that enforcement action. And, in fact, Steffel uses that
language, and Poe versus Ullman dismisses a case for
failure to establish a genuine fear of prosecution. But
then, you have to go one step beyond, and that is to say,
Are they -- is the cause of action not ripening because
the declaratory judgment plaintiff is forfeiting their
legal rights in order to avoid some very severe harm that
would be cognizable coercion? That's the test that's used
in Steffel for -- in essence, being able to test a --
defenses to a cause of action that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And why --
MS. MAHONEY: -- an enforcement action.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- doesn't that work here?
MS. MAHONEY: It doesn't work here, for several
reasons. Most fundamentally, this is a settlement. I
mean, Mr. Steffel did not enter into a settlement or a
compromise with the prosecutor. He wasn't complying
because he was under an agreement to do so. Here, it has
been settled for -- forever, that if a -- an agreement --
if you're making payments pursuant to an agreement, in the
nature of a compromise, you can't come and say that it's
been coerced or it's a form of duress.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why should we accept the
characterization that it's a compromise? As I -- and
maybe I'm just factually wrong here? I thought, at the
time they entered into the license agreement, they had
some disagreements about the scope of the then-patent, the
scope of the anticipated patent, and so on, and they
couldn't very well be resolved. But they were -- they
were not settling, in the -- in the classic sense of the
word, a -- let us say, a focus claim, one against the
other.
MS. MAHONEY: I think the answer, Your Honor,
is, they weren't settling, for all time, in the sense that
they could never get out of the deal. Certainly, they
could repudiate and then go ahead and sue. But yet, at
page 3 of their petition, they expressly say, the reason
they entered into this agreement was in order to avoid the
costs and risks of litigation. It is the reason --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But had they gotten to the
point, prior to the execution of the contract, in which
one party was saying, "You may not do this," and the other
party was saying, "Oh, yes I can," so that there -- there
was a focus controversy that would have been the subject
matter of a conventional lawsuit, then and there, had
there not been this license agreement?
MS. MAHONEY: Not exactly, but what they did was
they headed it off at the pass. They understood that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the question is, How far
--
ahead of the pass can they get and still call it a
settlement?" in the sense that you're using that term.
MS. MAHONEY: It's a compromise. It's a
compromise of the very claims they're trying to adjudicate
here. What they want to adjudicate are affirmative
defenses to a patent infringement action. That is not a
ripe claim, and there is not sufficient immediacy, because
they are preventing that claim from ripening by continuing
to make voluntary payments --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But --
MS. MAHONEY: -- under their --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you --
MS. MAHONEY: -- agreement.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right. But you were saying
that the status of that agreement, for purposes of the
jurisdictional question here, is exactly the same as the
status of an agreement that they might have entered into
after one party had brought suit against the other. And
MS. MAHONEY: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And they -- they had settled.
And then, later on, somebody wanted to repudiate the
settlement.
MS. MAHONEY: I don't know if it's exactly the
status. For instance, in a settlement after litigation
has been filed, I think that Lear would say that you can't
even repudiate that. But certainly -- so, there might be
some differences -- but from --
JUSTICE SOUTER: In any event --
MS. MAHONEY: -- the standpoint of coercion --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- it's equivalent to a
settlement after a formal demand has been made.
MS. MAHONEY: It is equivalent to that, in the
following sense. They understood that if they -- if they
didn't get a license, that they would be exposed to
Genentech's claims under the -- under the infringement
laws. And in order to avoid that exposure, even though
they had all the information they needed to assess the
validity of this patent at the time --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose they didn't have all
the information. Suppose you enter into a license
agreement -- you're convinced, as the one that's going to
pay the license fee, that it's a good patent -- after the
agreement's signed, the technological advances, other
disclosures, indicate that the patent is deficient. Could
you sue then?
MS. MAHONEY: No, I don't think so, unless --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but then -- so then, the
argument that you've made is just not --
MS. MAHONEY: No, I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- relevant for us, the fact
that they knew everything --
MS. MAHONEY: They did.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And it also means that this
isn't really a settlement, in any respect.
MS. MAHONEY: It's a compromise of claims that
could be brought.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Ms. Mahoney, can I ask this
question? Supposing at the time they negotiate the
license agreement there's some uncertainty about whether
the patent is valid or not. So, at the end of the license
agreement -- they agree on the royalties, the term, and
the -- everything it covers, but they put in a provision
and say, "We're not entirely sure the patent is valid, so
we reserve the right to bring an action challenging the
validity of the patent. We will pay royalties in the
meantime, and the -- you will accept these royalties as
sufficient for the use of the patent, that, if we win, you
don't have to pay royals, if we lose, you do." Would that
be a valid provision?
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think so, but that would
certainly be a closer case if there --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But would it --
MS. MAHONEY: But I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- not be precisely the same
issue as a jurisdictional matter as to whether there's a
case or controversy?
MS. MAHONEY: No, I don't think so, because the
real issue, in terms of Steffel, is whether you can say
that the party is being coerced. And, at least in your
hypothetical, you could say that they have --
JUSTICE STEVENS: He's not being coerced, but
he's bargaining a little better royalty rate than he'll --
otherwise would have to pay.
MS. MAHONEY: Well, in terms of whether they're
-- if the parties expressly agreed that that was part of
their deal, then you at least wouldn't say that there was
an issue of coercion. But here, that isn't what happened.
Instead, they used --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I'm really asking --
MS. MAHONEY: -- a standard proviso --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- whether the parties could
agree to create a case or controversy.
MS. MAHONEY: I think probably not, Your Honor.
I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: Let's suppose --
MS. MAHONEY: -- that that's one of the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well --
MS. MAHONEY: -- one of the problems --
JUSTICE BREYER: Will you assume Justice
Stevens' hypothetical? Assume it, take it as given. They
did put that in. I know you think they didn't, but I want
to assume it.
MS. MAHONEY: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, I'd like to also assume --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could I have a review of the
bidding? What --
[Laughter.]
JUSTICE SCALIA: Go back -- what is the
hypothetical --
JUSTICE BREYER: The hypothetical is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Continue on.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that they write into the
contract -- the party who's the licensee says, "And we
stipulate that the licensee thinks that the patent is
invalid." Nonetheless, the licensee wants a license, for
business reasons. Therefore, the licensee and the
licensor agrees that, after they sign the contract and
he's paying a thousand dollars a month in royalties, he
can go into court and challenge the patent." So, we
assume that's written into the contract.
MS. MAHONEY: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE BREYER: And now, let us also assume a
state of the law. The state of the law is that there is
no public policy or any other policy that forbids such a
--
condition in a contract. All right?
Now, on those two assumptions, the next thing
that happens is that the licensee asks for a declaratory
judgment that the patent is invalid.
On those assumptions, is there a case or
controversy under the Federal Constitution? If not, why
not?
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think so, because I think
what they're really asking for is advice about a business
deal under those circumstances.
JUSTICE BREYER: But he says, by the way, "If I
win, I will, in fact, save $42 billion a year in licenses"
MS. MAHONEY: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- "I would other have to pay."
And the other side will -- or -- I was a thousand dollars,
I meant 42 billion, okay?
[Laughter.]
MS. MAHONEY: But -- you know, but now -- but
now, can they come even before they sign the deal? In
other words, what's --
JUSTICE BREYER: No. Now, that's --
MS. MAHONEY: -- the line?
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not asking --
MS. MAHONEY: In other words --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- your hypothetical.
MS. MAHONEY: -- I -- no. Oh, no, I'm just
saying --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm asking --
MS. MAHONEY: -- I think that --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- my hypothetical.
[Laughter.]
MS. MAHONEY: I think the problem -- I think the
problem is, it -- is, it leads notion that parties can
simply, sort of, set up a -- even if there's not true
adversity, and come to court for answers to legal
questions. And that has --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, isn't there --
MS. MAHONEY: -- is something --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- true adversity? I
thought the assumption underlying the -- everybody's
hypothetical is that, if the patent is determined to be
invalid, that the license -- then the license agreement is
also invalid. Is that -- is that right?
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think so. I don't think
the license agreement itself is invalid. It simply --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can you -- can you --
MS. MAHONEY: -- means --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- can you collect --
can a patentee collect license fees based on an -- patent
that has been determined to be invalid?
MS. MAHONEY: Not on that patent. Right. The
license --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It would --
MS. MAHONEY: -- made.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It would be pursuant to
the agreement.
MS. MAHONEY: If the patent has been -- under
Lear and other cases, if a patent has been held to be
invalid by a final decision of a court, then I think it is
improper for a licensee to seek to obtain --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Collective --
MS. MAHONEY: -- royalties --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if --
MS. MAHONEY: -- for that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- the royalty agreement
says, you know, "We have a dispute about the validity of
this patent. We don't know. We disagree. And so, we've
entered into a compromise royalty rate that reflects the
uncertainty." But once it's determined to be invalid, the
license fees are not collectible.
MS. MAHONEY: I think that that is correct, Your
Honor, under the -- under the current state of the law.
JUSTICE SOUTER: One further -- on further
wrinkle. What if the contract goes the further step and
--
says, "Even if the patent were determined, in any action,
to be invalid, there will still be a royalty payable,
because that's what -- that's -- that is consideration for
the fact that we are not going to start any controversy
now." Let's assume they assume, precisely, the
invalidity. Would you say the contract is unenforceable
then, and the -- and the --
MS. MAHONEY: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- and, for jurisdictional
purposes, there would be no case or controversy then?
MS. MAHONEY: That if, under the -- I'm sorry,
to --
JUSTICE SOUTER: The --
MS. MAHONEY: The --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Take the Chief Justice's
hypothetical, add the following. There is a provision in
there to the effect that if, during the term of this
contract, the license is determined to be invalid,
royalties will still be payable under this contract --
MS. MAHONEY: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- because that is one of the
contingencies, which is a consideration for our bargain.
Would you say, in those circumstances, that your answer
would be the same, that there's no -- there's no case or
MS. MAHONEY: Well, I don't know what the
dispute would be about, Your Honor, because it sounds like
the contract terms would be clear. And if the contract
terms are clear, they would simply go in accordance,
unless they have an argument that the contract is --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but I'm talking about
jurisdictional purposes.
MS. MAHONEY: -- unenforceable. If the -- if
the point is that it is actually invalid, illegal, that --
that may be a different case, although I think there would
still be an estoppel argument, that they should not be
permitted to bring that action without giving up the
benefits of the bargain, which is the immunity from suit.
I mean, that is one of the fundamental problems with this
case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But do you see --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your argument
-- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, if -- do you see a
difference between -- I guess you're saying there's no
difference between my added wrinkle on the hypo and the
Chief Justice's hypo, for jurisdictional purposes.
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think that there's a
difference, from a jurisdictional perspective --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MS. MAHONEY: -- but I think, here, that the
major problem, from a jurisdictional perspective, is that
there is not anything in the language of the contract that
gives them a right to come to court to dispute validity.
Instead, we're --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about the fact that
it's under protest?
MS. MAHONEY: That makes no difference, Your
Honor. The fact is that they are making the payments
pursuant to an agreement. They're not under compulsion of
an injunction. They're doing it because they voluntarily
entered into it. Altvater is completely different.
There, there was no license agreement in force. The
courts found that it -- that the reissue patents were
never part of the agreement, to begin with. In other
words, Altvater never agreed to pay royalties. Altvater
had been sued, so there wasn't a counterclaim for
invalidity.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Could the --
MS. MAHONEY: And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- patent holder take the
position that, "I -- Sooner or later, I'm going to have to
fight out validity with someone, and might as well do it
sooner rather than later, so I am not going to raise the
license as a defense"? Would that be a "case or
--
controversy"?
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think that the patent
holder is allowed to come to court and seek a declaration
of validity. I don't think any court has ever allowed
that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is it -- it's -- no, the
patent -- the licensee is coming into court and wants a
declaration of invalidity so it can manufacture without
the fear of an infringement suit.
MS. MAHONEY: And they're under a license?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MS. MAHONEY: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the patent holder chooses
not to plead the license -- chooses not to plead the
license. Wouldn't the patent holder have that option?
MS. MAHONEY: Yes, the patent -- well, no. I
mean, not necessarily. Their view is that, because of the
terms of the agreement, that the patent holder has no
choice but to -- because they're receiving the royalties,
to simply --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't mean their view. I
mean, they start a lawsuit. They say, "We're -- we want"
MS. MAHONEY: But that is -- that's what
happened here.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- "we want a declaration of
infringement." And the patent holder doesn't take the
position that you're taking; instead says, "I'm prepared
to fight this out now. I know that I have the license,
which could be an affirmative defense, but I'm not going
to raise it. I'm going to go head to head on the validity
of this patent." Would that be a case or controversy?
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think so, Your Honor,
because I don't think the parties are allowed to just
decide, "Well, we'd like to do this now," when they're --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, even --
MS. MAHONEY: -- they've treated --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- even if the patent holder
chooses not to raise the license, the court would have to,
on its own motion, say, "Sorry, you didn't -- you're not
the master of your defense. We decide that you have to
effectively plead the license."
MS. MAHONEY: I think the plaintiff has to show
that they are here pursuant to -- that they have a legal
right that permits them to adjudicate the issue of
validity. What the -- what the patent owner does, or not,
I don't think turns this into a case or controversy; that,
instead, we have to start with the fundamental question,
"What is the cause of action that they are attempting to
adjudicate? Is it a contract action or is it a -- an
action under the patent laws? Is it an infringement
action?" Here, I don't think there's any question but
that it is -- they're trying to adjudicate an action for
an infringement that can't arise, because they're immune
from suit, because they continue to make their payments.
And, under those circumstances, it is not sufficiently
immediate to establish jurisdiction in --
JUSTICE BREYER: It is --
MS. MAHONEY: -- this Court.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it is, under other fields of
the law, isn't it? I mean, I imagine that the very -- we
see, all the time, declaratory judgments where a State
passes a law and the individual says, "Well, I think this
is unconstitutional, but my preferences are not to go to
jail; my preferences are not to be penalized. So, my
first choice is unconstitutional and my second is to obey
it." There's no possibility in the world that he will
violate that law. And yet, we've often held that, with
regulations, you have to have the other requirements. You
have to have the requirements that it's concrete, it's not
just ideological, there's real harm. But, if those other
requirements that are fulfilled, I've never seen any where
it said that there also has to be a reasonable
apprehension of a lawsuit in the absence of the
declaratory judgment. I've just never found that phrase,
and I can't imagine why it would be part of the law.
MS. MAHONEY: Your Honor, Poe versus Ullman,
this Court actually dismissed a declaratory judgment --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, there are many dismissed,
for the reasons that they aren't concrete, definite --
there are a lot of reasons why to dismiss it. I'm just
wondering if there is an additional reason that there has
to be a reasonable apprehension of a lawsuit in the
absence of the declaratory judgment action. It's that
phrase that I've never found anywhere --
MS. MAHONEY: We --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- and can't think of any
reason why that would be an additional constitutional
requirement. And I'm putting that directly to you,
because I want to hear you give me the counterexamples.
MS. MAHONEY: Well -- but in Poe versus Ullman,
it was a declaratory judgment action. They were seeking
to have a statute declared unconstitutional. And this
Court did dismiss, because they didn't have a reasonable
fear that they would actually be prosecuted. Dismissed
for lack of jurisdiction.
JUSTICE BREYER: And you say there has never
been a declaratory judgment action, except in the instance
where, in the absence of the action, the person would have
violated the law, if it's a Government law. In other
words, if they're -- so, it's really not --
MS. MAHONEY: Even --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MS. MAHONEY: Well, you could -- you could --
I'm not -- it is possible that that framework could be
extended. I -- it has not been done to date, and it would
be --
JUSTICE BREYER: As I think as we --
MS. MAHONEY: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- both know --
MS. MAHONEY: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in the Government area, it
happens --
MS. MAHONEY: It --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- a lot.
MS. MAHONEY: It does.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MS. MAHONEY: But there is always a reasonable
apprehension, and there was always a finding of coercion.
Poe versus Ullman says you can't do it unless there is --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do I remember that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, Poe versus Ullman was a
case in which, even if there was a violation of the law,
there was going to be no prosecution.
MS. MAHONEY: That's why they didn't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: He -- but, in this -- in this
case, if there's a failure to -- of -- conform to the
terms of the license agreement, there's going to be a
lawsuit. So, I think Poe versus Ullman is just not
relevant.
MS. MAHONEY: That -- it goes to the next point,
which is that there still has to be a coercive choice.
You have to choose -- there, they're choosing to give up
constitutional rights in order to avoid jail and
imprisonment, arrest and prosecution. Here --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, but --
MS. MAHONEY: -- what's at issue --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- but, in Poe versus Ullman,
the ultimate action was basically like violating the
contract here, and that's why it's not an applicable
precedent.
MS. MAHONEY: I don't -- I don't think it's like
violating the contract here, though, Your Honor, because,
What are the consequences here? What is the choice?
First of all, they actually owe the royalties under the
agreement, so they're trying to escape their bargain, not
enforce it. That's number one. So, they're not
forfeiting any rights under the contract, they're simply
trying to get out of the contract.
Number two, the consequences here, the choice
--
they're talking about, isn't in the nature of coercion.
Again, they're not being arrested or prosecuted. All
they're going to do if they walk out of this agreement, if
they stop paying royalties -- yes, they may well be sued
for infringement -- but, if they do, all they face is the
loss of their discount.
JUSTICE ALITO: But your argument seems --
MS. MAHONEY: That's --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- to be based on their having
implicitly given up their right to sue. Isn't that right?
That was your main argument. This is a settlement. This
is in the nature of the settlement. As part of the
bargain, the patent holder promises not to sue for
infringement.
MS. MAHONEY: It's not based on them giving up
their right to sue, in the sense that all they have to do
is stop paying royalties, and they can sue. They have to
JUSTICE ALITO: But in answer to the
hypotheticals, you seem to say it wouldn't matter if they
explicitly did not give up their right to sue. So, what
is left of this argument that what's involved here is
essentially a settlement?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, it is in the nature of a
compromise, Your Honor, and there's nothing in this
agreement that gives them a right to sue. They have to
find some legal right. What they're really saying -- what
their argument has always been is that Lear actually
creates an implied right of action for a licensee to sue
at any time of their choosing. That's been their argument
from the beginning.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, their concrete
right is, as I thought you conceded earlier, that if the
patent is declared invalid, they will not owe license
fees.
MS. MAHONEY: That's true. But that's getting
the cart before the horse. What this Court said in --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's what --
MS. MAHONEY: -- U.S. v. Harvey Steel is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- a declaratory
judgment action does, though, isn't it?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, I don't think so, Your
Honor. I think every single contract case in the lower
courts where they have allowed a suit to be brought on a
contract prior to breach, there was a genuine dispute
about the interpretation of the terms. Here, what they're
trying to do is adjudicate a cause of action outside of
the contract. They're trying to adjudicate an
infringement action and then say, "Aha, see what I have?
I have a judgment that the patent's invalid. And so, now
I'd like to say that I don't have to pay royalties under
my contract."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ms. Mahoney, the patent bar is
sort of specialized -- more than "sort of" -- it's a
specialized bar, and I've never -- I've never been a part
of it. Do you agree with the statement of the
Petitioner's counsel that Gen-Probe came as a -- as a
shock to the --
MS. MAHONEY: As a -- I do not agree that it
came as a shock. And, in fact, I think that Warner
Jenkinson, which is a Second Circuit case that allowed
this kind of action back in the '70s, was one of the only
cases ever that allowed it. And other reasons were found
to dismiss similar kinds of claims. In Gen-Probe, it was
a surprise that a licensee could do this. It -- the law
-- by the time that this license was executed in the
Federal Circuit, there was a case, called Shell Oil, where
the Court specifically held that a licensee cannot take
advantage of the protections of Lear until it has
repudiated the license, stopped paying, and said that it
wants to challenge validity. So that was the background
rule that was in force at the time of this license. And
then, when you couple that with the fact that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that wasn't -- the
District Court, in this very case, seemed to say, "I think
this suit should go forward, but there's Gen-Probe, and I
must follow Gen-Probe." The District Court, at least as I
read it, seemed to think that Gen-Probe moved in a
different direction from where the Federal Circuit was
before.
MS. MAHONEY: In all of the prior Federal
Circuit cases, the licensee had stopped paying royalties.
And what the Court explained in Gen-Probe is that that is
the sine qua non, that a licensee can't establish
jurisdiction, and it can't establish a right to challenge
validity, if it's still paying royalties.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Mahoney, you argue,
in the alternative, that we should dismiss it on the basis
of equitable considerations under the Declaratory Judgment
Act. We can't reach that argument unless we rule against
you on the Article III question. Is that right?
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think so, Your Honor. I
think you can, because I think that you can do it as an
alternative threshold prudential jurisdictional dismissal
in the nature --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We would have to be
assuming that we had jurisdiction, wouldn't we?
MS. MAHONEY: I think that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Under Article III?
MS. MAHONEY: I think that a prudential
dismissal under Article III would also be fine, and that
Steel Co. would allow for that kind of dismissal, because
Wilton said that you can dismiss for lack of jurisdiction,
at the front end, on prudential grounds if you know that
there would not be relief allowed at the back end.
And I think that there's no need for a remand to
do this. We are really talking about an equitable rule
that has governed equitable actions for 300 years. It is
a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what -- but jurisdiction
is a question of power, Does the Court have the power to
do this? A discretion question is different. It's, "We
have the power to entertain this case, but, as a matter of
equity, we're not going to do so." The power question, I
think, is a -- one that's -- it's either yes or no, either
the court has the power, or doesn't.
MS. MAHONEY: But I don't think that the Court
has to answer that question in order to dismiss on a
prudential ground, a prudential jurisdictional ground, and
nor is there a need for a remand in Samuels versus
Mackell, and in Cardinal, for instance. Those are cases
where the Court adopted prudential rules and went ahead
and applied them without remand. I -- and no remand's
necessary. The Federal Circuit has already looked at
this. They --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Ms. Mahoney, can I ask you one
question before your light goes off? I know it's not --
goes to the "case or controversy" issue, but, in your
view, was the bringing of this action a material breach of
an implied condition of the contract that would justify a
termination of a license?
MS. MAHONEY: It would depend on whether there
is an implied covenant, Your Honor. It wasn't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm asking you whether --
MS. MAHONEY: -- argued below.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- you think there was.
MS. MAHONEY: I think it -- it may well be, but
I don't think the answer in this case turns on it, because
I think they have to have their own right to bring the
action, whether it's a breach or not, and that they don't.
Because they don't have an implied right of action under
Lear, they don't have a right to bring this action. And
that is an essential component of their ability to
challenge the issue of validity. So, I think that's the
first and fundamental --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, if that's so, and it's a
super-violation of an implied covenant, and I guess you
could get damages.
MS. MAHONEY: I think that their theory, Your
Honor, is that a licensee can do this at any time, and
that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I think that your theory
is that it's a super-violation of an implied covenant.
MS. MAHONEY: Your Honor, I don't think --
whether it's an implied covenant or not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: "Not only did we agree to it,
but we you can't even do it if you agree to it."
MS. MAHONEY: I think that an additional factor
that bears on this analysis is also the fact that Congress
has never created an implied right of -- has never created
a right of action --
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms. Mahoney.
Mr. Kester, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN G. KESTER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. KESTER: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice. Just
several quick items.
I think -- I think, Mr. Chief Justice, you were,
a while ago, putting the horse in front of the cart, which
was right where it belongs. The contract claim is clear
in the record. It's at page 136 of the joint appendix. I
don't think more needs to be said about it.
Harvey Steel, on which Respondents rely, was, of
course, overruled --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait, wait. Before you leave
that, do you agree that it was not raised below?
MR. KESTER: No, we don't.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where -- can you tell us where
it was raised below?
MR. KESTER: Well, it -- it's raised in the --
in the first remanded complaint. It's been a -- it's been
here throughout. If it -- if it even matters. I mean, we
wouldn't concede that that -- that that would even matter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But was it raised before
the Federal Circuit?
MR. KESTER: Yes. The whole record was -- you
mean was it argued --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. KESTER: I believe it was. I'd have to go
back and -- you mean in terms of the oral argument. It
was certainly in the briefs. It was certainly not waived.
There was never, of course, any -- anything in
the license, or anyplace else, where Petitioner gave up
the right to sue. Petitioner doesn't need permission in
the license to sue.
And as for the shock in the lower courts when
this case was decided, I would call to your attention what
the Federal Circuit, in 1983, itself, said, and it quoted
the Warner-Jenkinson case, which was the Second Circuit
case that my friend dismissed somewhat. The C.R. Bard
case -- this is Federal Circuit, early -- starts out, the
opening line -- it says, and I quote -- this is 716 F.2d
5 -- "We hold that a patent license need not be
terminated before a patent licensee may bring a Federal
declaratory judgment action," close quote. And the last
words of the same opinion, at 882 of 716 F.2d, are, "We
hold that a patent licensee may bring a Federal
declaratory judgment action to declare the Federal -- to
declare the patent subject to the license invalid without
prior termination of the -- of the license." That was
83. Gen-Probe was 2004. Something happened in the
interval.
Finally, the discussion of settlements here
strikes me as, indeed, strange, because if this -- if a
license were to be redesignated as a settlement, we would
have the situation here where -- a license was signed in
77; the only patent at issue in this case was not even
issued until 2001.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Kester.
MR. KESTER: Thank you, Mr. --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 11:05 a.m., the case in the
