THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
KESHIA CHERIE ASHFORD DIXON, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 05-7053
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -X
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 25, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:07 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
J. CRAIG JETT, ESQ., Dallas, Texas; on behalf of the
Petitioner.
IRVING L. GORNSTEIN, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
J. CRAIG JETT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner
IRVING L. GORNSTEIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
J. CRAIG JETT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:07 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Dixon v. United States.
Mr. Jett.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF J. CRAIG JETT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. JETT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In this case, the parties agree that Federal
courts, including this Court, have addressed
nonstatutory defenses for almost 200 years and that
Congress, in enacting criminal law statutes, legislate
against a background of Anglo-Saxon common law, such
that a defense of duress was likely contemplated by
Congress when it passed the gun control statutes. It
is, therefore, required that courts apply defenses,
such as the duress defense, based on the background
principle of construction that the prosecution must
prove criminal intent beyond a reasonable doubt.
The Government would have this Court discount
the development of over 110 years of common law that
has produced a substantial, well-established, well-
reasoned majority rule in both State and in Federal
courts that places the burden on the Government to
disprove the absence of duress once that defense has
been raised by the evidence.
The development of the majority rule began
with this Court's decision in Davis v. United States in
95.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Jett, do I take it,
from what you've just said, that you are recognizing
this is a question of Federal common law and not due
process, so that if Congress placed the burden on the
defendant, there would be no constitutional infirmity?
You're just arguing that this is the Federal common
law?
MR. JETT: Our -- our first issue and our
first contention is that Federal common law will govern
the decision in this particular case, but we also have
a due process point that we also believe is germane.
But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You -- you -- then you
think that Congress could not say that the defendant
has the burden on the question of duress.
MR. JETT: We think that Congress could not
under the -- the precedents of this Court and under the
-- the basic common law construction that's
fundamental, I think, to the -- to the criminal law in
this -- in this country.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do you do with
Martin against Ohio?
MR. JETT: Well, we understand about Martin
v. Ohio, Your Honor, and we think that -- that based on
recent precedents, Martin v. Ohio should be
reconsidered. The -- the significant issue is that
duress is based on the fact that there -- that there
must be free will, and if free will is dispensed with,
in this case by duress, then the -- the defendant
doesn't have the requisite criminal intent. And -- and
in our -- and since the beginning of -- since before
the beginning of common law in -- in our system, it has
been recognized that in order to have a criminal -- a
crime, there have to be two things: one, a vicious
will and the other an act -- an evil act concurrent
with the vicious will. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, there may be --
there may be crimes where duress would vitiate an
intent element, but there may be other crimes where it
wouldn't. And -- and I don't understand your argument
to be -- is it that in every case duress negates an
element of the crime or only in some cases?
MR. JETT: Well, we think that in -- that in
every criminal case, with possibly the exception of --
of public welfare cases, that -- that there is an
underlying background construction for our criminal
law, which requires the Government to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt criminal intent.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Which is the easier of the
two cases for the defendant? A, the case where the
argument is a burden of proof should be on -- on the --
the State as a due process matter or a common law
matter in an insanity defense and, B, in a duress
defense?
MR. JETT: Which is easier for the State?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, either way.
MR. JETT: Well, we -- we contend that in a
-- a -- duress is -- is different. Insanity deals with
really the internal workings of somebody's mind, so
that's perhaps more difficult for the State. But in a
-- in a duress case, you're dealing not only with the
internal workings but also external factors as well --
as well that impose somebody else's will upon the
defendant.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would think that it's
easier in -- you know, we had -- we had a -- this term
another case in which the argument is that you cannot
have a separate insanity defense essentially and -- and
exclude from the mens rea element of a crime the -- the
lack of -- of mental capacity to -- to have that mens
rea. This is the same thing you're arguing before us.
And -- and it seems to me that if it applies to
duress, it applies even -- even more strongly to -- to
insanity. How can an insane person form the intent to
commit a crime that -- that requires mens rea?
MR. JETT: Well, we -- we agree that -- I
agree -- we agree that an insane person cannot form
that particular intent. We think that they are similar
except that the duress case is perhaps easier for the
-- for the defense because we have external factors
that often bear on what the defense is unlike --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but we've held, at
least under the M'Naghten version of the defense, that
the State -- that the burden can be put on the
defendant to show that he was not insane under the
M'Naghten test.
MR. JETT: Well, we -- and we understand
that, and again, our --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And as Justice Scalia said
and as I was considering in asking my question, in your
case we know that there was a conscious, knowing and
intentional, in some sense, act when -- when the person
bought -- bought the weapons. She says the intent, of
course, was induced by -- by the threat. It seems to
me you have a more difficult case than in the insanity
case.
MR. JETT: Well, our -- our -- we think that
they're -- that they're similar because both deal with
-- with the mental state, and -- and then historically,
at least since -- since 1895 in this Court, this Court
has said that you've got to have the vicious will in
order to constitute a crime. And so you have the same
issue here. Did Mrs. Dixon have the vicious will or
was she acting under the will of someone else?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but doesn't vicious
will mean simply the will to commit the crime?
MR. JETT: Actually, no. It means the -- the
criminal intent, not just to commit the crime but
having the criminal intent, the vicious mind, to
violate the law. Mrs. Dixon's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, what do you mean by
vicious? I mean, that the person is -- is nasty, that
the person is antisocial or asocial?
MR. JETT: No.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't know what the added
element is.
MR. JETT: The -- this -- this Court has --
has frequently equated the vicious will with moral
blameworthiness, that is, the desire to do wrong, that
is, the desire to do something -- to -- the free desire
based on the -- the choice of having -- being able to
do the right thing or do the wrong thing and freely
choosing to do the wrong thing, that is, moral
blameworthiness.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The phrase Justice Harlan
used in the Davis case.
MR. JETT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But when you -- when you say
freely choosing, what you mean, I take it, is choosing
with -- without consideration of pressure from a third
party. That's what you mean, isn't it?
MR. JETT: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. JETT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if the -- the third --
the third party may, indeed, exert pressure, but I take
it you would agree that it is still the decision of the
defendant whether to cave in to that pressure or not,
whether to commit the crime or not to commit the crime.
MR. JETT: We believe that would not be a
voluntary act. Certainly the defendant makes that
decision.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, I -- I don't want to
get lost in -- in rhetoric here. Isn't it still the
case, even on your theory, that the defendant in these
circumstances makes a choice? It may be a troubled
choice, a much more difficult choice to make than it
would be otherwise, but the defendant still makes a
choice as to whether to cave in to the third party's
pressure or not, whether to commit the crime or not.
Isn't that true even on your theory?
MR. JETT: Yes, it is true.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. JETT: But the difference is, as you
pointed out, Justice Souter, that the defendant is not
acting of her own free will. She's -- she's acting
based on the will of someone else, that that person has
overborne her will.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It was her will to yield to
the will of someone else. I mean, you can't blame
somebody else for her making the choice.
MR. JETT: Well, we -- we would respectfully
disagree, Judge. She believed that there was
figuratively a gun at the head of her children, and if
somebody puts a gun to the head of my child, you can
make me do almost anything that you want.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That may be a very
intelligent choice on your part to do what the person
with the gun at the head of your children tells you to
do. But to say that it's not your choice, which is
what you're arguing here, the only question is whether
that has to be brought forward by reason of -- of a
defense of -- of coercion or rather, whether it goes to
whether you had the intent. That's all we're talking
about here. And it seems to me you have the intent to
yield to -- to the demand of whoever has the gun at the
head of your children. It's a separate question
whether the law should punish your yielding like that.
MR. JETT: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But -- but you're telling us
that you don't have the intent to -- to yield and --
and to do whatever criminal act that person tells you.
Right? That just doesn't -- I just don't think it's
true.
MR. JETT: What -- what we're saying and what
I think that this Court -- the precedents of this Court
have said is that you have to have criminal intent.
That is the vicious will that -- that the Court --
Justice Harlan talked about in Davis and this Court has
talked about in Morissette.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what is the statutory
-- what is the mens rea under the statute for the
offenses that the defendant was charged with? It's
knowingly, isn't it?
MR. JETT: Well, on -- on seven or eight of
the counts, it's knowingly. Well, actually on the
first count it's knowingly, but that is defined as --
as -- in this case, it was defined as voluntarily and
intentionally. And then in the other counts, it was
simply defined as knowingly. And so, indeed, that --
that's -- that is what the Congress said.
However, based on the -- the precedents of
this Court, that even when there is a knowingly
culpable mental state provided by Congress, this Court
has impart -- imported the -- the criminal intent to --
into the statute. And so like in -- for instance, in
Morissette, which was a theft case, what this Court did
was the Congress had said knowingly didn't provide a --
a criminal intent. So this Court imported one and said
that the Court -- that the Government had to prove that
beyond a reasonable doubt. Once the defense was
raised, it became an element that the Government has to
prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, counsel, under
your view, how -- how is the Government supposed to
prove a negative in every case? How are they supposed
to prove the absence of duress?
MR. JETT: It's really no different than any
other case, Mr. Chief Justice. In -- in any case, for
instance, a self-defense case, the Government has got
to prove that -- disprove self-defense beyond a
reasonable doubt once it's raised. They do it in the
same way they do in the other case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that's something
that -- but self-defense is something that's often a --
a factual element that you can discern from the
circumstances of the crime. The -- the other guy had a
gun, you know, that sort of thing. So if it's going to
be presented -- so it's something that's within the
control of either side.
Duress is something that in this case the
Government would have no reason to suppose that it was
even implicated until it's raised, and then they have
no way of getting at what the particulars are because
they're all within the control of the defendant.
MR. JETT: Well, we -- we would respectfully
disagree with that. And this case is a very good
example of -- of that -- of that circumstance. The
Government -- early on in this case, they searched Mrs.
Dixon's apartment and found evidence. They -- they
interviewed her. They actually interviewed the abusers
prior to trial before we gave them notice. They --
they were able to investigate her background partially
before we gave notice, partially afterwards, so that
they were able to -- to investigate her and
circumstances of her life. But not only that, they
were able to call as witnesses the seven gun dealers
from which the guns were purchased who witnessed the
purchase and who did provide testimony that she did not
appear to be under duress, and they so testified.
So in this particular case, it's really just
like any other cases. You can certainly imagine a
circumstance where that would be hard, but in very many
cases, the facts are there just like a self-defense
case or, for that matter, just like --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I thought the
gist of her duress defense was not that she was under
duress when she was purchasing the guns, but that she
had reason to believe that her children were being
threatened by accomplices or associates of -- of this
-- this individual. And there's nothing in the facts
of the -- the scene that would lead the Government to
have any access to that evidence.
MR. JETT: Well, what -- what she was in
duress about is she was told at the time that there was
somebody at home with a gun who was just a cell phone
call away. So as far as she was concerned, there was
somebody there with a gun to the head of her children
and she was in fear of her children's life.
In terms of what -- what the Government knew
in this particular case, the Government had notice.
The trial judge required that we provide notice of a
defense. The trial judge required that if we -- said
that if we had an expert, we had to give the Government
notice of the expert and the subject matter of the
testimony of the expert. So the Government was very
well informed prior to trial what the defense was so
that they hired their own expert who actually was able
to interview the -- the accused without me being there
and -- and so was prepared to testify about the issues
of duress.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What -- what is the
threshold test that the defendant has to cross before
the judge will give the instruction to the jury?
Obviously, the burden of production is with the
defendant. When can a judge say, well, you know, this
-- this is just too flimsy for a duress defense? I'm
not going to instruct a jury on that.
MR. JETT: Well, the -- the first thing the
judge would have to determine is that has -- has there
been evidence of each of the elements of duress, and
the trial judge found that we -- we've produced evidence
of each of the elements of the duress.
The -- in -- in the circuit court cases,
they've not been consistent, but we would -- we would
suggest that the -- the standard would be that there
would be sufficient evidence, when viewed in the light
most favorable to the defendant, that would raise a
reasonable doubt with a rationale jury, sort of the --
the other side of -- of the prosecution's burden that
they have to reach in order to get to the jury.
JUSTICE ALITO: What is the -- the
methodology that you think we should follow in
determining where the burden should be allocated under
any particular criminal statute? Is it the -- the
majority rule at the time when that particular statute
was enacted or at -- is it -- you don't think it's the
-- the old common law rule. What -- what is the -- at
what point of time do we look at the -- at what's going
on throughout our country?
MR. JETT: Well, I think you've got to look
at two points in time. And certainly we agree. We
don't look at the old common law because -- because
there's been 110 years of -- of development of common
law in this country since Davis v. United States. So I
think the Court has got to look at -- at what the
common law was at the time that the relevant statute
was passed, which in this case was 1968.
But I think in addition to that, there --
there have been amendments to the statute.
JUSTICE ALITO: So the burden would be
different under different statutes?
MR. JETT: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: If we were dealing with a --
with a much older criminal statute, the burden might be
allocated differently?
MR. JETT: No, because I think the -- I think
you have to consider that. But the other thing you'd
have to consider is the development of the common law
since that time and what -- what courts have done, what
the rationale has been that they have employed over
time.
And in this particular case, for instance, we
have -- we have six Federal circuits and 29 States who
have found that the burden of proof -- the burden of
production should be on the defendant, but the burden
of persuasion should be on -- on the Government to
disprove duress once it's raised.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you have 21 States and
how many circuits --
MR. JETT: Six circuits and 29 States,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. I'm saying how many are
on the other side?
MR. JETT: On the other side of the circuits,
we count three; on the States, we count 14. Some
States have not addressed the issue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's -- that's sort
of a horse race. I'm -- I'm not sure, even if I agreed
with your theory, that -- that what the Constitution
requires changes on the basis of an evolving common
law.
Of course, it can only change in one
direction. Right? It can only change favorably to --
to your client, favorably to the defendant. It can't
change to be more harsh to the defendant because the
Constitution prohibits that.
MR. JETT: We would agree --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right? So -- so we have a
one-way -- a one-way altering Constitution.
MR. JETT: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But even -- even if I agreed
with that, I'm not sure that, you know, 21 versus 14 is
-- is an overwhelming demonstration of -- of the new
common law.
MR. JETT: But, Justice Scalia, it's 29
versus 14. And -- but it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: 29 versus 14.
MR. JETT: But it's clearly a 2 to 1 majority
in favor of placing the burden of persuasion on the
Government.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. But are you making
the argument that this number indicates a congressional
intent and that what we ought to do is come up with a
rule because Congress intended it? Or are you making
the argument that yours is the better rule, and as a
matter of common law, which -- which it is our
responsibility to develop, we should see it your way?
Which argument are you making?
MR. JETT: We're -- we're basing our argument
primarily on -- on the common law that has been
developed in -- in this country since really Davis v.
United States through the present and has -- has --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Jett, there's one
piece of this picture that's different -- that
distinguishes duress from, say, self-defense. If it's
self-defense, you take a snapshot on the scene. You
know exactly what happened. No one taking a picture of
these gun purchases would have any idea of all of this.
And the judge, when asked to give -- to allow
the defense of duress, said, it's frankly a close call
in my mind, but when it is a close call, better give it
than not.
Now, he thought that the defendant would have
the burden of proof. Perhaps the judge would call that
close question the other way if he thought he was
saddling the prosecution with the ultimate burden of
persuasion.
MR. JETT: In my mind it would be -- if it's
a close question, I don't think the burden of proof in
that particular circumstance would make a difference
because it still is -- because he would then be taking
it away from the jury. And in my experience, judges
are -- are not want to take the questions away from the
jury, and they will provide the -- the jury instruction
in a close case. And that would be the right thing to
do because ultimately we want the jury to make that
decision.
But the -- but the judge does have a
gatekeeping function in -- in a duress defense, so that
a judge -- in any circumstance, if the judge decided
that the evidence was insufficient to get to the jury,
the judge can make that determination so that you have
the trial court acting with the -- the -- to make sure
that what the jury is going to hear is -- is an issue
for which there is evidence. So I think that the
gatekeeping function that the trial court would --
would prevent there from being -- juries making a
decision on insufficient facts.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Jett, a thought occurred
to me, by reason of your agreement, that -- that it's a
one-way ratchet, that when the common law changes in
the -- in the direction of favoring the defendant, it
becomes the duty of the courts to allow that. But, of
course, it can't change in the other direction because
the Constitution would prevent it. You sort of agreed
with that.
But -- but if -- if you agree with that, how
can you explain our -- our 1895 decision in Davis which
held that the insanity defense had to be proved by the
Government which was then overridden by a Federal
statute. How could -- how could -- if -- if Davis was
right about what the -- what the common law required,
how could Congress possibly have changed that by a
statute? I would assume that all of the basic elements
of the common law are picked up in the Due Process
Clause. Why wouldn't -- why wouldn't the necessity of
-- of proving the mental element of a -- of a crime,
even when that mental element is overcome by insanity,
why wouldn't that have been embodied in the Due Process
Clause so that the congressional statute would have
been ineffective?
MR. JETT: Well, two reasons. One, Davis was
a common law case, and -- and subsequently in Leland v.
Oregon, this Court said Davis was a common law case.
And so this Court can decide the common law issue with
respect to the Constitution.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. I'm not questioning
whether we could do it. I'm questioning whether
Congress could do it, whether Congress could overrule
what we did in Davis. If Davis said that common law
was that the Government has to prove -- disprove
insanity, wouldn't that have been part -- become part
of the Due Process Clause if it was the common law?
MR. JETT: I think -- I think that if it --
if it does become part of the Due Process, then
obviously Congress cannot overrule it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. JETT: If it simply becomes the common
law -- the rule of -- of the Federal courts that this
Court has -- has established based on its supervisory
powers, then the Congress would be able to do that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it makes me suspect
that Davis was wrong.
MR. JETT: Well, the thing about Davis that
even though the -- the insanity holding about Davis was
overruled, the core holdings of Davis was not
overruled. And one of the things that Davis said was
that, again, to constitute a crime against human laws,
there must be the vicious will and, secondly, the
unlawful act.
The other thing that Davis said, which was
very significant, is that the plea of not guilty is not
like in a civil case where there's confession and
avoidance. What it does is it negates or it
controverts all of the allegations of -- of the State,
and so that it controverts the existence of each fact
that the State has to prove. If it -- if it, indeed,
does that and what duress does is it negates the evil
-- the evil intent, then -- then the Government has got
to prove that there's criminal intent. It's got to
negate one of the elements that the Government has got
to prove beyond a reasonable doubt. And that's -- that
-- that's part of the holding of Davis, and the
Congress has not affected that with its decision on the
insanity defense.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask, if -- if you
know, whether Congress has ever been asked to address
this precise issue that we're debating today?
MR. JETT: Congress has -- has never ruled on
the duress defense. I think a few years ago, there --
there was a proposal to -- to amend the Federal
Criminal Code, and in that particular -- it didn't pass
but I think the result of that was that Congress just
took out the duress provision and said that the courts
should make the decision as to how that would be
handled based on -- on all the -- the normal
considerations that a court looks at in making those
decisions.
So that the Congress has had many
opportunities to rule on duress. The Congress -- just
like the Congress has said you have to have notice of
alibi and just like they passed the -- this -- the rule
about -- I mean, the statute about insanity. The
Congress could have -- have abolished the duress
defense. I don't think they could have
constitutionally, but they could have passed a statute
and spoken to that, but they've chosen not to. And I
think what that tells us is that the Congress is
probably aware of the common law and have chosen not to
interfere with the development of the common law in
this country.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about a defense
that I was on drugs and -- and didn't know what I was
doing because of that and couldn't form the requisite
intent? Does the Government have to disprove that as
well?
MR. JETT: If that is a defense that is
recognized by -- by the common law or -- or by statute,
then the Government would have to do that if that
particular defense --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How is the Government
-- how would the Government do that?
MR. JETT: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: A person just says, I
was -- I was on, you know, PCP or whatever and -- and I
couldn't form the requisite intent.
MR. JETT: Well, the Government could do that
much the way they do like in an entrapment defense. In
an entrapment defense, the Government has to -- once
there's entrapment shown, the Government has to
disprove the predisposition of the defendant or prove
the defendant has predisposition. And so --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's based on the
defendant's -- the prosecution's conduct. The
Government's conduct in entrapment concerns how the
Government behaved.
MR. JETT: Justice Ginsburg, it does but it
still -- that case still deals with somebody overriding
the will of the defendant, the Government imposing its
own will on the defendant. In that regard --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if the Government is
out there trying to achieve that result, it's quite
different from the Government having nothing to do --
MR. JETT: Well, we -- we contend that it's
still the same because it's a third party, whether it's
the Government or somebody else, who's overbearing the
will of the accused.
And if there's no other questions, I'd like
to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Gornstein.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF IRVING L. GORNSTEIN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. GORNSTEIN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
For three reasons, the burden of proving
duress should be on the defendant, and the Government
should not be required to disprove duress beyond a
reasonable doubt.
First, duress is an affirmative defense that
excuses what would otherwise be serious criminal
conduct. When the Government proves that a defendant
has engaged in criminal conduct and has done so with
the mens rea specified by the crime, it is fair to
require the defendant to prove that duress excuses that
criminal conduct, so that here, the Government proved
that Petitioner knew she was lying when she filled out
the forms and that she knew it was unlawful for her to
receive firearms.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So there may be cases
where the nature of the mens rea required would require
the Government to disprove duress.
MR. GORNSTEIN: There could conceivably be
such cases, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The sort of crimes
where -- where your culpability depends on your motive.
Right?
MR. GORNSTEIN: Well, if you had a crime, for
example, that said someone who does something while not
under -- acting under duress, that would be an obvious
example. But there are --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It would be an easy
example.
MR. GORNSTEIN: It would be an easy example.
(Laughter.)
MR. GORNSTEIN: But there -- there are --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Good catch.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about a -- you
know, a hate crime, a bias crime, you know, an act of
violence done with a particular motive or intent? And
the -- and the suggestion is I didn't do this because
of a particular motive. I did this because they had a
gun to the head of my children.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Right. In -- in that kind of
situation, the facts that go to duress could also go to
undermining the proof of the motive in that case, and
in that situation, the Government always has to prove
the element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.
But if the defendant wants to add to that a duress -- a
specific duress defense, then the burden of proof would
be on the defendant to prove duress. Now, normally in
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Government wouldn't --
wouldn't have to disprove duress in the hate case. It
would just have to prove hate.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And to the extent that
duress undermines that, it would be a defense
considered by the jury on the hate question.
MR. GORNSTEIN: That's correct, Justice
Scalia.
Now, the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: How does self-defense fit
into this equation?
MR. GORNSTEIN: The Government's position is
that on self-defense, the burden of proof is on the
defendant, but it recognizes that there are important
distinctions between self-defense and duress that could
allow the court to reach different conclusions about
the two defenses.
In addition to the point that's already been
made about the degree of factual overlap between self-
defense on the one hand and duress on the other on the
basic crime, there are three additional considerations.
One is that the -- the circuits and the
States are virtually uniform on self-defense, whereas
there is a significant division of authority on the
question of duress.
Second, self-defense has always been a more
favored defense because when the defendant acts
legitimately in self-defense, he's not harming an
innocent person. But when a defendant is actually
under -- acting under duress, that defendant is still
endangering or harming innocent third parties.
And the third reason is that there's always
been a significant degree of judicial skepticism about
claims of duress, but there's never been that same kind
of judicial skepticism about self-defense.
So while we do take the position that the
burden of proof is still on the defendant, the Court
could take a different view on that issue and agree
with us on duress.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why is the number of
decisions -- number of States that have gone one way or --
or the other on the issue relevant? If it's not an Eighth
Amendment question --
MR. GORNSTEIN: No. I -- I think it's just a
Federal common law question here, and it's only as good
as the reasoning that underlies it. But when you start
to see a uniform body or a consensus of opinion on one
side of the equation, then there -- it's much more
likely that there are certain reasons that are
underlying that justify it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what if you're a
judge like me who -- who thinks that any significant
element of -- of the criminal law, when the Due Process
Clause was -- was adopted, remains in effect and it
doesn't change with the times as you seem -- as your
last comment seems to have said? What do I do with a
case like Davis? Not a case like. What do I do with
Davis? Davis tells me that this was the common law
when the Due Process Clause was adopted.
MR. GORNSTEIN: No, I don't think Davis was
taking the position --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No?
MR. GORNSTEIN: -- that this was the common
law when the Due Process Clause was adopted. Davis
took the position that the common law had evolved to
the point where on the specific defense of insanity,
--
that this was the result that should follow, that there
should be a burden of production on the defendant, and
then the Government should have to disprove insanity
beyond a reasonable doubt. But Davis was not a
constitutional holding.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I know it was not a
constitutional holding, but --
MR. GORNSTEIN: And it wasn't a holding about
what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'll have to go back and
look at it.
MR. GORNSTEIN: -- the early common law was
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. GORNSTEIN: -- because it's clear that
under -- at the time of the Constitution, the burden of
proof on all of these defenses was on the defendant.
And that was also true at the time the Fourteenth
Amendment was adopted. The burden of proof was on the
defendant. There was some evolution after that.
Now, the -- the other thing I wanted to talk
about with respect to Davis is it was based on the
understanding that the Court had about the relationship
between the insanity defense on the one hand and the
mens rea element of the crime on the other hand. And
here, there's simply no corresponding overlap. Whether
or not the Petitioner acted under duress, she knew she
was lying when she filled out the forms, and she knew
it was unlawful for her to purchase firearms. So
there's simply no relationship between the duress
defense and the mens rea element of these crimes.
Congress has also overruled Davis by statute,
and we don't think it would be appropriate for the
Court to extend Davis to a new defense when Congress
has rejected it with respect to the only defense that
it applied to. And -- and there's -- and certainly
Congress acted constitutionally in overruling the Davis
decision under this Court's decision in Leland and in
other cases like Martin and Patterson, which say that
there is no constitutional problem in putting the
burden of proof on the defendant for established common
law affirmative defenses. And --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is -- is -- I didn't mean to
cut you off.
MR. GORNSTEIN: No.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I was -- you have a tougher
argument, don't you, when you -- when you face the
comparison between duress here and entrapment because
it's -- it's quite true in -- in entrapment you're
talking about the actions of a -- of a third party
which is causing something, but the -- the ultimate
determination that has to be made is a determination
about the -- in effect, the -- the inclination, the
willingness, the readiness of the defendant to have
committed the act. And -- and yet, I take it, it's --
it's assumed that so far as the entrapment defense is
concerned, the burden is on the Government. So if the
burden is on the Government in what is a -- a somewhat
difficult issue for the Government to carry the burden
on in entrapment, wouldn't coherence suggest that a
fortiori it ought to be on -- on duress?
MR. GORNSTEIN: No, and here's the reason.
The -- the burden of proof on entrapment is actually on
the defendant initially.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, the burden of going
forward with evidence.
MR. GORNSTEIN: No. The burden of proof on
the element of inducement. That is, there are two
elements.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You mean the burden of
persuasion.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Burden of persuasion on the
element of inducement is on the defendant. The
defendant has to prove more likely than not that the
Government induced this crime in the sense that it took
actions that are likely to override what a innocent
person would have done. At that point, the burden
shifts to the Government to show that this particular
defendant was predisposed.
Now, that's consistent with background common
law principles under which, once it's shown that one
party has been engaging in wrongful conduct, i.e.,
inducement, then the burden shifts to the wrongdoer to
show that its conduct did not have its likely effect in
that case. And that's why the Government then has to
come back and show that with respect to this particular
individual, that particular individual was predisposed,
even though we took wrongful actions that would have
induced an innocent person to do this.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You could almost argue that
the other way. I mean, it -- it seems to me on
predisposition that the defendant knows more about it
than the Government does.
MR. GORNSTEIN: That -- that's true, but
again, if it was just a matter of who has access to the
relevant evidence, then that would -- the burden should
have been on the defendant, that it wasn't just a
matter of that. There was this other principle which
is that the -- there was already a showing -- there's
already a showing that the Government has taken
wrongful action to induce the crime. And that's why
the burden shifts to the defendant -- to the Government
to show that this particular person wasn't predisposed.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm not sure what the
criteria are that I have to follow -- that we have to
follow in deciding the case. Just count up all the
cases and --
MR. GORNSTEIN: No, I don't think that the
Court --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let me ask -- let me ask
you this. Is -- is there any evidence that -- that we
can take account of, commentary, law reviews, to show
that the Government has difficulties in -- in meeting a
duress defense?
MR. GORNSTEIN: It -- there is nothing that I
can point you to that shows there is an empirically
evidence that the Government is not going to be able to
deal with this burden.
But what I would say to you is that you
should take the same approach that the Court took in
The Diana case many years ago, which is it did not want
to establish a regime that invites manufactured claims.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why is this worse in
that respect? And lots of things in the case that you
have to prove may be hard to prove because it requires
finding out what someone said to the defendant over the
telephone, what happened 4 years ago in a room where
the defendant was the only one now alive present.
There are lots of cases like that.
Traditionally in the law, I take it, it's
been that most instances where the defendant excuses
his conduct on the ground he wasn't morally culpable,
mistake, accident, self-defense. Entrapment? Not --
that's a different kind of ground. This one? Evidence
mixed.
But you have to prove lots of things where
it's really in the hands of the defendant, and the
defendant saying I'm so innocent because I'm not
morally culpable. I was asleep. I was -- you know, we
can imagine. So I don't see why this is different.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's going back to
Justice Kennedy's question. I would look -- I guess if
we're supposed to get the better rule, the first place
I'd look is what did the Model Penal Code think. They
think you should have the burden.
Then I think has this turned into a practical
problem in the 29 States that have had it for 20 to 40
years. And you say we don't have any evidence to that
effect.
Now, I've listed about four things here that
I'd like your response to.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Let -- let me start with -- I
go back to The Diana case because I think the way the
Court approached the question in The Diana case is the
way this Court should approach it because it dealt with
the same kind of defense, necessity. And what it
wanted -- it said this is a defense where there is a
there is a big danger that this can be manufactured in
a way that it is difficult to disprove, and we are
going to establish a regime that doesn't invite
manufactured claims and that doesn't make it difficult
for the Government to disprove something beyond a
reasonable doubt. We have a choice here, and that's
not the regime we want to establish. We want to
establish a regime that makes it more unlikely that
manufactured claims are going to come forward and that
make it -- makes it more unlikely that if such claims
do come forward, the Government isn't going to be able
-- unable to disprove them beyond a reasonable doubt,
compromising the entire statutory scheme.
JUSTICE BREYER: But if we're thinking of
things logically, logically you're right. I can see
that this is in the hands of the defendant. But I've
wondered why hasn't this turned into evidence of a
problem in the 29 States. And the following occurred
to me, which I'll put to you to see what your reaction
The defense has to do something if they are
going to put duress in issue. They have to get the
defendant to testify. So the prosecutor has something
that the prosecutor doesn't ordinarily get. He has
that defendant right on the stand, ready for jury
evaluation. And that is something a -- a prosecutor
may want, and it's something the defense lawyer may not
want. He has to choose.
MR. GORNSTEIN: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: So when you get into the
practicalities of it, I see things both ways, and I'd
like to find some evidence of what's actually happened.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Well, take a recent case in
which a defendant transported drugs from Mexico into
the United States, and he claimed that he did that
because someone threatened his family members in
Mexico. Now, that's a case that somebody who has
deliberately violated the law would find relatively
easy to manufacture that defense. Yet, it would be
very difficult for the Government to disprove that
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Yes, but if the burden of proof is on the
--
defendant, then the Government can do what you were
talking about. It can cross-examine that person and it
can persuade the jury --
JUSTICE BREYER: If -- if does that --
MR. GORNSTEIN: If he does that --
JUSTICE BREYER: He has a few other things,
the prosecutor. He has that defendant on the stand.
There was an implication that you were in Chicago at
the time.
MR. GORNSTEIN: If --
JUSTICE BREYER: Where you on the night of
such and such?
MR. GORNSTEIN: There are -- there are other
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's an advantage for
the prosecutor.
MR. GORNSTEIN: That's true, Justice Breyer,
but what I'm saying is, that it's one thing to be able
to persuade the jury through cross-examination, that
that is more -- not more likely than not. It's quite
another thing to persuade the jury in that kind of
situation that that defense is not true beyond a
reasonable doubt.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, in the vast
majority of criminal cases, there's no doubt that the
person did the crime. And so the -- the benefit to the
Government is just carrying coals to Newcastle. The --
the defendant would plead guilty but for the fact that
he has a plausible coercion defense, and so he puts
that coercion defense before the jury, and oh, sure, he
does let the -- the Government cross-examine him. But
the Government really doesn't need his cross-
examination in the ordinary case. Isn't that right?
MR. GORNSTEIN: In the ordinary case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And I -- I guess the only
way we could really tell what the consequences are, as
Justice Breyer would -- would like us to be able to
tell, is to know how many people who have gotten off on
the basis of this defense have gone on to continue a
life of crime. And -- and we don't have any stats on
that --
MR. GORNSTEIN: We do not have any
statistics. And, of course, when -- when somebody gets
off, it results in -- in an acquittal and so we don't
get published decisions about that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We never know the
consequences of our decisions, by and large, do we?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, that's why this is
problematic.
MR. GORNSTEIN: I'm not sure I'll answer
that.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, I don't have the
experience as a criminal lawyer that allows me to say
whether it would be one way or the other. You're
saying -- and I'll repeat that. Is there anything at
all I could look to try to figure this out? Because I
think it is a question we're supposed to get the better
rule.
What did the Model Penal Code authors do?
Did they take testimony --
MR. GORNSTEIN: The -- the Model Penal Code
takes the position that every defense, affirmative
defense, goes on the Government, and that's just a
policy judgment --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do --
JUSTICE BREYER: Did they have evidence or
did they have -- take testimony? Did they go around
trying to find out how prosecutors and defense
attorneys -- you know. I don't know.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Justice Breyer, I do not
know. I do know it is based in -- in its explanation
of its rule for all affirmative defenses, which would
include insanity, which Congress has rejected --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Doesn't that come from an
underlying principle that your position is not entirely
consistent with, that is, that the defendant is
presumed innocent? So it's not as Justice Scalia may
have suggested that, well, he would plead guilty, but
we're going to let him -- we presume that the defendant
is innocent. That's why the prosecutor has to have the
burden on all issues. I thought that was the
underlying principle.
MR. GORNSTEIN: The -- the burden of -- the
presumption of innocence, though, only applies to the
essential elements of the crime under this Court's
decision in In re Winship, et cetera, and not -- it
doesn't apply to affirmative defenses, as the Court has
consistently held in Martin and in Patterson and in
Leland. That is, the -- it can be constitutionally --
you can put the burden of proof on the defendant to
prove an affirmative defense, and the Constitution has
nothing to say about that. The presumption of
innocence goes to all the things -- the essential
elements of the crime.
And here, Petitioner benefited from the
presumption of innocence. The Government had to prove
that she filled out those forms, that she filled them
out with falsities, and that she knew she was lying
when she filled out that -- those forms. It had to
prove that she received those guns and that she knew
that it was unlawful for her to receive those guns.
And it had to prove all of those things beyond a
reasonable doubt.
Now, on the position of the States, a
significant number of States are on --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Before you get there,
what -- roughly speaking, how much of the Model Penal
Code has Congress enacted into the criminal --
MR. GORNSTEIN: I don't think the Congress
has enacted the -- the Model Penal Code. This -- this
Court sometimes looks to the Model Penal Code as one
source of what is -- of -- of thought out there, but
that's all.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Who -- who develops the
Model Penal Code? Is that the American Law Institute
that does that?
MR. GORNSTEIN: Yes. Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which once upon a time
purported to simply be embodying the -- the general
law, the common law. But it doesn't even purport to do
that anymore.
MR. GORNSTEIN: No. It doesn't -- it doesn't
purport it. And in fact, in this particular case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There are a lot of law
professors involved in it, aren't there?
MR. GORNSTEIN: Well, I'm sure.
(Laughter.)
MR. GORNSTEIN: In this particular case the
Model --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Some judges too.
Right?
MR. GORNSTEIN: -- the Model Penal Code said
that it was expanding the common law defense of duress
to a new place where it had never been. So it's not
surprising that it would also have a different burden
of persuasion than the traditional burden of
persuasion.
Now, on -- on the practice of the States, the
Court has never taken the view that it is just going to
do a nose count and figure out what the best rule is
based on the practice of the States.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When was this -- the
underlying statute at issue here enacted?
MR. GORNSTEIN: I'm not remembering the --
the exact -- I think it's in the '70's, though.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, would we -- would
our -- would our nose count be today or would our nose
count be when the criminal statute was --
MR. GORNSTEIN: No. Mr. Chief Justice, we
don't think that the Court should do that kind of nose
counting based on whether a statute was enacted in
00, 1850, 1900, 1950 and potentially have different
rules for each statute. We think that the Court should
look at the entire --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, why not? Isn't it
realistic to assume that Congress looked at the state
of the law at the time it's passing a statute and
presumably adopted what was the prevailing view?
MR. GORNSTEIN: I don't think it's right to
say that it adopted the prevailing view unless it was a
consensus view. I don't think, though --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, a consensus view. It
would still be the time of the enactment of the statute
is what would be relevant, I would think.
MR. GORNSTEIN: But I think the -- I think
that the problem with that approach is to have a
completely different rule for all the different
statutes based on when they were enacted is
unmanageable and impractical. And the Court has said
the same thing in the context of mens rea requirements.
The Court doesn't import into statutes the
mens rea requirement that was in vogue at a particular
time. What it does now is it imports into all criminal
statutes that do not specify a mens rea requirement --
it simply imports in a knowledge requirement, that
there has to be knowing action. And that would be true
regardless of whether it's an 1800 statute, an 1850
statute, a 1900 statute, or a today statute. And I
think that the reason for that is one of practicality
and administrability which the Court has talked about,
in fact, in -- in other cases. The Bailey case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Gornstein, just out of
curiosity, of the 29 States that have the different
rule, in how many of those States was the different
rule adopted legislatively and in how many States was
it pronounced by the State supreme court?
MR. GORNSTEIN: I -- I'm not sure of the
exact breakdown, but I think that there are -- there
are possibly something like 10 or so States on -- that
have adopted it by statute, but I'm not sure of the
exact number of that -- on that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is -- is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Maybe your -- your friend on
the other side knows.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is the test proposed by the
Petitioner that -- that you have to prove non-duress by
beyond a reasonable doubt?
MR. GORNSTEIN: Yes, after the defendant --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And your test is that the
defendant would have to prove it only by clear and
convincing evidence?
MR. GORNSTEIN: No. More likely than not,
the preponderance of the evidence standard.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: More likely. More likely.
MR. GORNSTEIN: More likely than not. And
that -- the -- the Court in The Diana case, actually in
the context of forfeiture, thought that a beyond -- the
defendant should have to show it beyond a reasonable
doubt.
But we -- and we -- we would take a step back
from that, consistent the practice in the circuits that
have put the burden of proof on the defendant and the
States that put the burden of proof on the defendant
and the burden of proof that -- that Congress has
specified when it has thought about what the burden of
proof should be outside the context of insanity --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you think a State could
put a burden on the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt
for entrapment, duress, insanity?
MR. GORNSTEIN: For all of the affirmative
defenses, I think that's the -- the Leland decision
would allow a State to do that. Leland said that you
could put -- require the defendant to show beyond a
reasonable -- I'm sorry. Is it Leland?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Clear and convincing.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Yes. Beyond a reasonable
doubt and so that there is -- there would be no
constitutional problem in putting a -- a burden beyond
a reasonable doubt on the duress defense either.
And in fact, this is a defense that Congress
could -- could eliminate altogether, if it wanted to,
and just take the position that it's going to -- these
-- this kind of excuse would be considered along with
all other kinds of excuses in either making a charging
decision or -- or making a sentencing decision. There
is no constitutional imperative that there be a duress
defense at all.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the insanity
defense?
MR. GORNSTEIN: The same is true of the --
the insanity defense that the Congress could take the
position. It hasn't taken that position, but it could
take the position, that this is a defense that will be
considered, along with other excuses, in -- by
prosecutors as they make charging decisions and by
sentencing judges as they make sentencing judgments.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about self-defense?
MR. GORNSTEIN: The -- the same would be true
of self-defense, again, that the -- the Government --
no State has ever taken that position and the Congress
hasn't taken that position, and it would be very much
against all the traditions that are -- that we have.
But if a State made a policy judgment to that effect,
that this is the policy -- we want to encourage people
to retreat, we do not want to encourage people to take
the law into their own hands, but what we will do is we
will recognize this and we are sure our prosecutors are
going to recognize it, we're sure our judges are going to
recognize it as a -- a mitigating factor. And that
would be constitutional.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Gornstein, there are
some old cases that draw a distinction between
justifications and excuses. And you carefully use the
words excuse to describe that defense. Did you do so
having in mind that distinction or just as a
loose description of the -- of the defense?
MR. GORNSTEIN: I think that it -- it fits
the defense and that you can draw a distinction between
excuse and justification, but I don't think the
distinction ultimately matters whether you call it an
excuse or justification. It's still the burden of
proof should be on the defendant and it shouldn't --
the nomenclature shouldn't matter.
JUSTICE BREYER: What about mistake?
MR. GORNSTEIN: Mistake is --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought it was a deer.
MR. GORNSTEIN: Yes. Mistake is something
that negatives the mens rea requirement of knowledge.
So, of course, the Government has to prove knowledge
beyond a reasonable doubt, and if somebody has mistake,
then the Government isn't going to be able to satisfy
its burden of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
JUSTICE BREYER: And would you distinguish
between instances of duress where it may a negative
mens rea and instances where it may not?
MR. GORNSTEIN: Well, if it does negative
mens rea -- and this is infrequent, but if it does,
then the Government, of course, has to prove its
element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. And
if duress evidence undermines the Government's ability
to do that, then the Government hasn't proven its case
beyond a reasonable doubt.
If the Court has no further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Gornstein.
Mr. Jett, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF J. CRAIG JETT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. JETT: To answer Justice Scalia's
question, a quick count, it looked like that there were
perhaps three that we could count, but it was a quick
count. We can't tell whether all those decisions were
based on State statutes or not. The gun control
statute was passed in 1968, and at the time, the Model
Penal Code had been passed in 1962, and the Eighth
Circuit had said that the law was and there is no doubt
that the defendant does not have the burden of proving
his duress defense. So we believe that at the time the
statute passed, that the clear common -- the clear law
in the country was that the burden was on the
Government to disprove duress.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And three -- three was what?
Three States that have adopted it --
MR. JETT: The statute. By statute.
JUSTICE SCALIA: By statute.
MR. JETT: Now, the Government talks about
that the defendant can manufacture a defense, but you
can do that in any case. You can manufacture a defense
for a -- for a plea of not guilty, as to -- as to why
you're not guilty. So it really doesn't make a
difference. It would be the same thing for self-
defense.
In this particular case, instead of Ms. Dixon
having bought the guns, if she had gotten a hold of one
of Mr. Wright's guns and shot him, she would have had a
self-defense, and if she had done that, then the burden
of proof would have been on the Government to disprove
self-defense beyond a reasonable doubt. But because
she did the less blameworthy thing, that is, that she
bought guns instead of shooting somebody or killing
somebody, she is disadvantaged in -- in the courtroom.
Because -- because she raised duress, she then had to
prove her defense by a preponderance of the evidence.
And it's simply not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure it's less --
less blameworthy. I mean, if somebody has a gun to the
head of my child and I have a choice between doing a
criminal act that he wants me to do and shooting him,
you think it's -- the less blameworthy is to go do the
criminal act?
MR. JETT: I think rather than -- than to
kill somebody it certainly would be.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I wouldn't kill him. I'd
just wound him.
(Laughter.)
MR. JETT: Well, Justice Scalia, I understand
the sentiment, but she was -- she was threatened by
somebody with -- with a gun and her children were
threatened. And she might have killed him. She might
have shot him.
In either case, though, she is disadvantaged
by the law. She would have been better off if she had
shot him or killed him, and it's simply not consistent
that she does a less blameworthy action, buying guns
where nobody dies, her children didn't die, there were
no funerals for her, no funerals for her children, no
funerals for the abuser, nobody dies, but she's
disadvantage because she doesn't --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you take into account
that this was not something that occurred at once?
This was a long-term relationship. There were many
opportunities in which she might have, when her
children were with the grandmother, say, gone to the
police.
MR. JETT: This was a long-term relationship.
But what happened in this particular case is the level
of violence escalated substantially immediately before
the gun shows. The violence had been bruising where
you couldn't see it. Suddenly it -- it escalated with
a gun in the face and a split lip and a sudden threat
to the children that we're going -- if I kill you, I'm
going to have to kill your children. So even -- even
though it had gone on for a while, it suddenly changed,
and her state of mind suddenly changed because what was
most important to her was the safety of her children.
And so she did what she thought she had to do in order
to save her children and keep them safe.
And it simply would not be fair that if she
had done the less blameworthy action, that she has --
is more advantaged in court. So you can't square the
way duress is treated and the way self-defense is
treated.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can the judge ask the
defendant to produce evidence that there was no
possibility to go to law enforcement officials, and if
she does not produce that evidence, then refuse to give
the defense?
MR. JETT: The judge could do that if he felt
that that was -- was appropriate for one of the
elements. The -- one of the elements is you didn't
have an -- a reasonable opportunity to not do the
crime. In her mind, she did not believe she did
because she believed that there was somebody at home
with a gun threatening her children.
And I'm out of time. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Jett.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
