IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE, ET AL., :
Petitioner, :
v. : No. 05-848
DUKE ENERGY CORPORATION, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, November 1, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United
States at 10:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
SEAN H. DONAHUE, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Petitioners.
THOMAS G. HUNGAR, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
Respondent United States, in support of the
Petitioners.
CARTER G. PHILLIPS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
SEAN H. DONAHUE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
THOMAS G. HUNGAR, ESQ.,
On behalf of the United States 12
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
CARTER G. PHILLIPS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 25
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
SEAN H. DONAHUE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Environmental Defense
versus Duke Energy Corporation. Mr. Donahue.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SEAN H. DONAHUE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MR. DONAHUE: Good morning, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
The Clean Air Act requires that the owner of
a major emitting facility obtain a prevention of
significant deterioration permit before engaging in a
modification, which is defined to include any physical
change that increases the amount of any pollutant
emitted by such source.
Since 1980, EPA's PSD regulations have
measured such increases in terms of actual emissions in
tons per year.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's a disputed
point, I gather, central to the case, whether or not the
regulations measured PSD emissions through that device
rather than the hourly emissions.
MR. DONAHUE: That's correct, Mr. Chief
Justice, but the text of the regulations refers
pervasively, and I'm referring to the definition of
major modification which is in 40 CFR 51.166(b)(2) and
subsequent paragraphs of that regulation, refers
pervasively to actual emissions and measures emissions
exclusively in tons per year.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is a little of an
exaggeration, though, to say that EPA has since the
issuance of the regulations always interpreted them the
way that you prefer. In fact, the director of the PSD
program gave two opinions in which he took precisely the
interpretation that opposing counsel took.
MR. DONAHUE: Yes, Justice Scalia.
Respondent has relied heavily on two early applicability
determinations.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Rightly so, I think. I
mean, it was the earliest, application of the
regulation by the officer of the agency specifically in
charge of the program.
MR. DONAHUE: Well, Justice Scalia, as we
point out in our brief, Director Reich does not adopt
Duke's theory, in fact contradicts it. He doesn't say
that a new source performance standard modification must
precede a PSD major modification. Instead, in both he
relies on the express exclusion in the PSD regulations
for increases in hours of operation and the production
rate, and as EPA explained in its contemporaneous
preamble, that provision by its terms is an exception
from the definition of physical change.
It is not a provision that says -- increase
is attributable to a physical change, to increased hours
that are enabled by physical change, are not considered.
The plain language of the regulation actually
contradicts this reading. These determinations
themselves are quite ambiguous, and of course they are
two of dozens of such determinations.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, whatever the reason
he gave, was it -- these opinions were out there when
the challenge to the regulations, in which Duke did not
participate, when that challenge was brought, were
these -- were those opinions already out there?
MR. DONAHUE: Those opinions were out there
but the plain language of the regulation and the
preamble which explain that the increased hours exclusion
was simply to allow companies to respond to demand and to
link the coverage of PSD to construction activity. What
we have here is a physical change in the plants, massive
renovations of these elaborate networks of pipes and
tubes that compose a central component.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand that, and I
think you may have the better of the argument on me on
the interpretation of the PSD regulations. But what I
am concerned about is that companies can get whipsawed.
They don't challenge the regulations when they come out
because as far as they know, the agency is interpreting
them in a way that they favor. And then some years
later, when it turns out the agency is using a different
interpretation, you have the jurisdictional bar.
MR. DONAHUE: Well, Justice Scalia, these
regulations were challenged early on and there was a --
as the Court is aware, there was a settlement agreement
in 1982 to which Duke was, in fact, a party, that
proposed to add the hourly rate test that is completely
absent from these regulations.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But could Duke have had a
challenge to the 1992 or 2000 regulations? Could they
have reopened the issue at that point?
MR. DONAHUE: They did in fact precisely that,
Justice Kennedy, and that was resolved in the New York
proceeding by the D.C. Circuit. Duke didn't challenge
the very prominent aspect of the 1980 regulations, which
was to move away from the potential emissions test of
prior --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't want to jump ahead
to the jurisdictional argument if you want to talk about
the modification substantive point first, but it is not
clear to me whether Duke should have acted in 1980,
92 or 2000, or all of the above.
MR. DONAHUE: Well, the regulations were
clear on their face. I mean, to determine the effect of
7 --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's an audacious
statement.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: We've wrestled with these
things for several days. It's disappointing to hear you
tell us they're clear.
MR. DONAHUE: They're clear in this respect,
they did not include an hourly rate test. As Judge Posner
in the Cinergy opinion this summer said, the argument
that the statute mandates an hourly rate test is a
challenge to the validity of these 1980 regulations
because they don't say it, they don't provide for it,
and they are very specific and detailed, and instead turn
on actual annual emissions. And the entire rationale
EPA offered was linked to that effort to capture real
world changes in emissions.
JUSTICE ALITO: If they are so clear, how
can you account for Mr. Reich's interpretation? He's an
expert in the area.
MR. DONAHUE: Right. He misapplied, he
didn't adopt this theory, the theory that an NSPS
modification precedes at all; in fact, he contradicted
it. He misapplied in quite sort of anomalous
circumstances the increased hours --
JUSTICE ALITO: I know you say he's wrong,
but if somebody in his position with his expertise can
interpret the regulations in that way, doesn't that show
that they're not clear on their face?
MR. DONAHUE: We think that this Court can
resolve, can interpret, can address the reasonableness
of EPA's construction of the increased hours exclusion.
What it can't do is certainly what the Fourth Circuit
did, which is to say that the PSD regulations must be
the same. They are obviously not the same. They are
different in multiple respects. And certainly that
challenge could have been raised, and certainly that
challenge was barred, and of course the court of appeals
expressly called the regulations irrelevant, the texts
and interpretations of the regulations. That's exactly
what a court is supposed to be doing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. In deciding whether
the regulations are reasonable, however, is it proper
for a court to take into account that the regulations
must follow the prescription of the statute that the PSD
definition be the same as the NSPS -- what is it -- NSPS
definition? I mean, that's a usual tool of statutory --
or regulatory construction.
Cannot a court give great weight to that in
interpreting these ambiguous regulations?
MR. DONAHUE: Well, that -- they're not
ambiguous as to whether they're identical, and to hold
that they have to be is certainly an invalidation. And
the D.C. Circuit, of course, held that the statute
doesn't require identity as between the two sets of
regulations. And we're not here on certiorari from the
New York decision, we're here on an enforcement action
in which a court leapt over the express limitations
imposed on it, declared the language of the regulations
irrelevant, and indeed misapplied them rather
dramatically.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I don't think the
same argument has necessarily to be made, but the
question still before us is how you interpret the
regulations. Let's assume that's just a regulatory
interpretation question, it's not a statutory question.
MR. DONAHUE: Right. Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But in deciding that,
whatever was argued in prior cases, it seems to me that
we're entitled to take into account the necessity that
the regulations comply with the statute. And if they
are ambiguous, we should resolve the ambiguity in the
direction that it seems to us would provide consistency
with the statute. Now does that violate the
jurisdictional bar?
MR. DONAHUE: No. I have no problem with
any of that. If the regulations are ambiguous, take
into account the statutory text, structure, policies.
What the court below did, of course, was say it doesn't
matter what the regulations say, these have to be the
same. It forgot that in fact, these regulations were
very different. The D.C. Circuit said there's no
statutory mandate of identity and that the -- and, of
course, Respondent was there in the D.C. Circuit. It
was permitted to assert a challenge to this divergence,
as the court called it, between NSPS regulations and
PSD. And the court said --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If the regulations
are ambiguous, then the agency can interpret them in
different ways and can change its interpretation over
time. Of course, what your friend argues happened here
is that the agency changed its interpretation in the
context of an enforcement program. Now accepting that
premise, what is the -- what should Duke have done when
that interpretation was changed in an enforcement
program?
MR. DONAHUE: Accepting that premise, they
could have sought an applicability determination. Duke
knew very well what EPA's interpretation was because of
the WEPCO decision. EPA had been -- and subsequent
actions. In fact, Duke's attorneys were vociferously
charging that EPA changed the rules and was acting ultra
vires.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Donahue, were there
earlier enforcement actions in which EPA was taking the
position that it took in this action against Duke?
MR. DONAHUE: Well, in the WEPCO decision --
I mean, EPA has always taken the position that actual
annual emissions is the standard under the 1980 rules.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But were they, in fact,
enforcing that standard? So that -- you said that Duke
could have asked for a non-applicability ruling, but at
the time Duke started up its --
MR. DONAHUE: Certainly. I mean, WEPCO was
an applicability determination. That was in 1989-90.
Puerto Rican Cement was an applicability determination.
Duke instead, knowing that EPA believed that increased
utilization that is caused by physical change has to be
considered under this, as is prescribed in these very
detailed regulations, Duke decided not to do that, to go
forward, and it didn't, in fact, come to the State or to
EPA.
Of course, the increased hours -- I
understand the Court's concern about the Reich memos.
But EPA's construction of the increased hours exception
is completely correct under the plain language of the
regulations. And in WEPCO the Court upheld. So that
there was no question that not only was it consistent
with the plain language, but whatever Reich had said,
the express language of the regulations was as far as
the exception went. There was no further confusion, if
those early memos caused confusion.
I'd like to reserve the balance of my
time. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Donahue.
Mr. Hungar.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THOMAS G. HUNGAR,
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT UNITED STATES
MR. HUNGAR: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
The court of appeals exceeded its
jurisdiction and misconstrued the Clean Air Act in
holding that EPA was required to define the term
"modification" identically for the separate NSPS and PSD
programs, and on the jurisdictional point I'd like to
address the whipsaw question, because in fact it's quite
clear that there's no whipsaw issue here for a number of
reasons. It's true that there are those ambiguous and
cursory 1981 statements from Mr. Reich, who was a
subordinate official within EPA. In 1988, the
administrator of EPA, the head of the agency, in the
WEPCO decision, the applicability determination, made
very clear what EPA's position is on the application of
the hours of operation exclusion and the fact that this
is an annual tons per year test. That's page 44 of the
joint appendix. He made that perfectly clear and it has
always been clear that that is, in fact, the EPA's official
position beginning with the 1980 preamble. But again --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Should a challenge
to that have been brought in the D.C. Circuit at that
time, or would you have argued that's too late?
MR. HUNGAR: Well, I'm not sure whether it
could have been brought at that time. But the fact of
the matter is a challenge was brought on this issue
in -- to the 1980 regulations. True, Duke didn't assert
it, but General Motors and the steel industry did assert
in the 1981 brief they filed in that challenge to the
80 rule --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, presumably
Duke could say, we looked at the Reich memorandum and we
were following that and all of a sudden this new 1988
thing came up and they are surprised by that. Now
you're saying it's already too late because somebody
else challenged it in 1980?
MR. HUNGAR: Well, they might have that
argument, Your Honor, except for the fact that the
challenge to the 1980 rules was stayed and was not
reopened until 2003.
In 2003, Duke and other parties sought to
reopen and were granted permission to reopen that
challenge to the 1980 rules. They filed a statement of
issues in 1984 and a brief in 1984 challenging the
regulation on the ground that if EPA's interpretation
was correct and that it did not require an increase in
maximum total achievable emissions, as the NSPS did,
test did, they argued that it was invalid. They raised
the very incorporation theory that they advance here,
that is the statutory argument that Congress was
required to follow for the PSD regulations the same
regulatory approach that the NSPS regulations had
followed in 1977 with the hourly maximum achievable
test. They made that very argument in their brief in
the D.C. Circuit in 2004, the D.C. Circuit addressed and
rejected that argument on the merits.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: To be fair to them,
that very same argument was more a product of the Fourth
Circuit than of Duke. They had a somewhat different
approach before the Fourth Circuit and then the Fourth
Circuit came up with this insistence on the parallel
construction.
MR. HUNGAR: Yes. Well, I think it's
important to distinguish. There are two statutory
arguments here. One is what I would call the
incorporation theory. That is the argument that
Congress by borrowing the definition, the statutory
definition, also necessarily borrowed and mandated
adoption of the regulatory definition from the NSPS
program. That argument, the incorporation argument, was
made by Duke in its brief in 2004 in the D.C. Circuit.
The D.C. Circuit addressed and rejected that argument at
pages 17 through 19 of its decision in its 2005 New York
decision.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why was that rejection
wrong? Because this issue is still important to me for
purposes of statutory construction. Is it conceivable
that when Congress says the word widget in this statute
has to mean the same as the word widget in the other
statute, that the agency can effectively frustrate the
apparent Congressional intent by saying, oh, yes, I
mean, yes, that has to mean the same thing, but we can
adopt regulations under one statute which regulations
say it means one thing, and we can adopt regulations
under another statute that says it means something else.
I mean, to say that they have to mean the same
thing it seems to me means that the regulations have to
say they mean the same thing.
MR. HUNGAR: Your Honor, it is a fundamental
principle of administrative law and deference to agency
decisionmaking that when Congress adopts an ambiguous
statutory phrase and charges the agency with
implementing that phrase the agency has discretion, has
a delegation of rulemaking authority and policymaking
authority to choose from among the various permissible
interpretations.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course it does, but when
Congress says the definition in the two statutes has to
be the same, whatever choice the agency makes among
those options has to be applied to both, it seems to me.
MR. HUNGAR: No, Your Honor, because
Congress has not mandated, as it could have done, that
the choice of the specific interpretation from among the
permissible options must be identical across both
programs.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then it's meaningless
to say the definition has to be the same.
MR. HUNGAR: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Entirely meaningless.
MR. HUNGAR: The statutory definition is
ambiguous, but within the limits of the ambiguity it
imposes constraints on the discretion of the agency.
The agency must choose from among the options that are
permissible given the range of language that Congress
used. But within that range the agency has discretion.
Think of it this way, Your Honor. If there were no PSD
program, if we were talking only about the NSPS program,
Congress gave an ambiguous definition to the agency the
agency would have discretion to adopt different tests
for determining whether emissions increased for
different types of equipment even within that single
program, because the statutory definition is ambiguous.
The statute therefore does not mandate a one size fits
all approach and the agency in its discretion could well
determine that one emissions test is appropriate for
some types of equipment, another emissions test is
appropriate for other types of equipment, as long as
both of those tests are within the permissible bounds
of the statutory ambiguity. The agency is entitled to
do that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the ambiguity is the
word "increase," which could mean different things?
MR. HUNGAR: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The Government as I
understand it now has a proposed regulation that would
align the standards with the two programs. It would
bring the nonproliferation -- it would bring the
standard for the nonproliferation program in line with
the new source performance standard.
MR. HUNGAR: Yes, Your Honor, with respect
to certain types of units, electric generating units
like those at issue in this case, that's correct. They
would not be identical under the proposal, but would be
similar.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, since the
government is now taking the position that another Duke
could do just what was done here and there's an
enforcement action pending, would you, if you prevailed
in that enforcement action, nonetheless enforce, though
it's those against the current government policy?
MR. HUNGAR: Your Honor, the 2005 proposal
that you're referring to is only a proposal, a notice of
proposed rulemaking. It has not been adopted. So the
rules as they exist today are the same as the ones we're
talking about, although there was a modification in
02. But in any event, what we're talking about here
is conduct that occurred from 1988 through 2000 with
respect to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, what exactly are you
seeking in these enforcement proceedings? An injunction
to install the BACT or criminal fines or civil fine, or
what?
MR. HUNGAR: It is civil enforcement
proceedings, Your Honor. There are various remedies,
injunctive relief and civil penalties where appropriate,
yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If you have an enforcement
proceeding and there is a legitimate question of whether
or not the agency's interpretation is consistent with
the statute with Chevron deference and so forth and the
court looks at it and says, you know, I have a real
problem with the way the agency interpreted the basic
statute when it first issued the regulation, the court
can't get into that merely because the parties didn't
present it earlier?
MR. HUNGAR: That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The court's almost issuing
an advisory opinion in a way.
MR. HUNGAR: No, Your Honor. It's not an
advisory opinion. The court is simply precluded from
considering a challenge that would invalidate the
regulation because that is the determination Congress
made in requiring pre-enforcement review to avoid the
problem of inconsistent determinations and circuit
conflicts and 700 district judges potentially construing
the statute in different ways and tying EPA's hands.
The Congress made that determination.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are there other areas in
the law where courts have to take as binding a legal
proposition that they think is dead wrong when they --
MR. HUNGAR: It's quite common. It's quite
common, Your Honor, in any regime where review of an
agency decision is relegated to the exclusive
jurisdiction of one court, as it is here, and
enforcement proceedings are brought in a different
court. Hobbs Act agencies, their decisions are
reviewable in the court of appeals but often enforceable
in the district courts. The district court cannot look
behind the determination of the agency to challenge its
validity because that rests in the exclusive jurisdiction
of the court of appeals. Obviously there's a timing
issue in this statute as well because of the requirement
of pre-enforcement review. Whatever -- whatever concerns
might be raised in a situation where a party could not
reasonably have been expected to challenge it at the
time it was originally promulgated are addressed by the
after-arising provision in section 307(b)(1) which
permits challenges that could not have been made within
the 60-day period to be brought later in appropriate
circumstances. And in any event, if there were some
concerns at the outer limits of a provision like this
one, they have nothing to do with this case where Duke's
challenge, actual challenge to the agency decision, the
80 rule, it was heard in 2005.
And so Duke had more opportunity than you
could possibly ask for to understand exactly what EPA's
position was, understand exactly what the regulation
meant and to challenge it in the D.C. Circuit. It did
so and it can't do it here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Hungar, I'm curious.
What happens if you have a new company that wasn't around
when the regulation was issued? Can it -- can it bring a
challenge to the conformity of the regulation to the
statute?
MR. HUNGAR: Well, I think that's an
unresolved question. Presumably, the argument --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, a nice question. I
mean, all you have to do is find a stalking horse. Just
have some new company carry your water for you.
MR. HUNGAR: Well, presumably the argument
would be that the creation of the company and the first
applicability of the regulations to it is an
after-arising ground. I don't know the answer to that
question, but certainly it's not presented here.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Could it bring it up by a
declaration of non-applicability? Could the new
company -- how would it --
MR. HUNGAR: Well, it could seek a
determination of non-applicability, but -- and it could
obtain judicial review of that determination. But that
would not go to the D.C. Circuit and would not permit a
challenge to the regulations. But they could find a
petition, they clearly could find a petition for
rulemaking with the EPA, saying your regulation is
invalid, it's been around for 25 years, but it's still
invalid, you need to rescind it, and when the agency
declined to do that they could then go to the D.C. Circuit.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In the midst of the
enforcement action that's being brought against them by
EPA? What's supposed to happen in the enforcement
action, if that's the vehicle through which EPA is
implementing its new interpretation --
MR. HUNGAR: If this completely speculative
and hypothetical situation were ever to arise, a court
might well exercise its equitable discretion to stay
proceedings pending review in the D.C. Circuit.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can I ask you about an
argument I think they did make? I think they made this
argument. On page 26 of your brief, I think it's
explained well. You set out the regs and the reg says
that a major modification is "any physical change in the
method of operation that would lead to a significant net
emissions increase." Then you have little (iii), which
is an exception, and it excepts a physical change which
leads to -- is just an increase in the hours of
operation or the production rate.
So that's out of it. Now, the question is
what's in it? If that's out of it, what's in it? I
think what they've said is, if you think about that,
we'll tell you what must be out of it is a physical
change that does nothing to increase the capacity, but
just means you can run it more hours. And they say their
proof of that is that that was the EPA's interpretation
for years and years and years. Indeed, we did what we
did thinking that was it.
And then after we did what we did, they
pulled the rug out from under us and said no, that isn't
it; now it means any physical change, like you change a
nut, or a bolt, or a tube, even though there's no increased
capacity to emit more. It's just you run it more hours.
Now, that they say is basically unfair, it's
not what this reg has been about. And they made that
argument, according to them, very strongly and the
Fourth Circuit took the argument and changed it all
around and made some propositions of law that it's hard
for even them to defend.
All right. Now, that's what I think, that's
what I think is lying -- maybe that's lying at the
heart of it. And if it is, what do you say?
MR. HUNGAR: There are several things, Your
Honor. First of all the language of the regulation
simply does not support that interpretation. What the
regulation says is that hours of -- a change in hours of
operation is not a physical change. Fine. But we have
a physical change here. It is undisputed that Duke made
physical changes to its facilities, major modifications,
sort of using that term in the non-regulatory sense, but
substantial replacements of physical equipment at the
facilities. So physical change has occurred. The hours
of operation exclusion, therefore, has no longer any
relevance because it applies only at the physical change
step of the analysis.
There has been a physical change here
regardless of whether hours of operation changed or not.
Therefore, the hours of operation exclusion no longer
applies. The next question is whether the -- if the
physical change that did occur resulted in a significant
net emissions increase. Here it did under the plain
language of the regulations and under the test that EPA
applies. It is true that 1981 they were arguably
mistaken to the extent one can discern what the,
Mr. Reich was actually saying, they seem to be simply a
mistake in interpretation. But in 1988, the
administrator of the agency, the head of the agency,
made very clear EPA's position, the very same position
it is taking here today on the hours of operation
exclusion. The First Circuit in the Puerto Rican Cement
case, as Your Honor knows, upheld that interpretation in
89. The Seventh Circuit in footnote 11 in the WEPCO
decision upheld that determination in 1990. It was
restated by the EPA again and again and it is well
established.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Hungar.
Mr. Phillips.
ORAL ARGUMENT BY CARTER G. PHILLIPS,
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
I think I am inclined instead of starting
with the jurisdictional issue to focus initially on the
regulatory history immediately in the wake of the 1980
rules. Because it seems to me it is very clear that the
understanding of everyone in the industry, outside the
industry, from 1980, candidly well beyond 1988 all the
way up until 1999, was that these regulations didn't apply
under any circumstances in the absence of an increase in
the capacity. And you had to demonstrate that there
would be an increase in the hourly rate of the
emissions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then why were some
companies asking for declarations of nonapplicability?
MR. PHILLIPS: To confirm precisely that
interpretation. That's exactly why GE went to Mr. Reich
and asked for a determination of applicability, and was
told categorically PSD applicability is determined by
evaluating any change in emissions rates caused by the
conversion.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But Mr. Donahue said that
there were nonapplicability applications after those
early ones that came out the other way. So there were
companies --
MR. PHILLIPS: No. Well --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- who asked for a
declaration of nonapplication and then EPA took the
position that it is currently taking.
MR. PHILLIPS: As I heard Mr. Donahue, he
was talking about WEPCO. Understand the context of
WEPCO. WEPCO was a situation where every one of the
changes was a modification within the meaning of NSPS.
And then the question is were they also modification --
major modifications within the -- within the meaning of
the PSD. And that's what they analyzed. So it didn't
say anything about the argument we've been making which
is what is a modification. The only statements that I
know of that are out there are the two Reich statements
which I just quoted to you, says exactly our
interpretation. But even more powerful at least in my
view is the quotation from the amicus brief from the
State of Alabama and the 12 States that relied on the
Region 4 statement and that's on pages 7 and 8 of that
amicus brief and the answer, the question is -- you
know -- how do you determine what is a modification?
You know does something that doesn't increase the hours,
the emissions per hour, constitute it? It says no.
Since the modification does not cause any increase in
the hourly particulate emissions, no increase in annual
emissions should be calculated. They could not have said
that any more clearly than --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Who was saying that?
MR. PHILLIPS: That is the -- it is the
chief of the air and waste management division, James
Wolburn, giving guidance to Region 4. Region 4 is not
only Alabama, it is also North Carolina and South
Carolina. And then, in the wake of this, right? 1982,
North Carolina and South Carolina submit their SIPs and
in their SIPs, certainly the South Carolina SIP
expressly incorporates the concept of modification.
North Carolina a little less expressly incorporates the
entirety of the regulatory scheme under title 50 -- under
part 51 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
JUSTICE BREYER: It looks like -- I went
back and read the Puerto Rico cement case. And it
certainly looks as if -- though the issue was somewhat
different. It looks as if the interpretation that the
EPA is taking there is not consistent with what you are
reading now and is consistent with what they're saying
today. And that was in 1988-89, I guess. They must have
been starting on that in '87. So it seemed to me we have a
mixed bag. Some people were saying the one thing. Some
people were saying the other thing. And the later in time
seems to be the Puerto Rico cement. And that was at
least 17 years ago. And --
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Justice Breyer, I think
Puerto Rico cement is a somewhat complicated problem.
Because what you are dealing with there is the
elimination of two existing units, the two kilns, and a
replacement with a brand-new unit, which would have been
a modification under any -- I think under anybody's
theory, because there would have been an increase in the
hourly emissions anyway. So it would have been a NSPS
subject to the PSD. It didn't get analyzed that way but
the truth is it would have been fully -- the way that
decision came out would have been exactly
consistent with the way that they analyzed it.
JUSTICE BREYER: The analysis which was
probably pretty much based on what they said, I think
was that the reason there was increased potential here
to pollute, was really because this change would permit
the plant to be run more intensively or more hours,
something like that.
MR. PHILLIPS: But that was based on the
question of involving you know, normal operations or
non-normal operations. The Court really didn't have to
address -- and I don't think did address the question of
how do you relate --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, we didn't address it.
I'm not taking it as evidence of that. I'm taking it as
evidence that the EPA then had a basic position similar
to what they have now.
That's what I'm using it as a basis for
thinking that they were not saying to have a change, the
word "change" includes only a change in physical
facilities that increases the amount of emission per
hour. Am I right? Or --
MR. PHILLIPS: I don't think they were
really arguing that particular point. I mean, that's
not the way I would have read the argument that EPA was
making. But, and the bottom line is they didn't address
this issue in WEPCO. To the extent they came close to
addressing this issue in WEPCO they lost it in the
Seventh Circuit because WEPCO adopted an interpretation
that's much closer to what we are asking for.
The answer given on the other side at this
point, that we should have -- we should have sought a
determination. Well, the problem with that, of course,
is every one of these projects was being inspected. The
record is replete with examples from North Carolina and
South Carolina and EPA inspectors on site looking at
every one of these projects.
JUSTICE BREYER: So then they'll say your
argument here, even if you are right, I think they think
you're wrong -- but even if you're right, they'll say
well, that's an argument that it is arbitrary, capricious
abuse of discretion for them to change horses in the
middle of the stream, i.e., for them to take an
interpretation of a reg that was longstanding and without
adequate notice and comment and so forth radically
reverse that interpretation. Now that's not the issue in
front of us now.
MR. PHILLIPS: But that is the issue in
front of you, I believe.
JUSTICE BREYER: Because?
MR. PHILLIPS: Because --
JUSTICE BREYER: They say because the Fourth
Circuit didn't go really on that, it went on some
statutory thing, and --
MR. PHILLIPS: To be sure, but that's the
opinion. That's not the judgment. The judgment of the
court of appeals is that this enforcement--
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask a question, Mr.
Phillips? Focusing on this question in the amicus brief
which the EPA representative answered no. Supposing
the EPA had answered yes at that time. Would that have
been a permissible answer within the meaning of the
statute?
MR. PHILLIPS: If -- I'm not sure I
understood the predicate of the question, Justice Stevens.
Which question are you asking?
JUSTICE STEVENS: You know -- what's that,
page 7 and 8 of the -- of a source to modified
have to have a significant increase in the SO2 elements.
MR. PHILLIPS: Oh, I see.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And they answered no. You
say they were right.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm just asking -- want to
know, under the statute, could they have answered yes
and would that have been a permissible answer?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, our position would be no.
That would have been an -- inappropriate under the
rationale of Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So you're not basically
relying on the fact that you were misled, you're
basically relying on the fact that they have interpreted
the statute incorrectly.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, actually we're
making both arguments. Our basic argument is that all
along, they have interpreted it in a certain way. And
then 19 years later, they reversed course. And that is
arbitrary and capricious, Justice Breyer, and it is a
basis on which to defend the judgment of the court of
appeals.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, is what the government
is saying here is that suppose the regulation can be
interpreted to say X or Y. X would hurt the company; Y
would not. Is the government saying, if it is
foreseeable that the agency might take the
unfavorable position, you then must challenge it in the
D.C. Circuit?
MR. PHILLIPS: I think that's exactly what
they have to be arguing. And it seems to me that that
cannot be what 307(b)(1) means. Justice Kennedy, you
asked a great question. Should we have raised this in
80, 1992, 2000? When were we supposed to bring this
up? And the truth is in 1980 we interpreted this
statute, the regulation, exactly the same way EPA did.
It would have been silly for us to raise that. It is
true that this issue comes up 25 years later in a
bizarre proceeding. But that's not what 307(b)(2) is
all about. It says you are precluded from making a
challenge in an enforcement action if the action of the
administrator was subject to challenge. Well, the
action of the administrator was not subject to challenge
in 1980. And when we did have the subsequent
rulemaking --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just a pause, under
your view or the Fourth Circuit's view? If you read
Judge Tatel's opinion in New York versus EPA, he
suggests -- suggests, he says that EPA adopted different
interpretations of modification from the outset. And so
if what you are saying couldn't have been challenged,
was the Fourth Circuit's view, that may not be accurate.
But if you are saying what couldn't have been
anticipated was the argument you actually made to the
Fourth Circuit, that might be a different story.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. Well, I think that, that
is precisely what we are saying. But you know, Judge
Tatel, with all due respect to him, is dead wrong.
Because the interpretation of modification under NSPS
and under the regulatory PSD was identical. The
regulations couldn't be any clearer in that regard
because if you look at 15a of our appendix, you know,
the modification, this is the NSPS definition -- I'm
sorry, better go back a page. 17a. 60.14
modification defines emission rate and the emission rate
is expressed as kilogram per hour. So that is
absolutely clear that that is the NSPS --
Dobbs modification.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's the NSPS section.
MR. PHILLIPS: That's the NSPS section.
Then you go two pages earlier to 15a and you have the
PSD regulatory definition, and it comes right back to
emission rate, or the regulatory history that says the
emission rate as used in this provides is identical --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They say that that
provision only applies when there is no SIP. And that's
not this case.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, in the first place it
would apply in at least South Carolina immediately
because there is a SIP that incorporates exactly the
same language. And second of all, the notion that this
regulation is inoperative on one side and fully
operative on the other side make no sense. It makes
much more sense to recognize that modification is the
trigger for construction which is in part 51(2) and that
that incorporates this entire modification language.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand that.
It seems to me each part has had different definitions
and this definition only applies to part 52 which
applies when there is no SIP.
MR. PHILLIPS: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know how you can
say it automatically applies when there is a SIP.
MR. PHILLIPS: The way that would apply --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Part 51, in other words.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right. Go back to then -- you
have to go back to 12(a), I think it is where we talk
about the interpretation and we get to construction.
This is (b)(8), construction means a modification, okay,
of an emissions unit. So that -- and modification, if it
is undefined in title 51, right? According to 15.100,
means whatever it means under the statute. So that just
takes you back to the statute. And this is the
interpretation under the statute. The 52 interpretation
is also an interpretation under the statute.
So it is completely circular and brings you
right back to the same definition. I agree by its terms
it doesn't apply to 51. But going through the
definitional provision in part 51 through the definition
of the trigger for construction, which is modification,
it takes you right back to the same meaning of the same
provisions.
So there is no difference between the two.
And to me, it is really critical. And it seems to me
there are sort of two points to make here. One is
nobody on the Petitioner's side of this case answers the
State -- the dozen States who say we relied upon you
when we adopted these SIPs. We realized that you are
asking us to take on enormous burdens. And you should
have told us that before we went down this path in the
first place.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Phillips, before you
get away from this section 52, because I think that is
the best section for your case, 52.01(d), is there, is
there any sensible reason why you would want to have a
different definition of modification for non-SIP
situations than you would for SIP situations?
MR. PHILLIPS: No. Absolutely not. I mean,
you would -- you -- there is no rational --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That occurred to me when--
MR. PHILLIPS: And I have not heard the other
side make an argument that there is a rational
distinction between the two. And the truth is if EPA
wanted to achieve what it thought it was achieving, that
is to eliminate the concept of modification, what it
should have done is two things.
It should have -- it should have deleted
.01. And it should have adopted the proposed
regulation that it didn't adopt from the 1979 regs.
This is on page 9 of their brief. This statement is
astonishing to me. "The term major modification serves
as the definition of modification or modified when used
in the act in reference to a major stationary source."
If they had adopted that regulation in 1980, I
wouldn't had to litigate this issue 25 years later.
We would have litigated this question in 1980 because
then we would have said that's flatly inconsistent with
the statutory scheme because you're not entitled.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're quoting page 9?
MR. PHILLIPS: Page 9 of their reply brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, in their reply brief?
MR. PHILLIPS: The SG's reply brief, I apologize.
The gray brief. Where they seek to get some support for
the idea that modification was dropped out of this
analysis. But the truth is, that was a proposed rule
that would have done exactly what they say that the 1980
rule did without adopting that particular regulation.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Phillips, can I ask
another sort of basic question? In your view, would it
be permissible for the agency to interpret the word --
to adopt a regulatory interpretation of the -- in the
PSD regulations of the word "modification" that was
different from the definition it used under the new
source regulations?
MR. PHILLIPS: Substantively different?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Substantively different.
MR. PHILLIPS: No, I think that would be
impermissible
JUSTICE STEVENS: You think the statute
required the regulation to be identical?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. I don't understand how
it's possible that Congress says in the statute that you
take the NSPS trigger -- remember, this is not just some
random definition we're talking about. Construction is
the trigger for this part of this entire regulatory
scheme, and modification is the trigger, and say it is
as defined in, and they did it twice.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Your answer is no?
MR. PHILLIPS: My answer is no.
(Laughter.).
MR. PHILLIPS: I thought I said that first.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's definitely no.
(Laughter.)
MR. PHILLIPS: That's a no with some
emphasis.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Would it have been
permissible for the agency to adopt one definition for
years and then change the definition to the other
definition for all programs?
MR. PHILLIPS: For all of it?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. I think there is plenty
of room within that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So either definition could
comply with the statute?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. I think as long as you
maintain consistency between the two, there is a fair
amount of discretion for --
JUSTICE BREYER: The obvious reason to do it
is, I guess you have an area of the country, let's say,
which is quite clean in the air. And there is a power
plant. And what somebody works out, which is normal, is
demand for electricity is increasing. And so what we
will do is we're going to take these turbines and
system, and we're going to change it really radically.
It doesn't produce one more particle per hour, but now
we can run it 24 hours a day and previously we'd run it
hours a day. So there's going to be twice as much
pollution in the air. Now the whole idea of the PSD
system is you don't have twice as much pollution in the
air, and I guess that's why they wanted to do it.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, I think the premise of
that is, the real question is, if Congress had meant
that, why would Congress have adopted the same word,
modification, as the construction trigger that existed
in NSPS?
JUSTICE BREYER: Because you can use the
same word, you can apply the same word in different
places differently, depending on what your basic object
is in the different place. It's very hard to say what
kind of modification might exist over here, there, the
other place. And you put your finger on a very
difficult question for power companies, because those
turbines do go at different amounts of rates and so
forth during a day, during a month, during a year, so
it's hard for them. Therefore, you have a complex
definition.
What's wrong with that?
MR. PHILLIPS: Because by the time the
statute came up for review by Congress, and the PSD
program, the new source review, there was already a very
extensive regulatory history about the meaning of the
term "modification."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I think what's wrong
with it is that you could have achieved that same result
by simply not saying that modification in one program
has to mean the same as modification in the other. If
you didn't say that, that would be the result. You give
modification whatever meaning you think is reasonable
here. You give it whatever reading you think is
reasonable in the other place. But when you say the two
have to be the same, it seems to me you have something
else in mind.
MR. PHILLIPS: And it also seems to me,
Justice Breyer, it clearly creates an obligation on the
part of EPA to be very explicit if it's, in fact, going
to do what you say it's going to do. You don't go about
saying I am going to define modification in one statute
fundamentally different from the way I define
modification in another statute without discussing the
word modification.
And to put this in context, you'll remember,
these regulations were adopted in the wake of the Alabama
Power decision. Alabama Power didn't deal with the
issue of modification. That wasn't before the court.
Nobody had challenged modification's definition. The
hourly emissions rate was a perfectly valid one. What
the court in Alabama Power said is, you can't use this
threshold for major modification. And then the case --
so then the matter comes back, and if EPA immediately
adopts a new set of regulations that deal what, with
what? Major modification, not with modification.
And then they go through this entire
elaborate analysis of major modification, none of which,
candidly, do we challenge. We have no quarrel with
their interpretation of the concept of major
modification. If anybody does, my guess is the State
environmental groups would.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They make a kind of
interesting argument, major modification is not a subset
of modification.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yeah. And if the Solicitor,
and if EPA had enacted the regulation that they proposed
but didn't enact, that says major modification means
modification, then we might have an argument there. But
the concept that when you have modification as a core
baseline construction -- I mean trigger for the
applicability of this portion of the scheme, and then
you take that same -- and you not only do it once but
you do it twice, and you do it in the context of an
entire regulatory scheme that was designed to implement
this statutorily -- or implement this before the statute
was enacted, and you have Congress saying well, you
didn't get that right, but you did get this right, and
they leave this language exactly in the way it is, the
only fair inference you can draw from that, it seems to
me --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? Because the language,
I don't see anywhere in the statute where -- the words
of modification are, it's a physical changing or change
in a method of operation which increases the amount of
any air pollutant. Now those words, "physical change
which increases the amount of any air pollutant," could
mean different things in different places.
MR. PHILLIPS: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: Where does it say in the
statute that they can't?
MR. PHILLIPS: Where it says in the statute
is where it makes this specific cross-reference, because
if all they wanted to do was get that definition, all
they had to do was use the word modification. They
didn't have to use modification as defined --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Phillips, I want to be
sure I understand your position. Are you saying the
statutory text in effect says every regulation using the
word modification must employ the same definition, or
are you relying on a general principle that when the
same word is used it should be used in the same way?
MR. PHILLIPS: It's a general principle
that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So there's nothing in the
statute itself that says that principle shall apply to
this case?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, but the general principle
is that if the same language is used in two different
portions, you presume they have the same meaning. When
you go beyond that -- because otherwise, their
interpretation rendered superfluous the specific
cross-references to as defined in and as used in; and
while I know some don't like the legislative history,
the legislative history is quite clear that they had in
mind, and regulatory history as well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your answer is you
are not relying simply on the general principle. It is
not just that they used the word modification in one
place and the word modification in the other. It's that
in the latter place, they said modification as defined
in the first place.
MR. PHILLIPS: It depends on which general
principle, I suppose you're talking about. I'm not
relying on the mere presumption. I think this is much
stronger than the mere presumption.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But your reference of
modification as defined elsewhere merely defines the
scope of the statutory meaning. That's not the same as
saying every regulation that is a modification must be
the same no matter what the program.
MR. PHILLIPS: I think if you read it in
context, when you recognize that what Congress was doing
is adopting a statutory scheme that overlays on a
regulatory scheme that was well established with very
specific meanings, and where Congress quite clearly
picked and chose -- I think that's the way to say it --
from the regulatory scheme, and said we'll take these
and not take those, and has a provision at the end --
8 says, all the regulations remain in effect until
they get changed at some point, suggesting --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me just be sure I
understand the point. If instead of saying as defined
in X, the second statute had merely quoted the same
words that were in X, would your argument be the same?
MR. PHILLIPS: No. It would not be nearly
as strong as it is. We would still have a
presumption --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So you're saying that if
you used the definition as defined in another statute,
that implicitly says all regulations defining this term
must be identical.
MR. PHILLIPS: I don't know if I have to go
quite that far because I have more evidence than that in
this particular case, because I have the fact that they
say as used in, which suggests that it's more than just
a definitional point. We do have a legislative history
that seems to have in mind this regulatory background;
and we've been told by EPA that when Congress
incorporated modification, it really did incorporate
that luggage, baggage as well.
JUSTICE STEVENS: This is very helpful to
me, because the government has accused you of abandoning
the court of appeals approach to the case, and I think
you're endorsing the court of appeals.
MR. PHILLIPS: I do endorse it. The only
question I have -- I mean, I don't think that it
necessarily has to be -- that every word has to be
identical in the two provisions, but I do think they
have to be congruent. And so, that's the strong version
of our argument, and that's pretty close to where the
Fourth Circuit was.
The weaker version of our argument, which
gets I think some mileage on the arbitrary and
capricious part of the argument, is at a minimum, if
Congress adopts as the trigger point the same word in
two statutes, and EPA then purports to be implementing
that statute, it has some obligation to explain how it
is that they're doing a 180 with respect to the term
modification. And the reason --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not just a matter of
using the same word.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. You're right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's a matter of a statute
which says it shall have the same meaning.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right. They owe us some
responsibility to explain, how do you not follow that
course.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, could they have said
that construction means both modification and then come
up with a new word, alteration? Because the statute
says the term construction includes modification, so
I -- construction can be broader. Could it be an
alteration, they would come up with a new term of art,
and add that --
MR. PHILLIPS: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to the PSD?
MR. PHILLIPS: Could they have gotten away
with that? I mean, that would have been a much stronger
argument. It seems to me the better argument, and --
but see, the point here is if they had done that, or if
they had done what they proposed in 1979, which is just
to simply redefine major modification to be
modification, then we would have taken that issue
directly to the D.C. Circuit at that point in time.
JUSTICE BREYER: But you do have a brief
here. You have a brief filed in the D.C. Circuit, which
is Brief For Industry Petitioners on Actual Emissions
Definition.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And throughout that brief
it refers again and again to the problem, their proposed
reg is not taking, i.e., the potential capacity, which
is change the machine so it puts out more per minute or
whatever, but rather, it's using actual emissions even
though you don't change the capacity of the machine.
There's a whole brief on that. So you already argued
that whole brief, that what they were doing was
inconsistent with the statute, et cetera.
MR. PHILLIPS: The other side has not argued
collateral estoppel, if that's the argument you're
trying to make, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. As being outside the
statute at that time, and you did.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, you have to put that
into context. We're talking about a matter that was
closed for 25 years and then was reopened. And this
argument -- and it is true, a variant of this argument
was made. I don't think it's the full argument that
we've made before this Court. And it was rejected by
the D.C. Circuit. But if you're arguing that as a
7(b) argument, my answer to that is this is still not
action by the administrator that would trigger a 307(b)
bar. If you're asking about collateral estoppel, my
argument is --
JUSTICE BREYER: No. I was just thinking,
then you're left with what you called the weak argument,
arbitrary, capricious, et cetera, because I don't see
how you make the stronger one, what you think is
stronger, since you made it before, or a version of
it before the D.C. Circuit.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, again, if you are
arguing that as a matter of collateral estoppel, then --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, not collateral
estoppel, but you know, I'd be repeating myself.
MR. PHILLIPS: But if it's not collateral
estoppel and it's not 307(b)(2), then --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's what it is.
MR. PHILLIPS: So you are doing it as --
see, I don't think it -- I think if you read 307(b)(2)'s
language, it talks about action of the administrator,
and what action of the administrator are we, in fact,
challenging here? Nothing. Because in our view, the
80 regulation quite clearly says what we want it to
say. The only thing that's changed is that the
preambles have interpreted the 1980. We challenged that
and the D.C. Circuit said no, we're not going to address
that issue. That's an issue when you get back up, when
you get back on your enforcement action. Then you can
complain about that aspect of it. That issue is not
ripe. And that is exactly what we are trying to argue
in this case. And it's a variant of what I think --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Phillips, can I go
back for a second to the meaning in (a) includes the
same meaning as in (b). Is it not correct under your
view of the statute that that meaning can include either
of the two definitions that the two regulations
identify? So that either -- whether you start with (a)
or the second statute, either statute includes both --
may include both alternative regulations?
MR. PHILLIPS: As long as they are
consistent?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. That is my position,
Justice Stevens.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could you explain to
me again why this isn't a 307(b) problem? You said this
is an action by the administrator?
MR. PHILLIPS: Right. Because there is no
action of the administrator that we would challenge.
The only action of the administrator was the 1980
regulation, which we interpret as not changing
modification. If you read 52.01(d), it clearly retains
modification. We have no quarrel, then, with what the
administrator did in 1980.
Then they adopt preambles to the subsequent
regs. We do challenge those, but the D.C. Circuit said
we're not entitled to do that, that's got to wait for an
enforcement action. The only thing that's left out
there is this sort of inchoate interpretation by the
administrator. But there's no final action by the
administrator for us to challenge. Then the only
question would be, do we have some obligation --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You can't challenge
in the D.C. Circuit the administrator's interpretation
that led to the enforcement action?
MR. PHILLIPS: I don't know how that's a
final action. The filing of a complaint, as this Court
held in Harrison, is not a final action. So that
doesn't trigger it, and I don't know what else is out
there for us to serve as a hook. I would think at a
minimum the Court would want to be very, very loathe to
jump on a expansive interpretation of 307(b) where it
operates in a context like this as a pure gotcha. You
adopt regulations that nobody has a quarrel with, you
change the regulation afterwards and then you come back and
you say you can't challenge it at this point. That just
cannot be a sensible interpretation of that statute.
If there are no further questions, I would
ask the Court to affirm the Fourth Circuit. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Phillips.
Mr. Donahue, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF SEAN H. DONAHUE
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. DONAHUE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
You just can't read the 1980 regulations to
achieve the result Duke is seeking here. There is no
hourly rate in there, and it's important to note that
these provisions that they now state misled them into
their non-challenge, they didn't even cite to the Fourth
Circuit or the district court, and on their face,
they're not -- it's not plausible that these provisions,
which are totally nonspecific, were intended to vary the
very detailed and specific instructions on how to
measure an emissions increase laid out. And the
preamble --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, the one in part 52
surely does. You have to give them that.
MR. DONAHUE: No, I don't give them that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't give them that.
MR. DONAHUE: Because it says rate, and the
80 PSC regulations say that the relevant rate is tons
per year. They use the word "rate" pervasively.
I would also say the preamble to the rule
makes conclusively clear that "major modification" is
EPA's definition of the statutory term. This idea that
EPA, it's completely inconsistent with not only --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Major -- when you say
the statutory term, you mean "modification"?
MR. DONAHUE: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So then why weren't
those proposed regulations saying just that, adopted?
MR. DONAHUE: I don't know the answer to
that, but it's absolutely clear. EPA has never said
otherwise. And of course the idea that an NSPS
modification is required first, it would have been a big
deal. There is no sign of it, and in fact there are
specific examples. The example cited at page 23 of the
government's opening brief in the preamble is a PSD
major modification that would not be an NSPS --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's a tough sell,
isn't it? I mean, the idea is you propose regulations
saying major modification means modification. Those
regulations are not adopted, and then the industry is
supposed to be on notice that that's still what you
mean?
MR. DONAHUE: I think that there's no other
reading of what EPA meant from the regulations. No one
was confused by this, Chief Justice Roberts. No one was
confused.
This argument, it's a new argument in this
Court about how to read the rules, the 30 -- 52.01(d),
.100, and 51.166(b)(8), all uncited below. It's really
not plausible. The Court would have to abandon a lot of
very basic principles of how to interpret legal texts to
read the rules this way, and I think Judge Poisner was
right on that. He was right to say this is the natural
reading of the rules.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is "rate" defined?
I'm still troubled by 52.01(b). Where is -- you say
"rate" is defined. Where?
MR. DONAHUE: "Rate" is used as an annual
rate in 51.166(b) (21) and (b)(23).
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not defined. You
say it's just used that way.
MR. DONAHUE: It's the only -- it's tons
per year consistently.
The other thing I would point out, as the
Court is aware, is that 307(b) applies it bars courts in
enforcement actions, which includes this Court. This
case is not up on cert from the D.C. Circuit in New
York.
Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Donahue. The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:02 a.m., the case in the
