IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
POWEREX CORP.,
Petitioner
v. : No. 05-85
RELIANT ENERGY SERVICES, INC.,
ET AL.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, April 16, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ., Assistant to the
Solicitor General, Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; on behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting Petitioner.
LEONARD B. SIMON, ESQ., San Diego, Cal.; on
behalf of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting Petitioner 18
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
LEONARD B. SIMON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in case 05-85, Powerex Corporation
versus Reliant Energy Services.
Mr. Frederick.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID C. FREDERICK,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. FREDERICK: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court.
In 1988, the Government of British Columbia
created Powerex to perform a variety of public functions
including the marketing of surplus hydropower generated
by development of the Province's natural resources
pursuant to bilateral agreements with the United States.
The Ninth Circuit, however, denied Powerex
its rightful status as an organ of a foreign State
entitled to remove this case from State court to Federal
court.
Before addressing the appellate jurisdiction
issue, I'd like to highlight briefly the two key errors
by the Ninth Circuit in rejecting Powerex's organ
status. First, the court articulated the wrong test for
determining an entity's status as an organ of a foreign
State. The factors the Ninth Circuit found dispositive
are inconsistent with the FSIA; and second, the court
overlooked crucial evidence of Powerex's public
functions that are the best indication of its sovereign
status. The British Columbia Government receives and
distributes the proceeds from Powerex's operations,
supervises Powerex through BC Hydro, subjects Powerex to
provincial laws not applicable to private companies and
grants Powerex special benefits including exemption from
taxation.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Frederick, are you
going to get to the 1447(d) problem?
MR. FREDERICK: Yes. Let me address that
now. The court's -- the district court's remand order
was appealable because it was not issued under 1447(c).
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The district court
thought it was and one we did, the district court said I
have no authority in -- under -- over any of these
people. So back it goes.
MR. FREDERICK: The district court made two
mutually exclusive statements, that remand was proper
and that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction. Because
of that inconsistency, the court of appeals --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Removal. Removal was-
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- talking that -- where
are these statements?
JUSTICE SCALIA: You said remand was proper.
That's the --
MR. FREDERICK: Sorry. That removal was
proper under the sovereign removal provisions of 1441(d)
and 1442(a). It also then said it lacked subject matter
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But at the point it was
acting it was remanding, and its basis for remanding was
not that it thought the removal had been proper; the
basis for its remanding was that it said it lacked
jurisdiction over three of the other cross defendants.
MR. FREDERICK: But immunity was the basis
of the district court's thinking that it had to remand.
JUSTICE SOUTER: It may have been, leaving
aside the question of whether it was right or wrong, it
may have been wrong. But what it thought it was doing
it seems to me is fairly clearly remanding for a
jurisdictional reason.
MR. FREDERICK: And what this Court's cases
say, Justice Souter, is that the remand has to be a
ground cognizable under 1447(c).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Those cases are all
-- all based on Thermtron. You don't have any doubt
that Thermtron would come out the other way today, do
you?
MR. FREDERICK: I certainly do --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- in light of, in
light of the statutory language as it exists now?
MR. FREDERICK: Mr. Chief Justice, the
Thermtron rule has been reaffirmed no less than four
times by this Court, notwithstanding two statutory
amendments. It has been reaffirmed and stare decisis on
the basis of statute is the strongest form of stare
decisis. So I do --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But stare decisis on
the basis of statute is kind of a weak basis when the
statute's been changed.
MR. FREDERICK: Mr. Chief Justice, the
Thermtron rule was reaffirmed earlier this term in the
Osborn case, has been reaffirmed in prior cases lead --
from the time it was decided even through statutory
amendments. Our submission is that if Congress intended
to change that rule, it could have done so clearly. And
we note that the Respondents here don't ask for
Thermtron to be overruled, and it is clear from the
amicus on their side, that the only way you could rule
in favor of the Respondents in this case would be to
overrule Thermtron.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But Thermtron was such a
far cry from this case. In Thermtron the district judge
said yes, I have jurisdiction but I'm just too busy, so
I'm going to toss this case back to the State court.
MR. FREDERICK: But here, Justice Ginsburg,
the court did have jurisdiction because removal was
properly effectuated once the entities that we moved
were identified correctly as sovereigns, either foreign
sovereigns in the case of BC Hydro, or Federal
sovereigns in the case of BPA.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we go into that
question all the time, 1447(b) is a nullity. I mean, if
in every case you're going to be able to appeal whether
indeed there was lack of jurisdiction, you're going to
be able to appeal every case.
MR. FREDERICK: No, you're not,
Justice Scalia, and here's why. Immunity is not a
ground for remand because it is not a precondition for a
removal by a sovereign. It is a separate freestanding
issue. It is a status determination that determines
whether removal is proper by those sovereigns.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That would be fine if
47(d) said that there is no appeal so long as the
basis for removal was proper, but that's not what it
says.
MR. FREDERICK: But if in Thermtron the
court, the district court had said my docket is too
busy, I therefore lack subject matter jurisdiction and
remand under 1447(c), I don't think there's any doubt
that the courts would look beyond the label given.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't think the court
said in Thermtron, so therefore, I have no subject
matter jurisdiction.
MR. FREDERICK: I'm speaking hypothetically,
Justice Ginsburg. My point is that the label the
district court attached here was the wrong label, and
that's why the court of appeals to satisfy --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why? Why was it wrong
when with respect to the sovereign parties, the district
court said I have -- these people are totally immune
from suit; therefore, I have no jurisdiction over them.
MR. FREDERICK: Because it is inconsistent
with the notion that remand orders have no preclusive
effect to remand a case on the ground that the
sovereigns are immune, and force them to relitigate
their immune status in State court. That is precisely
why Congress enacted these sovereign removal provisions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then what you are really
arguing for is, in effect, a separate rule, and that is
that 1447(d) has an exception when we are dealing with
foreign sovereign immunities.
MR. FREDERICK: That's our backup
submission, Justice Souter. You do not need to reach
that if you agree with our principal submission and --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the trouble with the
principal submission, it seems to me, is that we have
said that even if the district court has come to an
erroneous conclusion about jurisdiction, if it
understands that it is making a jurisdictional ruling,
that is not appealable.
MR. FREDERICK: But Justice Souter, it did
so. The case -- the cases in which the Court has said
so have always been grounds -- jurisdictional grounds
cognizable under 1447(c). Immunity from suit is not
such a ground, because the purpose of having the removal
provision on the basis of status is to allow the Federal
courts to decide the immunity status. If the court
sends the case back to State court on immunity grounds,
it does not have preclusive effect in the State courts.
The State courts will be obliged to relitigate sovereign
immunity status and there will be no recourse except
through appeal through the State court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you're into your
backup argument now.
MR. FREDERICK: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The backup argument that
you're now making, that not your principal argument.
MR. FREDERICK: No, Justice Scalia, that's
not our backup argument. Our point is that in this
case, the district court had jurisdiction by virtue of
the successful removals, which everybody conceded were
correct, that the label that it attached, immunity is
subject matter jurisdiction, is not a label for a ground
recognized in 1447(c). So it was appropriate for the
court of appeals to exercise appellate jurisdiction to
determine whether or not the remand was a mandatory
remand under 1447(c) or a discretionary one of the type
this Court has recognized in the Cohill case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did you request -- when
the question of Powerex -- authority over Powerex was
before the district court, did you request that the
district court give you a 1292(b) order before the court
remanded the case, so that you could have gotten the
case -- the question up on appeal?
MR. FREDERICK: I don't believe that we did,
Justice Ginsburg. This case was remanded. A motion --
motions for clarification were subsequently brought.
But a 1292(b) order was not requested by Powerex.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because that would have
taken care of it if the district judge agreed to delay
the remand to allow this question of law to be
determined by the court of appeals.
MR. FREDERICK: It is certainly the case
that in searching through the docket entries, you'll
discover that there was a holding by the district court
of the remand, which is in itself an unusual procedure.
But the point that is important here is that
even apart from that, when the court had jurisdiction
pursuant to the removal provisions, it did not lose
subject matter jurisdiction by finding the immunity
claims upon the part of the Federal and foreign
sovereigns. And it is their theory that the district
court never had subject matter jurisdiction, and that
has to be wrong because it conflicts with the purposes
behind the removal provision to give the sovereigns the
opportunity to litigate their immunity defenses in
Federal court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They don't care whether it
had subject matter jurisdiction or not. It's not an
essential part of their case. Their case is even if it
did, it mistakenly thought it didn't, and remand it, end
of case.
MR. FREDERICK: Their submission in this
Court, however, is that there was no subject matter
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's their backup
argument, I think.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, their backup argument
should be rejected by the Court as wrong.
JUSTICE BREYER: If in fact it goes back to
the State court and you litigate it, you lost, can you
raise as a point of appeal that you did not receive two
things the statute guaranteed you? One was a
determination in the Federal court that you're an organ
of a Federal State, and second, a bench trial?
MR. FREDERICK: Justice Breyer, there's no
provision --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, but could you?
MR. FREDERICK: By the time the appeals in
the State court would have been exhausted, the very
benefits --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I'm just asking could
you, yes or no. I --
MR. FREDERICK: We would certainly make the
argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, okay. Now if you lost
in the State court, could you then use that as a basis
for asking this Court to accept jurisdiction? And if
they -- if we did, we took it and we heard the case,
reverse, and send it back for the proper tribal under
the statute?
MR. FREDERICK: Justice Breyer, I would not
--
want to foreclose any arguments that we might try to
make; but let me point out to you that in the years that
it would take to march through the State court system,
Powerex, as a sovereign, would be denied its right to
have a bench trial --
JUSTICE BREYER: See, what I'm getting at is
whenever there's an erroneous remand, the practical
problems that you raise are present. And they're awful.
I don't deny them.  I mean, they're right there in the
statute, it foresees them. So I wonder, is there any
difference in this case from every case where the remand
is erroneous?
MR. FREDERICK: I do think foreign
sovereigns are different, and Congress intended to treat
JUSTICE BREYER: In terms of the legal right
to get the trial to which the law entitles you on your
view of the law, there is no difference.
MR. FREDERICK: The foreign sovereign is
entitled to a bench trial. It is entitled to other
procedural protections with respect to treatment of
garnishment, other --
JUSTICE BREYER: And you would get those
eventually, it would just have to happen.
MR. FREDERICK: It would be after -- it
would be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that's purely --
pure question begging. I mean, the whole issue on the
merits is whether it's a foreign sovereign or not. And
you can't assume that you're correct when the remand
provision or the provision barring appeal when it's been
remanded doesn't care whether you're correct. The idea
is, you can get a correct determination in State court
through up to review by this Court eventually, as you
can in Federal court. There's no reason to assume that
the Federal court is the only place you would get a
correct determination.
MR. FREDERICK: But Mr. Chief Justice, the
point of having Congress enact these removal provisions
and to ensure jurisdiction in the federal court for
sovereigns on the basis of their status is entirely to
vindicate those rights and interests. If Powerex were
sued for not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's -- it's the same with
diversity jurisdiction. You can make the same argument.
There's nothing distinctive here. This statute says
that in a foreign sovereign immunity case you have a
right to be tried in Federal court. Fine. But the
statute also says that if you're a defendant in a
diversity suit, you have a right to trial in federal
court.
And I don't know why this is any more
demanding of an exception to 1447(d) than is ordinary
diversity jurisdiction, where Congress has said you're
entitled to trial in federal court.
MR. FREDERICK: Diversity is different,
Justice Scalia, and here's why.
When a case is removed on diversity grounds,
the court of appeals -- the district court is obliged to
examine the bases of diversity. That is what the
court's removal duty is. When a foreign sovereign
removes a case, the district court's duty is to
determine is this a foreign State within the meaning of
the FSIA. If it is, I have jurisdiction.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Frederick, may I just
follow up on Justice Breyer's question? It seems to me
that your answer suggests that you have two bites at the
apple because you -- all the way along, you might win.
And if you won, then it wouldn't matter. If you lose,
you always have the argument that you've made here,
let's go back and start over again.
MR. FREDERICK: Justice Stevens, I don't
think we would win at all in that circumstance because
we would be forced as a foreign State to litigate in
State court contrary to Congress's will.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but --
MR. FREDERICK: Whatever arguments that may
be preserved --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you might win that
litigation. It's not impossible, is it?
MR. FREDERICK: It is certainly not
impossible, but the point --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And if you lose, you
always have a point on appeal and may start all over
again later on.
MR. FREDERICK: It is unclear to me, and I'm
not sure that I've seen any of this Court's cases that
would suggest that the denial of that kind of procedural
right would be grounds for reversing a State court
judgment. And our position is that Congress intended to
protect the bench trial right, the immunity defenses of
a foreign sovereign, because the organ status
questioned --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did anybody in this
case -- did any of the Defendants in this case request a
trial by jury?
MR. FREDERICK: I don't recall whether the
Defendants do, but it is clear that the Plaintiffs would
be entitled to a jury trial --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And have they asked for
it? Has any party asked for a jury trial? If not, that
part of the case seems academic.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, the case has settled,
Justice Ginsburg, prior to the formal invocation of
trial procedures, and so --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The case is settled?
MR. FREDERICK: As explained in the cert
petition papers, the case is on appeal in the State
court system on objections to the settlement, and it
will not be mooted during the course of this Court's
action on the case.
But the invocation of jury that would be
done normally just before trial has not been an issue
that's been presented.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, that's different
than it is in the Federal courts. You have to -- can't
wait to the eve of trial to demand a jury.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, what the Plaintiffs
here assert is that they would be denied their right to
jury trial, and I presume that that means they intend to
ask for one and to perpetuate that request. Our
position, as we explain in a footnote in our reply
brief, is that they have a jury trial right as against
Duke and Reliant; they do not as against the foreign
sovereigns that they have sued.
So at root, the case is about the kind of
comity and dignity that the courts of the United States
will accord to foreign sovereigns. If Powerex were sued
on the basis of non-commercial acts, it would not be
entitled to have its immunity defense vindicated if the
district court is held to have no jurisdiction,
notwithstanding the proper removal under 1441(d).
I'd like to save the reminder of my time for
rebuttal, please.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Frederick.
Mr. Hallward-Driemeier.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES
AS AMICUS CURIAE SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
This Court has recognized repeatedly that
the bar on appellate review in 1447(d) applies only to
remands under 1447(c). This Court has held that the
courts of appeals have authority to decide whether a
remand order was, in fact, one within the authority of
47(c). In fact, just this term in Osborn, the
district court remanded the case on the basis of 1447(c)
for purported lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Osborn made it very clear
that was an extraordinary case where Congress had
explicitly ordered two conflicting things. One, it said
no remand of a case of this type, and then it said no
review of remands. So the Court was as clear as it
could be that only when you have those conflicting
signals does that court -- does that case have any
application.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Your Honor is
absolutely correct. Osborn concerned a particular kind
of categorical exception from 1447(c). Our argument is
that as a categorical matter, the basis of remand in
this case was not one within the scope of 1447(c). That
although the District Court termed the sovereign
immunity of the defendant's jurisdictional, it was not
jurisdictional in the relevant sense. And this Court
held precisely that in the Oliver American trading case.
There, a case removed by Mexico was dismissed by the
district court on the basis of its immunity and the
district court certified that holding as a
jurisdictional decision immediately appealable to this
Court.
Yet this Court looked beyond that label
attached by the district court and held that sovereign
immunity is not jurisdictional in the relevant sense
because it does not limit the authority of the Federal
courts qua Federal courts but rather is a general rule
that would preclude suit in State court as well.
Likewise, under 1447(c) it is not a basis to remand that
the defendant is immune.
When Congress authorized sovereign
defendants to remove cases to Federal court to vindicate
their immunity, it did not intend that when the district
court upheld that immunity, it would be remanded to
State court which would be free to disregard the Federal
court's decision.
JUSTICE BREYER: One technical question.
The same one. I would to be -- imagine it is a
diversity case. Imagine that a Federal court
erroneously remands it. A trial gets up to this Court.
And we say it was diverse. It shouldn't have been
remanded. Now what's -- is that like -- can that
happen? I guess. And is the remedy then wipe out the
State proceedings, go back to Federal court? What
happens? Has that have ever been a case like that?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: What happened?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The Missouri
Pacific Railway case holds that even this Court, on
review of a State court judgment following remand cannot
review the remand order itself. It can review issues of
Federal law that were decided by the State courts on
remand but --
JUSTICE BREYER: And it is called, the case,
Missouri --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Missouri Pacific
Railway case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, what --
what do you do about 1447(e) which says that if after
removal joinder might defeat subject matter
jurisdiction, the court can deny joinder or permit
joinder and remand the action. In other words, you have
got subject matter jurisdiction but the statute
contemplates it may -- later -- later you may lose
subject matter jurisdiction and you can remand it there.
And I suppose that that needs to be interpreted in pari
materia with (c) so that the remands would not be
subject to review. It seems to me the same situation
here. You have got allegedly subject matter
jurisdiction. It is later defeated, and it is remanded.
Why shouldn't that be covered by (c)?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: What, what's
notable is that Congress enacted 1447(e) at the same
time that it amended 1447(c). It provided in 1447(e)
for an authority to remand in a particular instance
where the court lost subject matter jurisdiction
post-removal. It had of course been the rule since this
Court's decision in St. Paul Mercury Indemnity, that
post-removal events did not defeat the removal court's
jurisdiction; and in the statute it was made explicit
that 1447(c) authorized remand only when the case was
removed improvidently and without jurisdiction.
And when Congress amended the language in
98 to make clear that non-jurisdictional defects in
removal had to be raised immediately or were forfeited,
it at the same time -- and added the language, or
changed the language in the second sentence that raises
problems for our argument; at the same time, it added
47(e) to provide, as I said, a particular authority to
remand based on post-removal events that would have been
unnecessary if, as Respondents urge, 1447(c) was
intended to confer general authority to remand on the
basis of post-removal events.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you don't have
any doubt that a remand under 1447(e) would be covered
by 1447(d), do you?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: No. And the courts
of appeals that have considered that question likewise
hold that a remand under 1447(e) is right in pari
materia with (d) although the courts seem to be split on
whether the decision to allow the joinder is a separable
decision appealable under Waco or not. But -- but that
issue is not presented.
But what is significant is that had Congress
intended by the amendment of 1447(c) to authorize for
the first time remand on the basis of post-removal
events, 1447(e) would have been unnecessary; and yet,
the legislative history, the 1447(e), makes clear that
Congress believed that in the absence of that provision,
the Court would have been limited to two alternatives.
Authorize the joinder -- or deny the joinder, or dismiss
the case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How is that relevant here?
Where is the post-removal event?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The post-removal
event here is the recognition of the defendant's
sovereign immunity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's not an event.
That's -- that's an epiphany, it's not an event.
(Laughter.)
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, according --
well, apparently the district court viewed it as a
post-removal event that deprived it, or defeated,
divested --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Very strange meaning of
event.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, I -- Your
Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean the sovereign
immunity didn't exist from the outset. Nothing changed.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: But -- but the
district court's order is clear. And it is absolutely
correct in this regard that removal jurisdiction existed
at the outset. So the court does not lack removal
jurisdiction. The reference in 1447(c), second sentence
to "lacks subject matter jurisdiction," refers to lacks
removal jurisdiction. And in fact, this Court used that
shorthand repeatedly in the Kircher decision to describe
47(c), lacks removal jurisdiction. This Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: When did it say that? I
really find it very hard to accept that argument, when
its says -- you know -- it doesn't use lacks removal
jurisdiction, that's what it means. It is such an easy
thing to say.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, the Court has
to go back to the history of the statute, how it's
evolved. Clearly pre-1998, authority to remand was only
if it was removed without jurisdiction. And so the
question is when Congress changed the language to lacks
subject matter jurisdiction, did it mean lacks removal
jurisdiction? Which it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Under the -- under the
district court's view, would there have been original
jurisdiction against Powerex?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: No, it would not
have. Bit that's because of the peculiarities of the
difference between original jurisdiction under the FSIA,
section 1330(a), and removal jurisdiction under the
FSIA. Whereas original jurisdiction depends upon a
conclusion that the defendant is not immune, Congress
conferred removal jurisdiction whenever a foreign
sovereign is defended.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then can you --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Likewise in
42(a), which was about the Federal --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can, can you tell me, if
the Petitioner does not prevail here, the case goes back
to the State court. Can the immunity argument be raised
in the State court?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The immunity
argument could be raised in State court. That's what
this Court held in Kircher. But the defendant would be
forever denied its right to a bench trial under Federal
law. That right is limited to suits in the Federal
courts by its term; 1441(d) --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In other words the State
court couldn't say well you know, this district court
was wrong; there's really immunity under the Federal
statute. The State court can't hold that?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The State --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because then you'd have
constant -- eternal shuttling back and forth, that's
why.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The State court
could reconsider Powerex's status as a foreign
sovereign, but it wouldn't have many, if any,
implications in the State court because Powerex isn't
claiming immunity in this case. It's only invoking the
procedural benefits of the FSIA which include that the
case be litigated in the Federal court before a judge
rather than a jury. And it would be forever denied the
benefits, those important procedural benefits of the
statute if this Court doesn't uphold review of the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, we don't know --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In other words, the -- the
Federal determination bars the State court from
redetermining that there's immunity? That the State
court can't say, "Federal court, you're wrong?"
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The issue of
immunity of Powerex was never raised in this case. It
can review the question of whether it is an organ of the
State it but it cannot review the remand determination
that Powerex can never be granted the procedures
benefits of Federal foreign order bench trial. Thanks,
Your Honor.
The Court: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Simon.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LEONARD B. SIMON,
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MR. SIMON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court.
There are two reasons, independent and
sufficient reasons why there is in appellate
jurisdiction in this case. The first most narrow and
simple reason to vacate the decision below for lack of
jurisdiction, is to follow this Court's precedents which
accept the district court's remand order for what it is
and what it says it is, a remand for lack of subject
matter jurisdiction under 1447(c), unremovable under
47(d). That is a simple direct route to that result.
There is a second approach suggested by a
lot of the briefing and some of the argument Your Honors
have heard this morning. And I want to lay it out
briefly for the Court.
And it is that, as the law professor amici
have suggested, there is some amount of confusion in the
lower courts, I might say with due respect, evasion of
47(d) in the lower courts, by judge-made exceptions to
47(d), created by some but not all of the courts of
appeal.
And the Court could clear out some of this
underbrush, mooting many of the issues that
Mr. Frederick and the that Solicitor General have
raised. Thermtron after Carnegie Mellon, addressing the
question Justice Kennedy raised in his concurring
opinion, in Things Remembered versus Petrarca, Thermtron
does not say what many of the lower courts think it
does. Thermtron does not say what my adversaries say it
does, because Thermtron has been partially overruled by
Carnegie Mellon. The notion that the only proper remand
is a 1447(c) remand is ancient history after Carnegie
Mellon, and therefore the notion that the only remand
covered by 1447(d) is a remand under 1447(c) is also
ancient history.
Congress has given us a simple and strong
message, which is when we're disputing the forum, when
the parties in a case are legitimately and in good faith
disputing forum, State court versus Federal court,
Congress has said take one shot at it, let an Article
III judge determine whether the forum is State court or
Federal court, and move on to the merits.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what, what reason
would Congress have for wanting a system that says --
and there are many, many, many people in the United
States who would like to sue Pakistan. They would like
to sue China. They would like to sue Russia. There are
all kinds of places they would like to sue. And why
would Congress want to have a system that says to those
countries, you can come into Federal court and get your
claim adjudicated, whether it is really you, China a;
but by the way, if the Federal judge makes a mistake,
there you are in Mississippi, Alabama, Illinois, any one
of 50 different states? In front of juries, the very
thing that we gave you this statute so you wouldn't have
to do.
Now what would their theory be?
MR. SIMON: It --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I, -- I'm not sure it
is even that he made a mistake. It is even worse than
that. If he gets it right and finds that you are a
sovereign --
MR. SIMON: Let me try to answer it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you can go back to State
court. I mean, that's even worse. He gets it right.
MR. SIMON: Let me try to answer both
questions. The problem is whether he gets it right or
wrong, we spend two years in a court of appeals. But
Your Honor, you're assuming there's an immunity issue in
this case. With due respect, my adversaries are arguing
someone else's case. There is no immunity claim in this
case by Powerex. There is one petition, one petitioner.
JUSTICE BREYER: They were saying they were
an organ of --
MR. SIMON: They were saying they were an
organ.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, and therefore they
are immune unless -- unless they fall within an
exception. And it may be they do.
Is that not right?
MR. SIMON: No. They conceded that they
fell within the exception.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I'm saying, that's
how the statute works.
MR. SIMON: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I take it if you win
this, it's precisely the same, in respect to a person
who has total immunity.
MR. SIMON: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not?
MR. SIMON: I would disagree Your Honor.
--
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not?
MR. SIMON: A party who has total immunity
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah.
MR. SIMON: Would have removed the case the
same way --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah. Yeah.
MR. SIMON: And it would have presented two
arguments to the district court. It would have argued
number one, we are a foreign sovereign; maybe it wins,
maybe it loses. And number two. We are immune.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. SIMON: There is a solid line of cases
that suggests the decision on immunity -- first of all
let me say, I think it is somewhat far-fetched that a
party that would actually be immune, say the King of
Saudi Arabia, would end up being in this third lowest
category of foreign -- purported foreign sovereigns and
end up in the position Powerex is in.
But if it did, in other words we have three
categories. We have immunes, we have non-immunes who
got Federal court, and then we have would-be foreign
sovereigns like Powerex, who end up in State court. And
I'm suggesting for a party to fall from the first
category to the third in front of an Article III
judge --
JUSTICE BREYER: And a Judge makes a big
mistake --
MR. SIMON: Makes a big mistake.
JUSTICE BREYER: China comes in --
MR. SIMON: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And says of course you're
China. And then it signs a remand order.
MR. SIMON: I would submit, Your Honor, the
question has never been addressed by this Court. The
lower courts suggest that that is a collateral order.
The immunity issue, not the remand issue. We actually
now have a Waco type case.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. Well, after all -- if
you're going to say, you say that one is reviewable on
appeal.
MR. SIMON: The immunity --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it or not, in your view?
MR. SIMON: In my view, the immunity issue,
but not the remand is reviewable on appeal --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. And now all they
want here is the organ issue reviewed on appeal.
MR. SIMON: Right. And the difference is --
JUSTICE BREYER: And what's the difference
between the one and the other?
MR. SIMON: The difference is that the
immunity issue is reviewed on appeal because there is a
line of court of appeal cases -- a majority, not a
unanimous majority, never blessed by this Court -- which
suggests that immunity is so important, don't need a
lawyer, you don't go to court, you don't say a word, you
don't spend a dollar, you walk away -- so important that
you are entitled to an immediate --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, and you agree with
that?
MR. SIMON: And I agree with that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. Then why is it in
your opinion that the immunity thing is so important
that they get this collateral appeal, but the organ
thing is not so important since all, what turns on that
is whether they're going to have their non-jury trial.
MR. SIMON: Well, I want to come back
non-jury trial and answer Justice Ginsburg's question
because I don't think she got the right answer. But the
reason it's more important is this is, as Justice Scalia
said, like a diversity decision, this is a litigation
who sells power in the Pacific Northwest and admits that
it competes with Enron, Duke, and Reliance, and it is
disputing whether it belongs in a State court in San
Diego or the Federal court across the street in San
Diego, leaving aside the jury issue. And that is
precisely the kind of dispute that Congress suggested in
47(d) and its predecessors, which have been on the
books for more than 100 years, ought to be done once.
What do they say, one and done? Is that what they say
in the district court?
JUSTICE ALITO: You're saying this all turns
on our assessment of the strength of the interest in
remaining in Federal court? Is that what it boils down
MR. SIMON: No, it turns on the strength of
getting an immediate decision on the immunity question.
The immunity question I think is a question of an
entirely different nature than the question of forum.
In the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The immunity question,
the immunity question is the same as State or Federal
court, because the statute as it's written, any foreign
sovereign, China, whatever, is as immune from State
court jurisdiction as it is from Federal court
jurisdiction because Congress said so.
But with respect to the commercial
enterprise, Congress said, we're going to give you a
Federal court and we're going to give you a judge trial.
That doesn't apply to State courts.
MR. SIMON: That's correct. But Congress
said, we're going to give you a Federal forum and a
bench tribal if you convince us that you are an agency
or instrumentality of a foreign State. This, this
corporation Powerex failed to make that convincing
showing. Having failed to make that convincing slowing,
again, they are debating in the appellate courts and
tying litigants up for two, five years over whether this
case should be litigated in State court or in Federal
court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was a sovereign
party who said: I'm out of this; I have suit immunity.
And that was the B.C. --
MR. SIMON: B.C. Hydro.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What happened to B.C.
Hydro? Because as I understand the district court sent
that party back, too.
MR. SIMON: The district court found that
they were immune, properly followed the law, but
determined because it believed it had no subject matter
jurisdiction that it should then stop at that point,
that it should just walk away from the case and remand
it, over the vehement disagreement of B.C. Hydro and the
parallel vehement disagreement of the Bonneville Power
Administration. The Ninth Circuit when it erroneously
took the appeal on the remand also clarified or
straightened out that issue.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but it couldn't --
if you are right, then the Ninth Circuit never should
have touched this case. So what happens to the three
parties, two U.S. parties, one British Columbia, who are
entitled to suit immunity?
MR. SIMON: Well, what's happened so far is
nothing, which might tell us that in the practical world
when a Federal district judge says that B.C. Hydro is
immune and then remands a multi-plaintiff,
multi-defendant, multi-cross defendant-cross defendant
case to San Diego Superior Court, it is exceedingly that
the San Diego Superior Court will reconsider the
immunity. But if it did --
JUSTICE ALITO: But could it?
MR. SIMON: I suppose it could, but if it
did that matter is subject to appeal and subject to
ultimate certiorari review in this Court. So I think
we're talking about a frolic.
JUSTICE ALITO: I thought the argument you
were making a few minutes ago, if I understood it
correctly, was that B.C. Hydro would not have been
barred by 1447(d) from taking an appeal to contest the
remand; is that correct or not.
MR. SIMON: I think B.C. Hydro could have
taken a collateral order, a collateral order appeal.
JUSTICE ALITO: Whether it's a collateral
order or not just goes to whether it falls under 1291.
It doesn't speak at all to the issue of 1447.
MR. SIMON: B.C. Hydro could have attempted
to appeal the immunity decision under a series of
decisions which suggest that immunity is so important
that it ought to be decided right then.
JUSTICE ALITO: The difference between that
immunity and Powerex's status is what? It's simply the
fact that there's a stronger interest in allowing
immediate appellate review, Federal appellate review of
the determination of the remand of a party that claims
to be a sovereign as opposed to Powerex's status as an
organ?
MR. SIMON: Among several other things.
There is a stronger interest in that, and we are not
debating about the forum. Again, we have the Kircher
case from last term saying State courts are perfectly
capable of resolving this issue. That is a quotation
actually from the Missouri Pacific case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If we think that Powerex,
that there's a strong interest in having Powerex remain
in Federal court if it's entitled To that under the
Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, that would be suffer
to get around 1447(d)?
MR. SIMON: I think Justice Scalia was
correct to say there is just as strong an interest in a
diversity case in having a New York corporation trying
to escape --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I'm having, I'm having
the same problem as Justice Scalia and Justice Breyer.
Can you say in just a few sentences the difference
between the case where there is sovereign immunity,
China, the China hypothetical, and this case where it's
organ immunity?
MR. SIMON: Yes, if I could --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You're telling us that one
is more important than the other, but there's no textual
basis in the statute for us to make that distinction.
MR. SIMON: I think there are two
differences, so if I could. One is textual and one is
important. Let me start with the textual difference.
The textual difference is that 1447(d) speaks to
remands, and so to the extent the district court
remanded the matter to State court the remand is
untouchable on appeal or by mandamus because of 1447(d).
And if the foreign -- if the foreign relations body,
lobby, doesn't like that, if the State Department
doesn't like, that they can go to the Capitol and get
that fixed quite easily.
There are half a dozen exceptions to 1447(d)
for class actions, for Native Americans, for civil
rights cases, and they can get their own exceptions. So
to the extent what the trial court did was remand, it is
untouchable. That is my textual answer. It's a remand,
i.e. Waco, in which the court says the remand is
untouchable, the dismissal of the unnecessary or
indispensable party is reviewable. So what I would say
is, although the remand is untouchable, the denial of
immunity -- and that's why I kept saying collateral
order; I apologize if that confused you, Justice Alito.
I meant that line of cases about going
straight up even though the case was continuing. While
the case continues in State court, where it belongs
under 1447(d), it would appear under this line of
collateral order cases that the denial of immunity
per se could go up on its own --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm asking why is denial
of immunity for sovereign status different from denial
of organ status giving you a right to a bench trial,
etcetera?
MR. SIMON: Possibly, possibly this could
would decide that question the other way. But --
JUSTICE BREYER: We have this very old judge
like me. China is there. And he says: This isn't
China; Formosa is China. So he says remand. So there
we are, China is now in the Western District State Court
for Illinois and they're suing them for a lot of money.
Now, you said, I thought, before that where that
happened, and they wrongly ly denied immunity, they
could, China, appeal in the Federal system. I thought
you said that.
MR. SIMON: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MR. SIMON: But not the remand.
JUSTICE BREYER: What?
MR. SIMON: But not the remand.
JUSTICE BREYER: All they want is a
definitive appeal that this is really China, all right.
Now, can they do that, yes or no? You said yes.
So I thought Justice Kennedy's question was,
if they can do that, why can't Powerex appeal in exactly
the same way on the question of whether they're an
organ. What's the difference?
MR. SIMON: The first difference is what I
said in response to Your Honor's question was I think
they could do that under some cases from the courts of
appeal. I know they can't appeal the remand because we
have an act of Congress which --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't care. I don't call
this an appeal of a remand. What this is, it is an
Appeal of the determination precedent to remand that
Powerex is not an organ.
MR. SIMON: Well, Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: That would make them just
as happy, I believe.
MR. SIMON: Justice Breyer, think about a
multi-party case and maybe my answer will be clearer to
you. In a multi-party case my position is the remand
stands, the case goes back to Missouri or Mississippi or
wherever your hypothetical was, but at the same time, I
do believe that the potentially immune party, which is
not here in this courtroom today, the potentially immune
party, could seek to review of what is a dispositive
ruling.
Remember, that's a dispositive ruling. They
win the case. That's very different than a venue
ruling.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Regardless of how they
would get up on it, assuming they could get up on the
immunity question, our series of questions is why do we
draw or why should we draw a distinction between
immunity and federal bench trial? And your answer is, I
take it, immunity is dispositive; Federal bench tribal
is not?
MR. SIMON: Immunity is dispositive and
Federal bench trial is not -- and is no different from
the day to day decisions district courts make all the
time about the choice between a State court and a
Federal court in the area of remands and removals.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Immunity, suit immunity,
is you can't be sued anyplace, not in State court, not
in Federal court; you can't be sued, period. But now it
is admitted that you can be sued. That's not in dispute
in this case, right?
MR. SIMON: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So the only question is
where.
MR. SIMON: And that is my core --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The question is if --
MR. SIMON: Excuse me. That is my core
point, that Congress told us when the only question is
where, we stop after one level and we move on to the
merits.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Can you help me with --
MR. SIMON: I would like to answer your
question about a jury, but I think I interrupted
Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I just want to be sure
your position. Assume that there is a remand that was
improper and cannot be appealed under your theory and
the Powerex argues all along, I was entitled to a
Federal forum and a non-jury trial. And the State court
says no all the way up. Can they file a petition for
certiorari saying, we had a Federal right that was
denied us, not the remand but our entitlement to a bench
trial? Can they petition for certiorari at the end of
the State proceeding in your view.
MR. SIMON: Other than the jury question, I
think the answer would be no because of 1447(d), because
I think 1447(e) would suggest that that's an appeal of a
remand. But again, you're asking questions that I
believe have not been addressed by this Court or even
lower courts.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm just wondering what
your position is.
MR. SIMON: A clever enough lawyer I suppose
could argue that at that point that we're no longer
challenging the remand, the remand has happened and been
completed and the trial has taken place; we're now
simply challenging the results. And maybe that clever
lawyer would win the day.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And in effect he would say
-- I mean, I assume what the clever lawyer would say is,
State court, cannot try me at all. The feds can do what
they want about remand and it gets back here. But
because I'm entitled to a bench trial, you cannot try me
at all. Isn't that the argument?
MR. SIMON: Oh, I think in State court a
clever litigant could argue all these points over again,
because 1447(e) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But his clever opponent
would say --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that what 1447(d) means
is that you can be tried in State courts. That's
precisely what it says.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And ultimately when the two
clever parties got to the State supreme court, they
would have these two opposing issues and ultimately if
we granted cert this Court would decide it, wouldn't it.
MR. SIMON: This Court would ultimately
decide it and they would ultimately decide questions
such as whether the jury or, to put it the other, the
bench trial issue has been preserved.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not say, depending on
the clever lawyers, or non-clever as the case may be,
why not just say Congress intended that you do get an
underlying appeal in the Federal system, for what is at
stake is not simply where the case will be tried, but
rather significant and important rights attach in the
Federal court that do not attach in the State court.
And therefore, it is right, the appeal you get when
they -- when what is at stake is immune or not, and by
doing that we avoid four more years of litigation and
the necessity to hire clever lawyers.
MR. SIMON: Well, Congress has said --
Congress has said the contrary. And there are often
important differences between State and Federal courts.
Justice Breyer, I think you have some experience in
California. We have 9 to 3 jury verdicts. You will
have a litigant here next year saying that the
difference between a removal and a remand is a unanimous
jury verdict or a 9 to 3 jury verdict, and that's really
important.
Now, I would just briefly like to go back to
Justice Ginsburg's question about a jury because I don't
think she got the full answer. Let me give it to you,
Justice Ginsburg. The jury issue is virtually -- I
would say not virtually. The jury issue is out of this
case based on my adversary's reply brief. I will tell
why you. We did ask for a jury trial in our case and we
were upset about the whole notion of this case being
removed on a cross-claim we were not involved in -- we
never sued Powerex -- losing our right to a jury trial
on this important case.
Mr. Frederick's reply brief says at footnote
, page 3 -- or footnote 3, page 4; I apologize -- that
our right to jury trial is not threatened here and that
under certain lower court decisions, which he is correct
they do exist -- I'm not sure they're unanimous -- Our
right to jury trial would survive even though he would
have a right to a bench trial under his theory.
Well, there is no right to a jury trial on
the cross claim against Mr. Frederick's client. The
cross claim in the California court, which got this
whole ball of wax rolling, is a cross claim for
equitable indemnification and declaratory relief,
equitable claims as to which there is no right to a jury
trial. So I think we are all now in agreement on a jury
trial. We are arguing someone else's case. Some day a
litigant will appear in this Court and present the issue
of jury trial --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But they raise that there
is still the question of Federal forum over State forum.
MR. SIMON: There is, and that's the issue
that I think Congress has clearly and definitively said,
the State courts have pretty good judges, pretty good
juries, pretty good systems and certiorari procedures to
this Court. In Kircher, the Court's opinion says, "the
State courts are perfectly competent to resolve these
issues."
The cost of this case being frozen for 3 or
years while we debated these issues -- and these
issues are very difficult. I would say, we don't only
have a backup position, we have a backup backup
position. Because we think, number one, the court
should be taken at its word. We think, number two, the
court had no subject matter jurisdiction. Removing
jurisdiction is not subject matter jurisdiction. If you
look at the book, Chapter 89, Section 1441, et cetera,
it's titled Removal of Cases From State Courts. You
won't find the word "subject matter jurisdiction" in
there anywhere.
A removal petition removes a case from the
State court to the Federal court, where if it's a
foreign sovereign immunities case, the Federal court
decides if it has subject matter jurisdiction. That's
what 1330 says in haec verba. It's what this Court's
decision in Verlinden versus Central Bank of Nigeria
says in haec verba. Verlinden says every court that
gets a foreign sovereign immunities case must determine
at the outset whether it has subject matter jurisdiction
by determining if the foreign sovereign is immune.
Which means that Judge Whaley was correct
when he decided that by concluding he had an immune
party in front of him, he had no jurisdiction. And it
was equally correct for Bonneville, when he determined
that United States versus Myers says the same thing, so
that he had no subject matter jurisdiction. And in
addition, there was a derivative jurisdiction doctrine.
This notion of "removal jurisdiction" quote
unquote, it's a term we all use. The Court used it in
Kircher. I use it. Other people use it. But if you
start getting serious about your words, it's meaningless
in this context. We have subject matter jurisdiction
and it is conferred in the area of 1330, 1331, 1332. It
is not conferred in 1441, 1442, or 1443. It's simply
not there.
So my backup argument is, he was right on
every point. And my backup argument beyond that is
again, please, reread Carnegie Mellon. Put it next to
Thermtron and look at what the lower courts have done.
They have found excuse after excuse to take appeals in
cases that have no business being in the courts of
appeals. They don't have immunity issues. They don't
have foreign sovereign issues. They don't have
anything.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, the reason why they
may have done that is because they've seen case after
case where absolute power corrupts absolutely. And
because district judges know that remand orders are not
reviewable, on occasion they will remand cases for
reasons that are clearly improper. That may be the
reason.
Now on your first argument, you say that
what the district judge says is dispositive. You mean
if the district judge says I lack subject matter
jurisdiction because my docket is crowded, that's not --
MR. SIMON: No.
JUSTICE ALITO: That's not --
MR. SIMON: No, Your Honor. I overstated.
Let me say it more clearly. Kircher, decided last term,
makes clear the line between what can and can't be done.
It discusses precisely this point and it refers to the
Ryan versus Contra case and it refers to the Principi
case. And it says that when the court is patently wrong
about whether the issue it is discussing is subject
matter jurisdiction, then this Court may enter into --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, it's a good
thing you've got a lot of fallback arguments because you
fall back very quickly. I would have thought your
answer to Justice Alito would be, the statute says if
it's remanded, it's not reviewable on appeal or
otherwise. And if it's remanded for a silly reason,
that will be corrected on review of the State supreme
court by this Court.
MR. SIMON: That would be my first answer,
and the Chief Justice said it much better than mine,
than I have. But I think, Your Honor, looking at
Kircher, to be fair, looking at Kircher, I believe that
is the position Justice Scalia took, it is concurring
opinion. And I didn't want to suggest that
Justice Scalia's concurring opinion was the opinion of
the Court. The opinion of the Court wrestles with what
I thought was Justice Alito's question. What do you do
if the trial judge says he has no subject matter
jurisdiction and he has not simply made a garden variety
jurisdictional error but he has missed what the issue
is? It's really failure to state a claim. It's really
something else. And we of course have the Steele case
which says jurisdiction has many meanings and we often
get confused about them. And the Court answered the
question by saying, only when the trial court is
patently wrong, patently wrong not about the
jurisdictional question but as to whether it is even a
jurisdictional question, only when the court is patently
wrong do we second guess the court.
So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That certainly
changes the argument. So the notice of appeal that's
filed or the brief on appeal says not only was the court
wrong, it was patently wrong, and the court of appeals
has to consider that before determining whether it has
jurisdiction to review the remand order.
MR. SIMON: If the court wants to adopt
Justice Scalia's view in the prior case, in the Kircher
case, my clients would be pleased with the results --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I recommend that.
(Laughter.)
MR. SIMON: But I think, Justice Roberts --
I think, Mr. Chief Justice -- I apologize. Because my
time is running short, I would say the key point in this
case came when we sought to have a prompt dismissal in
the Ninth Circuit of the appeal prior to full briefing
and argument, and it was denied. That was the point at
which if a litigant simply parroted the phrase "this is
patently wrong," would likely in most circuits before
most panels have lost. And this matter would have gone
back to the State court 2-1/2 years before it got
affirmed by the Ninth Circuit and five years before
today.
Unless the Court has any further questions,
I think I've completed my comments.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Simon.
Mr. Frederick, you have three minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID C. FREDERICK
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FREDERICK: Mr. Chief Justice, a
non-jury trial is an aspect of sovereign immunity. This
Court's cases have recognized that. In footnote 6 of
the Government's brief, the Government cites the Lehman
case which makes this point clear and argues that the
point should be applicable to sovereigns in the context
in which we are faced here.
The question of whether a foreign entity,
and it's more complicated often in the real world,
Justice Breyer, as your question's identified not simply
with questions but with the kinds of entities that
foreign governments create to advance public purposes.
The intent of Congress was not to have those kinds of
entities tested in State court to determine whether or
not they enjoyed the privileges and procedural
protections of the FSIA. And it is not simply a
question of whether or not an elderly judge might choose
to recognize China or Formosa, but rather the kinds of
--
instrumentalities that were created by those governments
to advance public purposes, to serve as separate
political entities, and who would be performing the
kinds of acts that might lead them into litigation, and
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And Congress said, those
entities don't get any immunity, they get two things:
They get a federal forum and they get a judge trial.
That's all that's at stake.
MR. FREDERICK: That's not all that's at
stake, Justice Ginsburg. There are also rights with
respect to foreign states to be free of punitive
damages. There are rights to have certain property of
the sovereign that would be subject to different
attachment rules.
The FSIA has a whole string of procedural
protections that are afforded to foreign states and
their instrumentalities. And this case ultimately is
about the fact that Powerex is being subjected to
multiple suits in State court, but as a result of the
Ninth Circuit's holding in --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are those -- have they
been sued by the plaintiffs in any of these cases or
have they always been brought in by defendants?
MR. FREDERICK: They have been directly sued
by the People of the State of California whom my brother
here represents. They have been sued by the California
Attorney General. They have been sued by the California
Department of Water Resources. And under the Ninth
Circuit's precedent in this case which I urge you to
overturn, Powerex has been remanded to State court, has
not been permitted to appeal the remand order, and is
stuck in State court in these cases without any
opportunity to test what is a clearly erroneous, and
what my brother doesn't make any attempt to defend, the
merits of the decision, that Powerex has performed
public functions, it's serving at the direction of the
Government of British Columbia, and is performing these
functions to advance clearly public purposes.
And yet, we are now in this Kafkaesque work
world between State and Federal court where if we try to
litigate all the way up through State court, it is not
entirely clear whether we will ever have our organ --
our status as a foreign organ ever vindicated. Thank
you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the case in the
