IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JACOB WINKELMAN, A :
MINOR, BY AND THROUGH :
HIS PARENTS AND LEGAL :
GUARDIANS, JEFF AND :
SANDEE WINKELMAN, ET :
AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 05-983
PARMA CITY SCHOOL :
DISTRICT. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, February 27, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JEAN-CLAUDE ANDRE, ESQ., Los Angeles, Cal.; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
DAVID B. SALMONS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioners.
PIERRE H. BERGERON, ESQ., Cincinnati, Ohio; on behalf of
the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JEAN-CLAUDE ANDRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID B. SALMONS, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioners 18
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PIERRE H. BERGERON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JEAN-CLAUDE ANDRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
[10:03 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
this morning in 05-983, Winkelman versus Parma City
School District. Mr. Andre.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEAN-CLAUDE ANDRE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. ANDRE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case asks the Court to decide to what
extent non-lawyer parents of a child with a disability
may litigate an IDEA case pro se in Federal court.
Under two distinct theories, the answer to that question
should be without limitation. But I would like to focus
today on petitioner's primary and first theory, which is
that parents are real parties in interest in IDEA suits
regardless of the claims being asserted.
Under 28 USC 1654, a party has a right as a
matter of Federal statutory law to litigate their own
case. Accordingly, when a parent sues under IDEA, it is
our position they are suing in their own right and are
suing on their own case. This is particularly so
because the right to sue provision that Congress enacted
in IDEA uses the broad phrase "any party aggrieved" when
it allows judicial review of an adverse administrative
hearing officer's decision. The parties agree that it
is the underlying administrative complaint or the due
process complaint that frames both the claims that can
be brought eventually in court, and also identifies who
the parties are that can appear in court.
Those complaint provisions in IDEA, and
there are eight of them in all we cite in footnote seven
of our reply brief; all eight of those provisions refer
unambiguously to the parents' complaints. Congress did
not describe this due process complaint that starts the
whole dispute process as the child's complaint, the
child's complaint by and through the parents, or the
parents' complaint on behalf of the child.
Accordingly, when a parent files that due
process complaint, they are the real party in interest,
and again, the provisions make no distinctions about the
kinds of claims that can be brought. It shouldn't
matter that when they get to Federal court that -- or
there shouldn't be any limitation on who is the real
party in interest in Federal court, or what claims may
be asserted.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If we say that the parents
are the real party in interest and are entitled to sue
in their own right, is that the end of the case, or do
we reach the second -- a second question as to whether
or not they can represent the children?
MR. ANDRE: I don't think you would need a
reach a second question, Justice Kennedy. It's our
position that the remedies in an IDEA case are
co-extensive and that the rights are inseparable. And
so, this case was pleaded in such a way as to have both
the parents and the child be before the court. But if
this court were to agree with us on our first and
primary theory, we don't believe it would be necessary
to have the child listed as a plaintiff to a future
suit, and we imagine that on remand the child might be
dismissed from the suit. It's our position that he's
not an indispensable party.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What can the parents get
out of this case other than reimbursement for the
tuition they've paid to private schools and procedural
rights that are given them by the Act? What can they
get out of this case other than those two things that do
not depend upon their status as representatives of the
child?
MR. ANDRE: Well, clearly the relief
primarily sought by my clients -- in fact, if you look
just at the relief section of the complaint that my
clients filed, which is in joint appendix, page 19, the
only relief they actually seek is reimbursement.
There's a number of ways --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What other possible relief
could they seek other than giving them a procedural
right accorded by the Act? What other possible relief
could they seek that they would not be seeking as
guardians of the child?
MR. ANDRE: Of course, it's our position
that parents are never acting as guardians, at least in
the legal sense, or lay representatives of a child in a
court action. And so, therefore, a parent should be
able to assert any one of the -- a claim asserting
violation of any one of the many rights conferred in the
Act.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It depends upon their being
a party aggrieved. That is defined in Black's Law
Dictionary as a party entitled to a remedy.
MR. ANDRE: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now if the only remedies
the parents are entitled to in their own right are
reimbursement, which is at issue here, and procedural
guarantees, why would not their ability to sue or to
appear pro se be limited to those two categories? You'd
win this case, but I'm talking about how broad is the
rule that you're urging us to adopt?
MR. ANDRE: Well, in -- and this could be a
very easy case if the Court wants to look just at the
specific procedural violations that my clients assert
and also the reimbursement claim that they assert. But
it's of course our position also that the full bundle of
rights can be asserted by parents. I think maybe the
best way to answer your question, Justice Scalia, is
that -- to direct you back to the definition of a free
appropriate public education itself, and that's in
01(9) and (29) in the statute. That definition
provides that a free appropriate public education is one
that's provided at no cost to parents. So if a school
district provides a free and inappropriate public
education, then it's the parents' obligation -- or not
obligation -- they have the choice of whether to
supplement the inappropriate public education with
additional services, or to replace the public education
with one that provides an appropriate bundle of
services.
So I guess my point is that even in a case
where the parents don't necessarily seeks reimbursement,
they still are intended beneficiaries of the right to a
free appropriate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The child is. The child is
entitled to an appropriate public education and the
parents are entitled to have it provided free. That's
really the only interest they have on the table, it
seems to me, separate and apart from their status as
representatives or guardians of the child.
MR. ANDRE: We also believe that the parents
have an interest in the education being appropriate
for -- in addition to the reason I just explained, that
they may have to supplement education, but parents are
also the co-architects of the individualized educational
program that is eventually -- that eventually defines
the bundle of services that it provides the child. And
they're integral to the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you say
they're the co-architects. I mean, are you saying
anything more than they are given the procedural right
to participate in the hearing?
MR. ANDRE: I think they're given -- I
haven't counted them -- but I think they're given 10, 12
of the 15 procedural rights outlined in the statute.
And this Court explained in Rowley, Congress placed
every bit as much emphasis on parental involvement in
the shaping of the individualized educational program --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Isn't there a bit
of -- there's a leap from saying they have these various
procedural rights and they're are a party aggrieved by
the decision rendered after the hearing, that's a
different question, isn't it?
MR. ANDRE: Well, typically a parent would
file a due process complaint, challenging the bundle of
services offered by the school district, and alleging a
procedural violation. And so I think it would be a rare
case where a parent would, by the time they get to
Federal court, try to be a party aggrieved is something
that they didn't exhaust -- that would render the
exhaustion requirement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: They are an aggrieved
party for purposes of the administrative process. The
question is whether that -- when that is done, whether
they also constitute an aggrieved party. And one of
the -- one of the points made by the other side is that
there is an express provision for proceeding without
counsel at the administrative level, and there's no
provision for proceeding without counsel in court.
So doesn't that suggest that the right to
proceed pro se is limited to the administrative process?
MR. ANDRE: No, not at all,
Justice Ginsburg. Congress sensibly recognized that
because the process proceedings are run on a State by
State basis, certain unauthorized practice of law
statutes or other laws require prohibiting counsel in
administrative proceedings might come into play. So
Congress had to make it express in section 1415(h)(1)
that any party may appear in the administrative
proceedings with or without counsel.
In contrast, in Federal court, there's
already 28 U.S.C. 1654, which has been on the books
since 1789 as part of the Judiciary Act. That provision
allows any party to litigate their own case. So it
actually makes a lot of sense that Congress would have
included the express right to proceed pro se --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Which just begs the
question, doesn't it? I mean, you're assuming that the
parents are a party to the case in Federal court.
MR. ANDRE: Well, again, it is our position
that they are because they're parties aggrieved by the
administrative proceedings, so long as they have
exhausted their claims. And that this is confirmed in
other provisions, for example, the attorneys' fees
provision of the statute refers repeatedly to parents as
a possible prevailing party.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought it was the
unanimous view of the circuits that parents, as a
general matter, do not have the right to represent their
children in Federal court, that the provision of the
judicial code that you cited does not confer on parents,
generally, the right to represent children.
MR. ANDRE: That's correct, Mr. Chief
Justice. But our primary theory in this case is not
that parents are seeking to represent their children as
lay advocates in court. Our primary theory is that a
parent suing under the statute is suing in their own
right. In fact, that's why my clients pleaded this case
with -- as -- with themselves on the caption, and
asserted claims that are their own, because they
believed that those claims are their own, and they
believed they should be able to litigate those claims
under section 1654.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You know, it's not an
insignificant matter at issue here. Counsel, who are
referred to as officers of the court, protect the court
from frivolous suits, from suits that really have no
basis. When we give that authority to appear in court
and initiate a suit to the public at large, we make a
lot more work for Federal district judges. Why should
we interpret this statute to achieve that unusual
result?
MR. ANDRE: Well, I'm not sure that the
policy considerations would be relevant to the statutory
construction question of whose rights are being asserted
in a case like this. But certainly under our second
theory, the public policy considerations would be
appropriate.
It is our position that those public policy
concerns about pro se litigants burdening the court,
burdening opposing counsel are dramatically outweighed
by the fact that -- by the reality that two-thirds of
the disabled children in the United States come from
families that cannot afford counsel --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The statute already
allows the shifting of fees to a prevailing party. So
presumably attorneys can be found to take the
meritorious cases. And What we are probably dealing
with are cases that can't attract attorneys, even though
the attorneys know that if they win, they will get their
fees.
MR. ANDRE: Two responses Mr. Chief Justice.
First, in other regimes, where you have a fee-shifting
statute, the cases are usually still brought by pro se
litigants. Here because you are dealing with a minor
child, really, it is an all or nothing proposition.
Either bring the case and you have the potential to
recover attorneys' fees, or the case doesn't get brought
at all. And this is borne out by the statistics cited
in our position and the amicus briefs from the Council
of Parent Attorneys and Advocates, and the Autism
Society of America.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Was their an argument at
any point in this case that the claim was frivolous?
MR. ANDRE: No, there was not. And then
that brings me to my last point, which is, as a
practical matter, there is a very limited private
special ed bar and they cherry-pick only the best cases.
But that doesn't mean that all the cases that are left
are frivolous or meritless. There's a whole universe of
cases out there, some of which may be quite strong, some
of which may be on the borderline, and some which may be
meritless.
But Congress cannot have intended to create
this important and robust substantive statutory
guarantee to a free and appropriate public education,
and guarantee all these procedural safeguards, including
judicial review to enforce it, and then expect that that
right would never be fulfilled because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if they had
that overriding intent, it would have been easy enough
for them to make clear that this was an exception to the
normal rule, that parents don't have the right to
represent children in court. They did that with respect
to the administrative proceeding, as Justice Ginsburg
pointed out. They perhaps conspicuously did not do it
with respect to the proceeding in court.
MR. ANDRE: Well, actually, if I could
clarify one thing. If you look closely at section
15(h)(1), it does not provide that a parent can
represent their child in the administrative proceeding.
It just says that any party may litigate that
administrative proceeding.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I know, but 14 -- is
it 1415(f)? Specifically says that parents have the
right to participate in the due process hearing. I'm
looking at 1415(f)(1)(A). In other words, parents have
the right to participate in the due process hearing.
MR. ANDRE: But that's also -- our position
is they have the right to participate in the due process
hearing as parties, in fact as the kind of plaintiff
side parties. And that is confirmed by the provisions
that we cite in footnote seven of our reply brief that
talk about the parents' complaint.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It doesn't say they
have the right to participate as parties. They have --
it says they have the right to -- for an impartial due
process hearing. I would suppose if you're trying to
figure out who is the party to that case, you would
still think of it in terms of the child and not the
parents.
MR. ANDRE: Well, we thought that -- we
believe that Congress thought of it as the parents
because of all the statutory references to the parents'
complaint. Of course, we don't take the absurd position
that the child could not also be a party to those
proceedings.
But in any event, my point was simply that
the express Lesesne argument that some courts relied on
to suggest that Congress consciously decided not to
allow parental lay representation, I mean, that argument
simply doesn't have a strong foundation, because the
provision on which that argument is based, which is
15(h)(1), is ambiguous at best. And, in fact, could
suggest just the opposite.
I'd like to address a point that Respondents
have relied on --
JUSTICE ALITO: Before you do that, how much
of a practical benefit would it be for children with
disabilities and their parents, if you are successful
here, in light of the complexity of the IDEA and the
fact that this is an area where some parents are going
to have difficulty maintaining any kind of emotional
detachment from the litigation?
If parents can represent their -- can -- a
non-lawyer parent can appear in court, isn't there a
risk that in some instances where a lawyer could be
found if the parent made an effort to do that, they're
going to be lured into trying to provide the
representation themselves?
MR. ANDRE: Well, first of all, parents
already have to get to know the statute and the
applicable regulations when they bring these cases at
the administrative level. By the time they get to
court, they are intimately familiar with the facts and
intimately familiar with the relevant law. The only
thing that's different about the court action and the
administrative proceeding is now you have the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure.
JUSTICE SCALIA: These disadvantaged parents
that you are referring to who comprise the majority of
parents, they're really up on section, you know, (h)(1)
and all that stuff? I find that hard to believe. I
mean, the people you're assertedly benefiting here are
the people least likely to have familiarized themselves
with the statute and the procedures.
MR. ANDRE: I'm not sure we agree, with all
due respect, Justice Scalia. But even if that's true,
the nature of IDEA court action, I think, addresses some
of the concern. These are not pure record review
proceedings, like in merit systems protection board
cases, or immigration cases. But they are quasi review
proceedings. And so what we're advocating here is
really access to the courts. Let the parents, whether
they are brilliant writers or they're not so good at
writing, let them at least have access to the courts, so
that will then -- a capable district judge can look at
the case and decide whether the school should have
complied with the statutory mandates.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And do it right after
reading pro se prisoner petitions, right? You'd have a
nice evening's work.
MR. ANDRE: We think that the pro se parents
are quite different from pro se prisoners. I'd like to
save the rest of my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Andre.
Mr. Salmons.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID B. SALMONS
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING PETITIONERS
MR. SALMONS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Congress made parents of children with
disabilities parties in their own right in
administrative and judicial proceedings under the IDEA,
and granted parents their own rights under the Act. One
--
of the rights granted expressly to parents is the right
to seek reimbursement for private educational expenses
when the parents believe the school has failed to
provide an appropriate education.
That is the claim that's at issue in this
case, and the parents are clearly the appropriate party
for that claim because they're the ones that have
incurred the financial harm. When they are reimbursed
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That argument proves
a little too much. If you have a child who is the
victim of a tort, for example, and suffers a serious
injury, it is the parents who are going to have to bear
the costs of accommodating that injury. And yet in any
tort action, it's still the child who is the party and
not the parent.
MR. SALMONS: Well, I think that's right,
Your Honor, but the difference here is that the statute
in section 1412(a)(10)(C)(2), and this is on page 6A of
Petitioner's brief, expressly provides a right to
parents to seek reimbursement for the -- for their --
the educational expenses that they incur.
And while the parents have to show that
there was a denial of a free appropriate public
education, we think it's clear that the statute makes
the claim the parent's claim. And there are cases, for
example, out of the Fourth District, in Emery, that
would suggest that it is not even clear that the child
would have standing to assert a claim for reimbursement
when they're not out of pocket any expenses.
So we think in a case like this, this is an
easy case. We think clearly here the parents are the
parties.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then you would be
establishing a right for the least needy. I mean, if
they're seeking reimbursement, they're able to pay the
private school tuition. It's the people who can't --
who have no alternative, they have to take what the
school district gives them because they don't have the
wherewithal to enroll their child in a private school.
And your argument, concentrating on the reimbursement
right, would leave out those people, would it not?
MR. SALMONS: Well, that's not the sum total
of our argument, Your Honor. I was just pointing out
that actually there's a relatively narrow way to decide
this case if the Court so chose, by focusing on the
reimbursement claim in this case.
Our position is that parents share in the
substantive right to a free appropriate public education
under the Act. And there are two things we would point
to in regard to the definition of a free appropriate
public education that we think makes this clear. And
this is in section 1401 of the Act on pages 2A and 4A of
Petitioner's brief.
The first is the definition says that the
term free appropriate public education means special
education services provided, quote, without charge and
at no cost to parents. We think clearly the free
aspect, again, is first and foremost a right of the
parents, because they're the ones that bear the cost.
With regard to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm not following you.
Where is this provision? 1401 what?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you quoted from
(a).
MR. SALMONS: There's -- That's correct.
The definition begins on page 2(a) "which says free
appropriate public education on section 1401 and it
says, "the term free appropriate public education means
special education related services that -- and under
subparagraph A have been provided at public expense
under public supervision and direction and without
charge -- Then in subparagraph 29 on page 4(a)the term
special education is defined which is again the term
from the definition of free appropriate public
education, is defined to mean "specially designed
instructions at no cost to parents."
And so again the right to a free appropriate
public education is defined expressly in part as terms
of the parents interest. We also think that regards to
any question about what is the appropriate, if you look
back again on 2(a), subparagraph D of the definition of
free appropriate public education, it says that it has
to be special education services that are provided in
conformity with the individual education program
required under the Act.
And now the individual education program or
IEP process is the process by which parents are given
the right to participate as full members of the IEP team
and to have a say in helping to define what is an
appropriate education for the child. And as this Court
pointed out in Rowley, this is the essential feature of
this Act. The way it works is that Congress did not
specify or flesh out a substantive standard for what is
appropriate for a child' instead it ensured -- it
mandated, excuse me -- that an appropriate education is
an education that involves parental involvement.
And when there is a dispute with regard to
whether the IEP team has adopted the right educational
program for the child, we think that the Act makes
parents, who again, who are full members of that team,
when their views are rejected as far as what is
appropriate, they are given the procedural safeguard of
initiating a due process hearing. Again the Act refers
repeatedly to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So their, their
rights -- so their right to proceed in Federal court
should be limited to the rights that you've identified
under the statute as opposed to the right to proceed on
behalf of the child?
MR. SALMONS: That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words, you
think -- you think their -- their, their rights -- the
rights they can assert are only ones they can identify
as their own as opposed to the child's?
MR. SALMONS: Well it, that is essentially
our position although I would add that our position is
that all of the rights of the statute are rights that
are shared by the parent. At least with regard to the
substantive --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then you still
haven't said anything. I thought you were saying that
they can sue for the money and they can sue for denied
procedures. But if all the procedures are given and
they're still not satisfied with the public education
that is given, they would not be able to sue claiming
that it was inadequate under the terms of the Act.
You think they can sue then, too, as well.
MR. SALMONS: Yes, Your Honor. We do --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you haven't said
anything then.
MR. SALMONS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You really haven't limited
the scope of the parent's right to sue at all.
MR. SALMONS: Well -- well -- just because I
haven't limited the rights of the parents right doesn't
mean that I haven't been trying to make a point about
how to interpret the statute. The statute we think does
not limit the parents' rights to sue on behalf of their
child and on behalf of their own rights under the
statute.
We think the way to think about this --
again, keep in mind that the right to initiate a due
process hearing and the right to seek review of that in
court, those are rights that are contained in Section
15, which is the procedural protection, the procedural
guarantees of the Act. And we think those are rights
that belong to the parents.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Fine. You've given the
procedure but where does the Act guarantee the parents
the proper outcome? The proper -- assignment?
MR. SALMONS: Well, we think the way --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It does give the parents
the right procedures explicitly and the rights to
reimbursement for -- for private tuition.
MR. SALMONS: The -- that -- that's correct.
The way we look at the question, Your Honor, is to say
it gives the parents those rights, it gives the parents
the right to be full members of the IEP team that
determines the appropriate education for that child.
While the school district has the final say as far as
the contents of the IEP, the parents as members of that
team have the right to initiate litigation through
administrative procedures and then ultimately in court,
if their view of what is appropriate for their child is
rejected by the -- by the -- by the IEP team. And
while, and no doubt --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that right, where --
where is that right contained? You have given us
citations for the other ones. Where is that right
contained?
MR. SALMONS: The right to initiate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The right to initiate a
suit solely on the basis -- not that I was denied
procedures, not that I, I paid money for private
--
schooling, but I do not believe the outcome, the
education given to my child in the public school was
enough.
MR. SALMONS: Your Honor, what I would refer
you to are the many provisions of the Act, and you can
turn to pages 16 A and 17 A for example of Petitioner's
brief that has these, in part, where the Act repeatedly
refers to the parents' due process complaint, the
parents' due process complaint, known as the parents'
right to a due process hearing. The 2004 amendments
expressly refer, define prevailing party to be parents.
It referred to the parents' cause of action
JUSTICE SCALIA: They have the right -- they
have the right to the hearing. But do they have the
right --
MR. SALMONS: They have a right --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do they have a right in and
of themselves -- not as guardians -- do they have the
right to a particular outcome in the hearing? That's,
that's the point I'm inquiring to.
MR. SALMONS: Our way of looking at the
statute, Your Honor, says that if they are the ones that
initiate the hearing, they file the complaint, they are
parties to that hearing, then when, when their claims
are denied, they are parties aggrieved within the
meaning of the statute. It's the same term, parties
aggrieved, that refers to the right to an appeal in the
administrative process that refers to the ability to
initiate a civil cause of action.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It is not -- it is
not just party aggrieved. It's party aggrieved by the
findings and decision, as opposed to party aggrieved by
a denial of the procedural right, and those strike me as
two different things.
MR. SALMONS: Well, I -- does say, it does
reference back, in fact it references back to the
complaint that's filed to initiate the due process
hearing. And the parties are the ones that -- excuse
me, the parents are the ones that are referred to as the
ones filing those complaints. It is referred to
repeatedly as the parents' complaint and the parents are
-- are referred to as prevailing parties in the civil
action. Again in the attorneys fee provisions that were
added in 2004, expressly refer to quote, "the parents'
complaint or subsequent cause of action." This is on
page 24 A of Petitioner's brief.
And it refers to parents as a prevailing
party. There are other provisions that do so as well
and while we're on the topic of the 2004 amendments -- I
see my time is up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Salmons.
Mr. Bergeron?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PIERRE H. BERGERON,
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. BERGERON: Thank you Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court.
The common law rule banning parental pro se
representation is as longstanding as it is pervasive.
Appreciating the fact that the IDEA does not abrogate
the common law rule, Petitioners instead seek to
circumvent that through this substantive rights theory.
If a due process complaint never raised any issue of
parental substantive rights, nor even did their cert
petition, which at page 11 said children had substantive
rights but parents have procedural rights.
Now, however, they tell this Court that the
right -- the parents' substantive right is so ingrained
in the fabric of the statute that the courts should
recognize it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: How do you classify right
to reimbursement?
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor, I would classify
that as not a right, it's a remedy. It is a remedy
premised on the denial of the FAPE to the child. And as
a result, it is simply a derivative claim for the
parents to recover those funds.
JUSTICE STEVENS: The right to recover
money, it's just a remedy, it's not a right?
MR. BERGERON: That's, and that's how 1412
is structured, the provisions about reimbursement. It
depends upon the predicate finding that the child was
denied a FAPE and therefore one of the remedies, among
other remedies, compensatory education and so forth, is
reimbursement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the provision
that says at no cost to the parent?
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor, certainly that
has been one of the emphases by Petitioners, but the
response to that is that the free aspect of the free
appropriate public education does not give parents a
substantive right to the education itself. We are not
talking -- we are debating in this case, the merits of
this case, we are debating the A aspect, the
appropriateness. We are not saying, we have not
expelled the student and therefore they have a claim
based on that. It is simply --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why don't we go back to my
other question to be sure I got your point. The
reimbursement is paid to whom?
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The child or the parents?
MR. BERGERON: Our position is it would be
paid to the child. The child would be the party that
could bring that claim. And I just would like to
clarify. If you look at page 153 of the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You reimburse the child
for money that his parents spent?
MR. BERGERON: And Your Honor, that is how
the court, lower courts in the Third Circuit, where the
Collinsgru rule prevails, that's how they apply it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What would -- what would
happen if the child were deceased or incompetent?
MR. BERGERON: Well, that is, that is
exactly the scenario in the Seventh Circuit case that
they cited in 2007. And they said it's, the child's
estate is the one that brings the claim. Now in that
case, the child had actually expended the funds. But
that case upheld the rule that we were advocating here.
JUSTICE SOUTER: In an instance in which the
money is paid to the -- the reimbursement is paid to the
child, how does the child get the money to the parents?
MR. BERGERON: You've got to assume --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Maybe, maybe these
children don't. Do they set up trust funds for these
reimbursements?
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor, I think it is no
different than a basic attorney fee award. There's not,
there's not a claim that -- that, you know, if someone
else, if the uncle pays the attorneys' fees that didn't
negate the award of fees on behalf of the child.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I'm not talking about
negating the award. I'm -- if that theory is sound, if
the child is the proper recipient of the reimbursement,
I presume that ultimately the reimbursement is supposed
to go to the person who paid the money?
MR. BERGERON: That's right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Which would be the parent.
My question is how does the child in that case get the
money to the parent?
MR. BERGERON: Well, because the claim would
have to be brought on behalf of the child, because they
would not have the capacity to bring the claim itself,
the award would go straight to the, to the guardian, who
may be the parent that is proceeding on their behalf.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But the guardian can't the
funds that belong to the child.
MR. BERGERON: Well, but Your Honor, we
believe that that's the pragmatic result that Congress
intended here.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. But if the, if
the guardian is in a position to convey the money to
himself in the different capacity as the parent, then
why isn't the guardian equally in a, in a position to be
substituted for the child in -- in litigating the
action?
MR. BERGERON: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You can't have it -- you
can't have it both ways.
MR. BERGERON: Well, the guardian can
certainly bring the claim on behalf of the child. But
its' different than bringing the claim in their own
right. And I would point that at page 153 of the joint
appendix, it specifies at the -- at the administrative
hearing level, there was no claim for reimbursement to
the parents. In fact, what they were seeking was
reimbursement to Monarch, to the school. In other
words, as far as the administrative record disclosed
they had not actually paid the funds.
JUSTICE BREYER: What is this to do -- I
mean, I'm -- I'm puzzled about why we're talking about
this complicated thing. I mean why -- the statute as I
read it has a section and it's called procedural,
procedural rights.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it says that the
procedural rights, right at the beginning, are for both
the children and the parents. And it sets up some
procedures in the agency which is for the children and
the parents and school board, and everybody is supposed
to be there. And then another part of the same section
says any person aggrieved by the first has a court
hearing.
Why isn't that the end of it? It's clearly
aimed, as the statute is aimed, at both students and
parents. And then we give them all procedural rights,
and what in the statute says that the procedures that
they're following before the school board happen to be
for both parents and students. But without saying a
word, a different procedure, a Federal court procedure
in the same section, without saying anything, would be
just for the students and not for the parents?
I mean, I find that hard to read the statute
that way.
MR. BERGERON: Well, Your Honor, if you're
talking about the distinction between the procedural and
the substance in the Act, Congress made clear --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I'm not. I'm talking
about the whole Act. Throughout the whole Act, they
talk about parents and students.
MR. BERGERON: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And who writes the check?
The student?
MR. BERGERON: Generally, no, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. Of course. The parent
writes the check. And has the interest? I have an
interest in educating my children as you do in yours.
And this statute talks about that throughout.
MR. BERGERON: Just --
JUSTICE BREYER: So I'm looking at the
particular words in the procedural section, and the
particular words explicitly say that every subsection is
both for parent, through child; and then we get to the
Court one and it talks about person aggrieved.
And you, I guess, have to convince me --
which as I'm putting it, sounds like an uphill battle --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: But you have --
MR. BERGERON: I'll do my best.
JUSTICE BREYER: You have to convince me
that person aggrieved at the at the end of this section
is meant to apply to only some of the people whom every
other section talks about, namely just children, not
parents.
Now why should I read that it way?
MR. BERGERON: Well, let me try to explain,
Justice Breyer. The reason is as Petitioners
effectively conceded in their reply brief, party
aggrieved does depend on the party entitled to the
remedy. And if we look at the amendment in
15(f)(3)(E), which was just added in 2004, it
clarifies that all relief that the hearing officer
should award is based on substantive violation to the
child.
And it's important that if we look to the
entirety of subchapter 2, there are more than two dozen
references to the right, to the obligation, to the
provision of a FAPE to the child. That is what we are
talking about. The dispute resolution provisions hinge
on vindicating the child's right. And I think the
question earlier to Mr. Salmons was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What's that section you
just alluded to? I'm blasting by it. Where is it, in
the --
MR. BERGERON: I'm sorry, which section?
JUSTICE SCALIA: F --
MR. BERGERON: Oh, 1415(f)(3)(E}, I'm
focusing on 21 A of the blue brief, Your Honor. And
once that section --
JUSTICE SCALIA: 21 A or -- -
MR. BERGERON: 21 A of the blue brief, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And which is the statutory
section again.
MR. BERGERON: It's 1415(f)(3)(E).
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you said 14.
MR. BERGERON: (f)(3)(E).
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are you sure it's not
(a)?
MR. BERGERON: (f)(3)(E) is on 21a of my
version of the blue brief, Your Honor. That's the
provision that's titled decision of the hearing officer,
and provides that the hearing officer should grant
relief on substantive grounds.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's in 18(a) of mine, too.
Maybe I have a different brief there.
MR. BERGERON: That's not my brief, Your
Honor, I apologize. In any event, it limits the hearing
officer's ability to reward relief based on the
substantive, whether the substantive right to the FAPE
has been awarded or not. And then we return to
Justice Breyer's point about the party aggrieved, the
party aggrieved by the finding or decision. Because the
decision is limited to substantive grounds, that is what
we are really talking about here. And I think one of
the confusing aspects about what the nature of the
substantive right is, and I think we've heard some
different versions of that this morning, is what is the
scope.
Petitioners in their reply brief seem to try
to retreat a little bit and make the rights more
palatable. But if they -- in doing so, the question is,
what is the right different than the child's right? And
we simply do not have the answer to that, and for the
school districts applying this act on a daily basis, and
for courts interpreting it, it simply poses numerous
problems trying to apply to a parent a statute that was
designed to benefit children.
JUSTICE BREYER: Your argument, I guess, is
this argument. Now you're conceding the parent does
have a right to go to court, but he can only complain
about something that hurts him. Right?
MR. BERGERON: I would not --
JUSTICE BREYER: He can't complain in court
or -- well, it sounds as if you were saying that.
You're saying that the hearing officer has to decide
against the parent and if he doesn't decide against the
parent, obviously the parent can't go into court because
he doesn't have anything to complain about, the parent.
Isn't that your point?
MR. BERGERON: Well, he can't decide against
the parent because the only issue at stake is the right
of the child.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, well -- right. I'm
sorry. Then you go ahead. I thought I heard you say
that the problem is that the parent didn't have a right
taken away by the hearing officer, and that's why the
parent can't go to court.
MR. BERGERON: Well, he won't have a right
taken away from him because it's not -- it's not his
claim at stake in the due process hearing.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, I would agree, we can
be on the same grounds there.
MR. BERGERON: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: I agree that if the parent
isn't hurt, if the parent wasn't deprived of anything,
the parents can go to court but doesn't have anything to
complain about, you know, whereas another section of the
statute says that reimbursement is something supposed to
be reimbursement for the parent, so it would seem as if
the panther has something to complain about. Isn't that
so? It says the -- I think so -- it says a parent is to
be reimbursed. I thought that was one of the things
that --
MR. BERGERON: That's correct, Your Honor.
That's what it says.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, now it looks as if the
parent has something to complain about. The parent
hasn't got the money that he was supposed to get. Now
we have something to complain about, so therefore, we're
aggrieved, and then the last section says an aggrieved
person can go to court.
MR. BERGERON: Right. We simply feel that
because the reimbursement, as I said before, hinges on
the deprivation of the right to the child and not the
deprivation of the substantive right to the parent, it
is the child's claim to bring. I appreciate --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Bergeron, I have a
basic conceptual problem, both with that response and
with your larger argument. Leaving aside how we should
classify the reimbursement right or classify
reimbursement, you make a broad distinction between the
substantive right of the child to the free appropriate
public education and on the other hand, the procedural
rights of the parent in going through the process that
ultimately comes to a conclusion for the child's
benefit.
The conceptual problem I have is that I
don't understand why it makes sense to say that the
parents have procedural rights unless that procedural --
or unless those procedural rights of the parents are in
aid of some substantive entitlement for the parents. We
give procedural protection to people in order to
vindicate some substantive interest that they can claim,
and you're, in effect, splitting those two apart.
You're saying one person has a substantive right, the
other people have procedural right. And I don't see
conceptually how you can make that split. And if you
don't make that split, then it only makes sense that the
right to the free public -- the free appropriate public
education is, as the statute in one place seems to say,
a right of the family group, the parents and the child
together, rather than the right of the child alone.
So conceptually, how do you defend the
distinction that you make between substantive rights on
one person and procedural rights in another?
MR. BERGERON: And here's how I would
explain it, Justice Souter.
The right, the substantive right is the
right to a FAPE to the child. And because the child
does not have capacity, Congress implemented a pragmatic
system to allow the parents to protect those rights.
It's derivative for the parent to protect the child's
right --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why don't we say that
they are the procedural rights of the child and the
parents are simply stepping into the child's shoes to
vindicate them?
MR. BERGERON: That is exactly what 1415(m)
says, Your Honor. That allows a transfer of rights.
And 1415(m) is at 11a and 12a of the red brief, and I
hope I've got the cite right this time. 1415(m) allows
for states to require, and Ohio does, to require the
transfer of all rights under subchapter 2 that a parent
would otherwise have, straight to the child. So
basically --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's when the child
reaches majority.
MR. BERGERON: That's right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The child is no longer a
child, the child is an adult.
MR. BERGERON: And that's my -- that's part
of what I was trying to say.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I'm sorry. You go ahead.
MR. BERGERON: Oh. Well, what I'm trying to
say is because the child lacks capacity, they can't do
all these things on their own until they reach majority.
But once they do and the rights transfer, it illustrates
that it's not really the parents' rights, it is the
child's right that they are protecting.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if -- what stands in
the way of that analysis is the text, which says all
other rights accorded to parents under this subchapter
transfer to the child.
Not only doesn't that help you, it seems to
me it hurts you. It acknowledges that there are rights
accorded to parents.
MR. BERGERON: Right. And those would be
the procedural safeguards that are delineated in the
Act.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But then you were denying
them, as I understood the argument.
MR. BERGERON: Well, let me clarify then. I
wasn't denying the existence of the procedural
safeguard. To the contrary, what I'm saying is that
they are not redressible independent of themselves in
Federal court unless -- and this is what 1415(f)(3)(E)
clarifies, is that you have to have a substantive
violation. Because if you think of a situation in which
the child is provided a FAPE, no one disputes that, but
a parent says well, you didn't invite me to a meeting,
what's your remedy there? There is no remedy. And
that's what Congress was trying to clarify.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Isn't that the problem? On
the analysis that you're coming up with, parents end up
without even the procedural rights, because you're
saying the only person who can basically invoke a
violation of procedural right is the person whose been
denied the substantive right. The parent hasn't been
denied the substantive right. Therefore, the parent
cannot invoke even the procedural right which ostensibly
on your own analysis, the parent has been given. That
can't be correct.
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor, if you look at --
I'll direct you to the DiBuo case and the Lesesne case,
I'm probably mispronouncing both of them --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but before you direct
me to cases --
MR. BERGERON: Okay.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's wrong with the
analytical point that I just made?
MR. BERGERON: Well, Your Honor, the --
that's what Congress was trying to clarify in 2004.
They did not want technical procedural violations to
eclipse the substantive rights, and so what they
provided was the substantive right is the only one that
is important.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yeah, but instead of saying
they're not eclipsed, you're saying they are totally
blocked out. Because you analysis, I thought was, in
response to my earlier objection, that the procedural
right, in fact, can only ultimately be invoked for the
vindication of the substantive right. And because the
substantive right is the child's, not the parents, it
would follow that the parents cannot even invoke their
procedural rights, and we know that that can't be
correct.
MR. BERGERON: Right, and I'm not saying
that the parent -- the parent's procedural rights are
gone. I mean, remember --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if the parent's
procedural rights are not gone, then the parents must be
able to invoke those procedural rights based on what
they claim to be a denial of some substantive
entitlement. You're saying that's the entitlement of
the child, but if the parents are going to have any
procedural right worth having, they've got to invoke it
for the purpose of vindicating that substantive right;
isn't that correct?
MR. BERGERON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. Then why do not the
parents, when they are claiming that they are aggrieved,
have as much right to make a claim that goes to the
substantive denial as to the procedural denial, simply
because the two are inseparable?
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor, because that --
again, that was what Congress was trying to clarify in
04. And if you look at the DiBuo case and the Lesesne
case cited on page 27 of the SG's brief, both those
cases make clear that notwithstanding procedural
violations, there must actually be a causation, there
must actually be substantive harm before any relief can
flow from that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does a parent have a
right to bring a 1983 action if their procedural rights
under this statute are interfered with by the state
actors?
MR. BERGERON: Your Honor, if the parent
would otherwise have a 1983 claim under 1415(l), if it
relates to an IDEA claim, there would have to be
exhaustion first.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think I understand
your argument based on 3(E), but when I look at 21a of
my blue brief there's another provision on attorneys'
fees and it's phrased in a very curious way. It says
that fees are allowed to a prevailing party who is the
parent of a child with a disability. It seems to me
that's the most difficult express language for you to
deal with. It doesn't say attorneys' fees happen to be
allowed to parents, it's to a prevailing party who is a
parent. And I understand your argument to be that a
parent can never be a prevailing party.
MR. BERGERON: That's right. And let me try
to explain why. If you look at 1411(e)(3)(E), which is
a of the red brief, and I'm sorry to keep jumping
briefs on you, that provides that litigation brought to
secure the right of the child to a FAPE is brought on
behalf of the child. So Congress added both that
section and the section you were just referring to at
the same time, and the only way to read them
harmoniously is that any action that is being brought on
behalf of the child to secure the FAPE, it's not the
parent's own action that they are bringing, they are
bringing it on their own -- on behalf of the child.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was the section you
cited?
MR. BERGERON: 1411(e)(3)(E), on 5a of the
red brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: (e)(3)(E).
MR. BERGERON: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Legal fees. The
disbursements under subparagraph (d) shall not support
legal fees, court costs, or other costs associated with
the cause of action brought on behalf of a child with a
disability to ensure a free and appropriate public
education for such child.
What do you think that proves?
MR. BERGERON: What I'm saying is Congress
recognized that when legal action is being brought to
secure FAPE, just like it's the child's right to the
FAPE under subchapter 2, it is being brought on behalf
of the child. And that's where petitioners run into
problem with the common rule law, because the common law
rule that they don't dispute is that parents cannot
bring claims on behalf of the child pro se. So they
have to find a way to abrogate, and they initially
argued in the opening brief for an exception to the
common law rule, which from my reading of the reply
brief they have abandoned. So the core issue in dispute
as far as the petitioners go is what is the nature of
the substantive right.
And I'd like to make the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There's a section you
pointed to that says disbursements under subparagraph
(d), but your brief doesn't include subparagraph (d).
MR. BERGERON: It's the high cost, one of
the high cost funds for states, Justice Ginsburg.
I'd like to make --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well then, if this
provision is limited to subparagraph (d), how can you
argue that it covers the waterfront?
MR. BERGERON: Well, Your Honor, I think
it's indicative of what Congress appreciated the claim
would look like on any level, and it's not simply saying
that those funds aren't provided under subparagraph (d).
That is the nature of the claim. Regardless of under
what section we are looking at, that is the nature of
the claim that could be brought in order to secure a
FAPE for the child, and in every circumstance, it is
brought on behalf of the child.
Your Honor, I'd like to make one point, if I
can, about the spending clause, in response to
petitioner's argument in the reply brief.
Petitioners effectively say that the
spending clause doesn't apply because this is not an
issue of liability. I'd like to direct your attention
again to Rowley, where at footnotes 11 and 26 the Court
recognized the difference between the educational
benefit which is the FAPE, and maximizing the
educational outcome.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are attorneys' fees
allowed to a parent who is bringing one of these cases
on behalf of a child pro se?
MR. BERGERON: No.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's a convoluted
question. Okay. So there's no issue under the spending
clause that a non-attorney parent would be able to claim
some sort of attorneys' fees?
MR. BERGERON: That's what -- I think there
have been four circuits who addressed that in the
context of attorney parents, and they've all said that
they cannot get fees.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So how is the
spending clause issue very significant in terms of the
exposure of the school boards?
MR. BERGERON: Well, Arlington did not limit
it to simply liability. It said repeatedly obligations
and conditions. And that's exactly what Rowley was
looking at in footnotes 11 and 26. We don't necessarily
have -- have to have a line item that there's going to
be X dollars in damage. It was simply the difference
between an educational benefit and maximizing that
benefit that triggered spending cost concerns in Rowley.
Just like in South Dakota v Dole the issue of whether
someone was 21 in order to consume alcohol was not
necessarily a liability but it was a very important
obligation or condition imposed upon the State.
And their second point regarding the
spending clause is that not every single detail needs to
be fleshed out in clear notice.
JUSTICE BREYER: So I take it your argument
is, your red brief argument is that Congress said,
states, if you get some judgments against you and they
award attorneys' fees, you pay for it, we won't? Is
that what it said?
MR. BERGERON: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: You don't pay for it, you
can't pay for it out of the grant?
MR. BERGERON: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So we're not paying
for this, you pay for it. Is that right?
MR. BERGERON: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE BREYER: States --
MR. BERGERON: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- if some people bring
claims against you under this because you didn't have a
good plan for the child and your attorneys' fees are
awarded against you, don't pay for it out of this grant.
Isn't that what you're saying it says?
MR. BERGERON: Well, Your Honor, it's a
little bit different because part of the -- part of the
real issue here is not necessarily an award of
attorneys' fees to the other party, but it's the
incurrence of attorneys' fees defending --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought what your
argument was -- and if it's not, forget it, it's just
that I don't understand it. That here the Government
says pay for this out of your own pocket, and then its
defines what you're supposed to pay out of our own
pocket is, as a parent representing a child, not his own
action.
And then later on they say, they define it
differently. They talk about prevailing party. The
parents of the prevailing party. But you say that
second phrase must mean the first phrase. Because it
wouldn't make sense for the Government to say pay for
that out of the grant but not this out of the grant.
That's your argument?
MR. BERGERON: And -- I think that's right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. It is an argument.
MR. BERGERON: And -- and just to clarify,
Congress hasn't provided any funds for this. I mean
they, they recognized in 2004 they were only funding 19
percent of the obligations of the statute, and we have
to pick up the balance of the tab.
And their other argument on the spending
clause is that it's, you don't have to flesh out
everything in the statute but here we're talking about
two core issues. One is abrogating the common rule law
and the other is creation of substantive rights to an
entirely new class of beneficiaries.
If there's ever anything that demanded clear
notice, this is it. It is much more serious and severe
than the expert fees at issue in Arlington, and school
districts and states simply have to have notice, what is
the parameter of the right that you are being requested
to recognize? And based on the briefing, and based on
what we have heard in argument, it is simply not clear
to the school districts not only what the nature of the
right is but how to apply it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's where I
have a little bit of trouble. It's not -- the
underlying right is still the same. It's the right of
the child to a free and appropriate public education.
And that can be vindicated in court actions by attorneys
who get their fees paid if they prevail, and all we're
talking about is a situation where the parents can
assert that same right when an attorney won't.
And I'm just wondering how significant
additional exposure we're talking about? And what turns
on that is whether to take the spending clause argument
seriously or not.
MR. BERGERON: Well -- and I think the
answer to that is it's still not clear to me from --
from listening to the argument today, I mean, Petitioner
acknowledged the child falls out of the equation.
This is a statute that needs to benefit the
child, and they're taking the child completely out. And
so what is the nature of this parental right? The SG
says well, it's all, it's all intertwined. But if we
look at what Petitioner said --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if you agree we're
talking about. What is the toll on the states, it seems
to me that if the state would have to pay for a lawyer,
if it lost, and that parents who brings the case is not
entitled to reimbursement, how is the state's pocketbook
affected?
MR. BERGERON: Justice Ginsburg, in
litigating this case while the Winkelmans were pro se,
we expended far greater than the $8,000 at issue in
Arlington, on our legal fees defending --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. But you
would have had to do that if they had gotten a lawyer to
take the case. What, what your spending clause argument
is, the State agreed to undertake this liability, that
they would have to provide a free and appropriate
education, that if they litigated, they would have pay
the other side's attorneys' fees. But if they knew that
in the case where an attorney wouldn't take it, the
parents could prosecute it, and that might result in
overturning their decision and that might result in
greater expense, well, in that case they would not have
bought into this deal at all. That seems a little
implausible.
MR. BERGERON: Well, Mr. Chief Justice,
remember at the time the Congress reauthorized in 2004,
every circuit that had addressed it besides the First
had agreed that parents could not bring a pro se. So
the states reasonably would not have believed,
especially in the circuits where it was decided, that
they would have to -- have to come up with these funds.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm not disputing
that it results in additional exposure. I'm just
disputing that it affects the voluntariness of their
agreement to undertake the program.
MR. BERGERON: Well, if you, in the dissent
in Arlington, they made -- Justice Breyer made a
basically materiality argument and the majority did not
seem moved by it. So I think, this is something that is
very significant, not simply on the dollars involved,
but how we apply this substantive right to parents that
Petitioners seek to have recognized.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could the court appoint
the parent guardian ad litem and just the parent proceed
as guardian ad litem?
MR. BERGERON: That wouldn't solve the issue
of, under the common law the guardian ad litem would not
have the ability to receive pro se on the common law
fees, the same as the parent. The rule is the same. So
they would still have --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The guardian ad litem
cannot proceed pro se?
MR. BERGERON: That's right. Unless they're
-- unless they have -- unless they are an attorney.
Which in many cases the appointment to someone who is an
attorney.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Bergeron, on, one of
the points you made on the spending clause argument, I
thought, was that if there are lawyers representing the
parents, the lawyers are going to screen out the more
frivolous cases. If they are not, more frivolous cases
are going to be brought. And there's -- there's an
intuitive appeal to that argument.
Do we have any -- any figures on the
comparative numbers of frivolous cases in lawyer
representation and pro se representation under the Act?
MR. BERGERON: Justice Souter, we don't
because most of the circuits were saying this is --
we're not going to allow pro se --
JUSTICE SOUTER: We don't have any First
Circuit numbers --
MR. BERGERON: No.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- versus other numbers?
MR. BERGERON: No we checked and couldn't
find anything, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Bergeron.
Mr. Andre, you have three minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JEAN-CLAUDE ANDRE,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
MR. ANDRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I would like to turn briefly to Respondents'
assertion that Petitioners somehow waived their claim to
reimbursement by not exhausting it below. We addressed
this in our reply brief, but if the Court wishes to look
at pages 78 and 88 of the joint appendix, particularly
page 78, there it is clear that the Petitioners were
seeking reimbursement in their own right.
On the page 153, that Respondent refers to,
I assume that that point in time we were now on appeal
to the second tier of the Ohio administrative
proceeding, and perhaps at that point in time, Monarch
School was actually paying for Jake's education on a
grant-like basis, because that was something that
happened in this case. And that perhaps at that point
in time Petitioners referenced reimbursement to Monarch
because Monarch had actually been expending the fund.
But by and large my clients expended the funds to
educate Jake at Monarch School, and they certainly did
exhaust that claim to reimbursement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you claiming that
hiring an attorney would be a cost, if the phrase "at no
cost to the parent," if they have to hire an attorney,
that the cost --
MR. ANDRE: Certainly. And I mean, I think
that's why Congress included the attorneys' fee
provision in 2004 that recognized that parents can be
prevailing parties. And if they prevail on establishing
that a free appropriate public education has not been
provided, then they can recover attorneys' fees as part
of their, their right to try to vindicate Congress's
purposes at no cost to them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So why didn't
Congress just add the provision making this very clear
that the Senate had passed, why did the House boot it
out of the conference bill?
MR. ANDRE: We don't know. The legislative
record is entirely silent. But one plausible inference
could be, could be reached based on looking at the
addition of attorney's fees provision and the timing of
the Maroni decision in the First Circuit. Maroni came
down after the parental lay representation provision was
proposed by the Senate.
Maroni was the first court of appeals case
to recognize that parents may litigate these cases pro
se. The way Maroni did it however was by adopting our
primary argument here today, which is that parents
possess the right to -- to sue in their own name, as pro
se litigants, not as lay representatives of their
children, and seek to enforce the full bundle of rights.
Congress very well could have looked at
Maroni and said aha, that's what we intended all along;
Maroni got it right, and then they just put -- Congress
just put the thumb on the scale a little bit by enacting
the attorneys fee provision which made it clear that
parents can be, or are the prevailing party if the
plaintiffs prevail in an IDEA action.
Finally, I would like to address two -- two
points about the spending clause. Of course we believe
the spending clause is totally inapplicable, but I want
to respond to Respondent's suggest that we're advocating
creation of a new substantive right here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why do you think
it's totally inapplicable?
MR. ANDRE: We think that this Court's
spending clause jurisprudence is concerned with
providing clear notice to states with respect to
liability and certain fiscal obligations. And what
Respondent is complaining about here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Please --
MR. ANDRE: Oh, what Respondent is
complaining about here is essentially a disparate
impact. And this Court has never recognize a disparate
impact claim under the spending clause.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think it is
not violated, not that it doesn't apply for some reason?
There is no doubt this is spending clause legislation,
right?
MR. ANDRE: Well, absolutely spending clause
legislation. But we believe that the clear notice
concerns of the spending clause are not even implicated.
But that if the clear notice concerns were implicated,
the statute is -- clear.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
[ Whereupon, the case in the above-titled
