IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ROBERT LOUIS MARRAMA, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 05-996
CITIZENS BANK OF :
MASSACHUSETTS, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 6, 2006
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DAVID G. BAKER, ESQ., Boston, Mass; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR., ESQ., Hartford, Conn; on
behalf of the Respondents.
LISA S. BLATT, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DAVID G. BAKER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 26
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
LISA S. BLATT, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting Respondents 45
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID G. BAKER, ESQ.
On behalf of Petitioner 53
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first today in Marrama versus Citizens Bank of
Massachusetts. Mr. Baker.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID G. BAKER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BAKER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Section 706(a) of the Bankruptcy Code
provides that a debtor may convert a case under chapter
to a case under any other chapter of the Bankruptcy Code
at any time if the case has not been converted previously
from another chapter, and that any waiver of the right
to convert a case under the subsection is unenforceable.
Other subsections of section 706 give rules for the
Court to decide about conversion in the case where some
party other than the debtor requests conversion of the
case and also provides that the conversion must lead to
a chapter to which that debtor is qualified to be a
debtor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Baker, as I
understand it subsequent to the grant of certiorari in
this case, your client filed for relief under Chapter 13
and that relief was denied. You're now seeking under --
your petition seeks a conversion to Chapter 13 and I
guess I wonder what relief is still open to you.
MR. BAKER: In the present case or the new
case?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What relief is open
to you in this case? In other words, you're trying to
get a conversion to Chapter 13. Subsequently, you've
tried to apply for relief under Chapter 13 and that's
been denied. Why isn't the case moot in the sense that
that relief is not available to you now?
MR. BAKER: The circumstances of the new
case are entirely different. In fact, in that -- in the
present -- the new case, the court decided that he was not
eligible because his debt limit exceeded the statutory
limitations that exist section 109(e). There is a
three-year time span between the two, and we believe
that the existing case is not moot because he still has
remedies that he can obtain in Chapter 13.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if he isn't
eligible -- the new case determined that he was not
eligible because his debts were too high. He didn't
incur additional debts between the time of the
proceeding one and proceeding two?
MR. BAKER: Yes, Your Honor, he did.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Or he didn't reduce the
debt. If we have a finding from the bankruptcy court
that he is ineligible, that is number one condition
to convert into Chapter 13. If you don't meet that
condition, that's the end of the matter.
MR. BAKER: I wouldn't say it would be the
end of the matter in the present case because the
eligibility was never questioned below, was never a
factor below.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But now there has been a
finding, and it's an essential finding, that there be
eligibility. And wouldn't the bankruptcy court's
findings in the later case have preclusive effect?
MR. BAKER: In the prior case? I would say
no, Your Honor. First, because as I mentioned, the
issue of eligibility within the monetary limits was
never raised below. And in fact, if you look at his
schedules in the supplemental joint appendix, he is
clearly within the statutory limits based -- just
looking at his schedules.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's a question you
can argue on appeal in -- from the recent decisions, but
for the moment you have a bankruptcy court making that
determination, which I think would be preclusive on
another bankruptcy court.
MR. BAKER: The -- well, the -- the
bankruptcy court made a decision in the current case,
the new case, but they haven't dismissed it. Dismissal
is in fact on appeal to the District Court for the
District of Massachusetts. The reason is, in our view
is that the bankruptcy court in the new case incorrectly
looked back to the claims that had been filed in the prior
case.
Now, it is a difficult issue in some
respects because there is case law at least in
Massachusetts or the First Circuit that says a debtor
does not have standing to object to claims in a Chapter
case. So the fact that a number of claims were
filed and argued doesn't relate to, in a prior case,
does not have a preclusive effect in the new case.
Now we did, in fact, object to quite a
number of claims and the eligibility, and I think that
ultimately once the claim objections are resolved, we
will be within the statutory limits.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If the decision is
affirmed on appeal to the First Circuit, do you think
you could still argue that there's qualification for
Chapter 13, after the court of appeals has affirmed a
determination that there isn't?
MR. BAKER: I'm -- I don't quite follow the
question. Would you mind restating it?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We have now a judgment that
this debtor is ineligible for Chapter 13. If that
judgment is affirmed on appeal to the court of appeals,
can you nonetheless argue that somehow there is no
preclusive effect?
MR. BAKER: Yes, Your Honor, because there's
a three-year difference between the two and
substantially different facts. The -- we have to go
back, I think, to the case that's at bar, because it is
those claims, the claims that were filed in the current
case that are the issue. As I say, we are in the process
of doing objections to those claims and I think that
ultimately we will come within them.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They're not at issue as far
as this mootness question goes. I mean, you're seeking
to have the right to file under 13.
And if, in fact, there's no eligibility to
file under 13, you're asking for the impossible. The
case is simply -- you know -- it's just air. So I
guess, perhaps you rely on the fact that the case is
still on appeal. Should we not take as a given that
there is a judgment that you don't qualify for 13, and
yet you're coming before us asking us to say that you
can apply under Chapter 13. It doesn't make any sense.
MR. BAKER: Well, I would respectfully say --
suggest that it does, Your Honor, because once -- we don't
really get to the eligibility question until the court
below considers it in the context of the case that's at bar.
We have to, as I say, we are in the process of objecting to
claims and resolving them. Now the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, didn't you make that
argument to the bankruptcy court that found that you
were not eligible?
MR. BAKER: No, Your Honor, because as I
mentioned before, the case law in the First Circuit up
to this point has held that a Chapter 7 debtor does not
have standing to object to claims. Now in the new case,
in fact, the bankruptcy court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's what I'm asking. A
Chapter 7 debtor doesn't, but a Chapter 13 debtor
presumably does. So didn't you make the same argument
to the bankruptcy court.
MR. BAKER: In the old case, yes, once we
converted the chapter.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they rejected it?
MR. BAKER: No. I beg your pardon, Your
Honor. No, we did not address eligibility in the
present case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't care about the
present case. I care about the Chapter 13 case in which
you have been found not to qualify for Chapter 13
treatment. Didn't you make before that court the same
argument you're making now that some of the debts
shouldn't be counted.
MR. BAKER: I did.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They rejected it, right?
MR. BAKER: Pardon?
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they rejected it?
MR. BAKER: The bankruptcy court did reject
it, yes. But they rejected it because, as I say, up to
that point the case law had held that we did not have
standing to object to the claims, so we were bound by
what was there.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you said it was only a
Chapter 7 debtor who couldn't object.
MR. BAKER: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you are applying under
Chapter 13.
MR. BAKER: Right. What I'm trying to say
is in the previous Chapter 7 case we lacked standing to
object to those claims and that in the new Chapter 13
case the court took the Chapter 7 case claims and said,
you're bound by these in the new chapter 13 case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Didn't you object to that
and say you should look at these claims afresh?
MR. BAKER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And what did the court say?
Did it say it had to or that it did so and still found
them over the limit.
MR. BAKER: It -- the bankruptcy court in
the new case said -- pardon? The bankruptcy court in
the new case said that there are circumstances under
which a debtor would have standing. This was in effect
a new rule of law for that, for this district.  So
subsequent to that decision we did, in fact, object to
quite a number of claims and substantially reduced the
total of those claims, and I think that once --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What did the bankruptcy
court say?
MR. BAKER: The bankruptcy court sustained
our objections to those claims and in fact reduced the
total substantially.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand that.
But did it reduce it to a level that you qualified for
Chapter 13 treatment?
MR. BAKER: We are not finished with the
claims objection process. I believe that once we are --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course you are. They've
rendered a decision. How could you not be finished with
the claims objection process if the bankruptcy court has
rendered a final decision.
MR. BAKER: Because the bankruptcy court
rendered a final decision which is on appeal in the new
case. We are objecting to the Chapter 7 claims in the
old case. I apologize if this is confusing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is terribly confusing.
It seems to me that the Chapter 13 bankruptcy court had
the responsibility for determining whether you qualified
under the, you know, under the amount of debt.
MR. BAKER: And it did so by reference to
the claims that had been filed in the previous Chapter 7
case. We can't object to claims in a Chapter 13 case
that haven't been filed. So procedurally, we had to go
back to the Chapter 7 case and do the claims objections
within the context of the old Chapter 7 case.
Now, in the Chapter 13 case we used the --
the bankruptcy court used the total of those claims that
had been filed in the Chapter 7 case to determine
eligibility in the 13.
In doing so, the bankruptcy court basically
announced a new rule of law that the claims that had
been filed would be essentially I suppose, res judicata
in the subsequent case, but that in some cases a
Chapter 7 debtor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you objected to that, I
gather?
MR. BAKER: Sorry?
JUSTICE SCALIA: You objected to that, to
that ruling?
MR. BAKER: Not necessarily, because it does
give you a vehicle to go back to the old Chapter 7 case
and do the procedural claims objections in that case,
which is what we did, and we substantially reduced the
total of the claims.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What is the status of the
Chapter 7 case? I was under the impression it had been
dismissed and a determination of no discharge had
been made.
MR. BAKER: A determination of no discharge
had been entered. However, it was an asset case, so it
remains open, it remains open at this point, until the
Chapter 7 trustee makes a distribution to creditors or
files his final report with the court. It has not been
dismissed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there's a
determination that you're not entitled to a discharge?
That has been made.
MR. BAKER: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: If we just could go to the
merits for a second here. You're saying this word,
where it says, the word is you "may convert," and that
means you can convert no matter what?
MR. BAKER: The plain language of the
statute says that, yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: No matter what? Okay,
suppose they repeal Chapter 13 before you convert. Then
can you convert?
MR. BAKER: I'm sorry. Would you repeat
that?
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm just producing examples
where it's clear you can't convert. Now, suppose
Congress -- there is no Chapter 13. Could you convert
then?
MR. BAKER: Not if there's no Chapter 13.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, okay. Suppose he dies.
Could you convert then?
MR. BAKER: If the debtor dies?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. No inheritance, no
nothing.
MR. BAKER: Well, there is a rule, I believe
it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Even though there's no such
person existing any more. He's gone and his whole
family is gone, and there's no inheritors, nothing.
Then can he convert? No.
MR. BAKER: Right. I think the rule 2009
says, the Federal Rules of Bankruptcy --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm trying to produce
ridiculous examples. Maybe -- all right, so you say
even if he's dead and there's no family he still could
convert. That's an extreme test of my hypothetical, but
okay. What about if, in fact, he goes insane? No.
MR. BAKER: Well, again, Your Honor, the
rule says --
JUSTICE BREYER: What about if, in fact, the
conversion is part of a scheme to defraud millions of
people in a foreign country because it will be viewed as
a signal that they should mail their life savings into a
particular account in Switzerland? Can he convert then?
MR. BAKER: The statute is plain, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: You say yes on that?
MR. BAKER: I would say yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Even though it's going to
bilk people out of millions of dollars?
MR. BAKER: I think that the statute is
plain and says that the debtor may convert.
JUSTICE BREYER: No matter what? Even if
he's dead, even if he's insane?
MR. BAKER: Even if he's insane.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well alright, then I can't
get anywhere with my hypotheticals.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: I would have thought the
answer was no, but there we are.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Baker, couldn't the
-- let's say the conversion goes through. The first
thing that the bankruptcy court does in the Chapter 7
converted to Chapter 13 is say: I'm going to dismiss
this suit, the -- the bad faith taint stays with the
case, it doesn't get -- you can't erase it; and so back
you go to the Chapter 7. Why couldn't the bankruptcy
court now sitting as a Chapter 13 court say: We're not
going to let a debtor who has conducted himself in bad
faith proceed in this court?
MR. BAKER: The bankruptcy court could
certainly do that. The procedural safeguards of due
process require, obviously, notice and hearing of the
court's reasons for wanting to say that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but your claim doesn't
rest on a due process denial of hearing does it? That's
not, that's not the question you brought to us. So it
seems to me that Justice Ginsburg's question is not
answered by saying, well, he'd get a hearing in that
case. The fact remains that in that case the, as I
understand it, the judge in Chapter 13 could immediately
deconvert to Chapter 7, couldn't he?
MR. BAKER: Well, I wouldn't say he could
immediately reconvert. Again, there is the due process
requirement that the debtor have an opportunity to be
heard on the issue.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But due process is not the
issue here. The fact is the bankruptcy court could
deconvert or reconvert to Chapter 7, in effect,
following the election that the debtor makes. That's
so, isn't it?
MR. BAKER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well then, why would we
have a system as ridiculous as to preclude the court
from looking at fraud or bad faith at the moment of
election, go through the paperwork and the folderol of
converting to 13, and immediately turn around,
admittedly having the power, to deconvert? That would
be a rather foolish system.
MR. BAKER: Well, perhaps, but it is the
system that Congress has given us. Congress has said
the debtor may convert at any time so long as it has not
been converted previously.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When cases are
reconverted to Chapter 7, is that typically done before
or after the filing of the Chapter 13 plan?
MR. BAKER: Most of the time, a plan is -- I
don't do it this way, but most practitioners will file a
plan at the same time as they file the notice, the
motion to convert.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But they don't have to.
MR. BAKER: They don't have to.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And the deconversion could
be done prior to the filing of the plan?
MR. BAKER: I suppose arguably it could. In
my view, the statutory provisions of section 1307 have to
be applied to the question of conversion. So I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Creditors -- under
Chapter 13 one of the prerequisites to approval of the
plan is that the creditors get at least as much as they
would have gotten under Chapter 7, right?
MR. BAKER: That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So presumably the
creditors might want to see what the Chapter 13 plan
looks like themselves.
MR. BAKER: Exactly. Exactly. Exactly.
And I think it's the Tenth Circuit Bankruptcy
Appellate Panel noted that sometimes a problem debtor
files a plan and gets it confirmed, pays creditors,
and everybody winds up better off.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could the district
court -- pardon me. Could the bankruptcy court make
that same determination in deciding whether or not to
allow the Chapter 7 proceeding to be converted? He
could make this inquiry in a Chapter 7 proceeding? He
says: I don't think you should be able to convert
because there's a fraud, but I'll look at how the
creditors come out. Could he do that? And then you
don't have the specter that Justice Souter referred to
of this transfer back and then the transfer back, which
is a waste of time.
MR. BAKER: Well, again, the statute says
that the debtor may convert except in certain
circumstances. I think that the requirement of a motion
to convert a case gives the court the procedural
mechanism for looking at the case, seeing, making sure
that the debtor --
JUSTICE BREYER: But there is a difference,
and this is -- assume with me, which apparently you
don't agree, that everywhere in law there are implied
exceptions for unusual circumstances. I have never
found an instance where you couldn't think of some
exception that they didn't see. You could not bring a
thing if you were insane or dead or if a death would
ensue or a murder. Assume that, all right.
Then the question would be, well, what about
this instance? And I think the strongest instance --
the strongest argument for saying there's is no
exception here is the argument that the trustee
discovers that this individual is behaving dishonestly,
that he's hidden assets. Maybe he has a safe deposit
box and he has a key and the key -- the key will allow
him to get diamonds out of the safe deposit box and hide
them. Under 7, the trustee has the key. As soon as you
convert it to 13 the key is given back to the debtor,
who has been shown dishonest.
Now, assuming you're going to have some
exceptions, why isn't that a very, very powerful one?
MR. BAKER: Because ultimately the Chapter
trustee has the same powers of the Chapter 7 trustee
with the exception, as Your Honor is pointing out, of
possession of the property in the bankruptcy estate.
But that's how Congress wrote the statute. We should
not ignore Congress's command about the process of
converting and look for exceptions before we proceed to
go back to the appellate court --
JUSTICE ALITO: If I could come back to a
prior question. Unless there is some different
procedure required when -- between the two situations of
denial of conversion from 7 to 13 and allowing
conversion but with immediate reconversion back to 7,
unless there's some difference between that's required
by the code in those two situations, maybe it is because
you have to -- in the reconversion situation, you have
to wait until the plan is filed. Maybe it's because the
bad faith doesn't carry over.
But unless there's some difference, I don't see
what this case is about.
MR. BAKER: Well, ultimately the case is
about the language of the statute and whether the court
should apply it as written. And I think --
JUSTICE ALITO: You can't provide any reason
why there's a difference between those two?
MR. BAKER: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE ALITO: You deny -- do you dispute
the fact that the bankruptcy court could simultaneously
convert on the motion of the debtor from 7 to 13 and
during the 20-day period that's required by the rule,
the rules, reconvert? Do you dispute that, for bad
faith?
MR. BAKER: I dispute that the court could
do it sua sponte and without notice and an opportunity
for a hearing.
JUSTICE ALITO: If it gives notice and
an opportunity for a hearing during the 20 day period --
you have to give 20 days notice before the conversion
takes place; is that correct, from 7 to 13?
MR. BAKER: I believe that's correct. When
you file a motion, a 20 day notice is required, yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: If it has the hearing during
that period, you don't dispute that the court could do
that, or do you?
MR. BAKER: Well, again we come to the
question of when the plan gets filed. The plan isn't
filed until after it's converted, according to the
rules.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But here there was a
hearing on the motion to convert, right? There was a
hearing?
MR. BAKER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And as I understand it,
there was no objection to the character of that hearing?
There was no request for an evidentiary hearing? So
there was a hearing. Now, does that get wiped out too,
just the way, the determination that you couldn't
convert?
MR. BAKER: The procedure I would, I would
expect to see is that if the court saw an issue of fact
with respect to whether the case had been converted or
whether the debtor was eligible for it to be a debtor in
the chapter to which he seeks conversion, then an
evidentiary hearing would be required.
If -- the fact that there was no evidentiary
hearing in the particular case here, I think, I think we
have to go back to recognize the fact that most issues
in bankruptcy court are decided summarily on motion
practice.
And it is my feeling that, the
jurisprudence of rule 56 has to apply. If a court
sees that there are disputed issues of fact, the court
must schedule an evidentiary hearing. It cannot, it
cannot simply grant summary judgment without furtherance
issue of fact. So this is why I say that,
that on these two -- the two particular points -- and
obviously, the question of whether it has been
previously converted is very easy to determine. But as
previously discussed, the issue of eligibility, whether
the claims and the debt is within the statutory
limitation, is an issue of fact that ultimately might
require an evidentiary hearing.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But your case as I
understand it, your case does not turn on the question
whether there was or was not, should or should not have
been a hearing in this case, an evidentiary hearing in
this case; is that correct?
MR. BAKER: That's correct. That's correct,
because in our view the schedules -- excuse me -- in our
view the schedules in this case clearly indicate that it
-- that he was within the statutory limitations, at
least as far as the schedules go.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. -- Mr. Baker, I have -- I
have a question on a matter that really upsets me
and causes me to wonder how, you know, how much we can
rely upon your description here. You claimed in the
petition that the reason your client filed under Chapter
rather than 13 was that he was unemployed at the time.
And that he decided to go to 13 after he became
employed.
Yet, on -- as shown in the supplemental
appendix, when he filed under Chapter 7, under penalty
of perjury, he said that he was employed, and at
the meeting of the creditors, he confirmed under oath
that he was employed.
What was it? Was he employed or not
employed?
MR. BAKER: On the petition date itself, he
was not. And if you look at schedule I, which is at
page 30 of the supplemental joint appendix, at the
bottom line, bottom of the -- and it indicates that he
was in the process of having a second tenant in his
rental property and that he was beginning a job at about
the time the petition --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It says employment,
occupation, name of employer: Capital Carpet and
Flooring. How long employed, five months. Address of
employment: Woburn, Massachusetts. It also says the
same thing on page 18 of the supplemental appendix. And
also with the meeting of creditors. If you look at the
joint appendix at 64a, he says the same thing that he
was employed. Was he employed or not employed?
MR. BAKER: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does he go around swearing
he was when he wasn't?
MR. BAKER: No, he was -- he was not employed
at the time. If you look at his page 18, as you
point out, it says at the bottom the income given is
estimated based on a new job which is about to start.
He had -- he had been the principal of a company called RLM
Flooring, which had been closed by Citizens Bank. So he
was, in fact, unemployed because Citizens Bank had taken
all of the assets of the corporation and shut it down.
And this put him of course behind on his mortgage so he
was very concerned about finding employment so he could
in fact, keep -- get his mortgage current and then
retain his home.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Look on page 64a of the
appendix, the meeting of creditors. Trustee says okay,
and you now work for another entity, Capital Carpet and
Flooring, sir? And Mark Marrama says yes.
MR. BAKER: Right. And between the -- between
the time of petition at the meeting of creditors which
was approximately six -- six weeks later, he became
employed.
As I say, he had a mortgage. He had children
to whom he has to pay child support. At the time he had
a wife he owed a lot of money to. He was concerned about
having employment so he could in fact meet those
obligations.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask, I may have
missed some of the colloquy here -- is it correct that
he would not be eligible to file a-- to have a,
institute a Chapter 13 proceeding if he had unsecured
debts of over a certain amount?
MR. BAKER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And what if at the time he
makes the motion to convert, which you say he has an
absolute right to make, what if the record then
disclosed that he had debts exceeding that amount? What
should the bankruptcy judge do in that case?
MR. BAKER: The bankruptcy judge should
examine the claims that have been filed, if any, do
the arithmetic, offer the debtor an opportunity --
JUSTICE STEVENS: He concludes they're
over the amount? So it is clear under the record. What
should he do then?
MR. BAKER: He should deny conversion.
JUSTICE STEVENS: He should what?
MR. BAKER: He should deny conversion. If in
fact --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So he does not have an
absolute right in all cases to convert, then.
MR. BAKER: It's absolute except in the
two circumstances stated in the statute.
One of which, is as Your Honor is pointing out, the
eligibility, the other is that if it has been previously
converted he does not have that right.
If the Court has no further questions, I'll
reserve my remaining time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Baker.
MR. BAKER: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Brunstad.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF G. ERIC BRUNSTAD,
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. BRUNSTAD: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The bankruptcy court need not sit idly by
and grant a motion which is part of an abusive scheme.
The power of the court is there to deny such a motion.
It is there by statute under section 105; it is there
because the courts have always had power.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Under -- you think
5 is an affirmative grant of power?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think the second sentence
of 105(a) supports the traditional powers that courts
have had to grant relief, to prevent or to deny relief
to prevent abuse or to remedy bad faith conduct. The
fact that the debtor has the authorization under section 706
to convert a case cannot be construed to prevent the
court from sua sponte taking action to prevent abuse --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: 105(a) is much more
limited than that. It is only if you take the second
clause of that out of context and quote it, as has been
done, that it looks like an affirmative grant. It says:
"No provision of this title providing for the raising of
an issue by a party in interest shall be construed to
preclude the court from taking sua sponte other action."
That's a much more limited, narrow provision telling you
not to imply a negative pregnant from a requirement
that a particular party raise an issue. I -- as a
--
source of sweeping powers to, to basically act as a
roving commission in equity, I think that's a
mis-citation.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, Chief Justice Roberts,
I think that in order to understand 106(a), the second
sentence, completely, I think it is important to
understand it was added to 105 in 1986 in response to a
number of decisions that were holding that the courts
did not have the -- the bankruptcy courts did not have
the authority to sua sponte take action to prevent abuse,
to monitor their own calendars, to make sure that
inappropriate things weren't happening, and that Senator
Hatch when he introduced this legislation which was
ultimately enacted, the goal was to overturn cases like
the Second Circuit's decision in Grissom to provide
expressly and perhaps not as clearly as perhaps they
intended, to give the courts this power. But I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Was that Second Circuit's
decision a decision that said the court didn't have the
power because it had not been moved to take that action
by the party who had the responsibility for raising the
issue? Was that the basis for the Second Circuit's
decision?
MR. BRUNSTAD: In part, yes. The court also
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then -- then you haven't
contradicted what the Chief Justice suggested.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, I think -- I think
5(a), the second sentence is worded the way that it
is. It doesn't say exactly that the courts may take any
action of sua sponte. It says shall not be construed;
the fact that a party has the right to make an action shall
not be construed to deny the court the right sua sponte to
take an action. But I think that the implication of the
statute is clear. There is this background principle which
applies not only in bankruptcy cases but in trial court
cases in the district courts everywhere, that this Court
recognized in Chambers, that it has specific application
in this Court's jurisprudence in bankruptcy in Pepper
versus Litton and other cases, that the bankruptcy
courts may take action to prevent abuse. And in fact,
they must do so. Because by granting a motion, by
sitting back and allowing the court to grant relief that
furthers an abusive scheme in essence makes the court
complicit in the fraud or misdealing. We can't have that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do you do about
the different structures, wording between 706(a) and
6(b)? I mean, this provision says debtor may. The
other provisions say that a debtor may ask a court to
order, and it suggests a difference in who has the
primary responsibility, whether it is a motion of the
Court or whether it is an independent action.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Mr. Chief Justice, I think
that the drafting conventions between the two subsections
is key. 706(a) says the debtor may convert. Whereas
other sections of the code, like 1307(b), other
provisions, provide that upon request of the debtor,
the court shall take some particular action. Here the
use of the "May" -- I think the word "may" properly
signals discretion in the court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think under
those other provisions the court doesn't have this
inherent power or the implicit power from 105(a) that
you're arguing for here?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, if you look at section
07(b), upon request of the debtor the court shall
dismiss the case, that is an absolute right. And for a
clear reason. Nobody can force a debtor to continue in
Chapter 13 against the debtor's will because Chapter 13
requires the debtor to work to pay off creditors. That
would violate the 13th Amendment. So there would be no
circumstance where someone could block a debtor from
getting out from Chapter 13, for constitutional reasons.
That's a special case. That is why Congress drafted
07(b) the way that it did.
Contrast that with section 706 where the
court said the debtor may convert. Now, there are,
there are requirements that the debtor has to comply in
order to convert, statutory, but there is also, a debtor
cannot have an absolute right to convert if it would be
part of an abusive scheme. I think the direct analogy is
this Court's decision in Pepper versus Litton. There a
fraudulent party wanted the Court to allow a claim as
part of a fraudulent scheme, and this Court unanimously
said no we're not going to allow that, even though there
was a subsequent remedy further on in the process.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you, if given
that the court has express statutory authority to
reconvert from 13 back to 7, why should we take the leap
of conferring inherent equitable authority to do
something, when the statute addresses it in a much more
specific way?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Two primary reasons, Your
Honor. The first reason is that it would be just
pointless wheel spinning.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, maybe, maybe
not. I mean, they convert. He comes up with a plan
under 13 that looks better to creditors. I mean, just
because there's fraud that offends the court and prompts
it to take action prior to conversion doesn't mean that
that's going to be the same situation after conversion.
MR. BRUNSTAD: But the debtor could argue in
the context of the motion to convert, well, I would like
to propose a Chapter 13 plan, perhaps the misconduct
wasn't that severe, and the court can take that into
consideration allowing the debtor to proceed. But where
as here you have a clear case of abuse, the court should
be entitled to nip it in the bud at that particular
point in time. Allowing the court to senselessly say,
"Oh, go ahead and convert -- "
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if it might
injure the creditors.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, the court can take that
into account. The court is not -- is not shackled under
section 706 to deny conversion, it can consider various
factors. If all the creditors were to come up and say:
"We know the debtor has been abusing the bankruptcy
system, but we think you should allow the conversion to
a Chapter 13 case because perhaps that will work for the
particular circumstances." But whereas here there was
no such thing, the creditors were saying don't allow
conversion, this is part of an abusive scheme. The
trustee was saying don't allow conversion, this is part
of an abusive scheme, the bankruptcy court -- if the
court had signed the order, then that affects the
integrity of the court.
Is the court itself now not participating by
allowing it to happen, this sort of fraudulent scheme?
The court should be able to nip it in the bud. Debtors
who are --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What limitations
would you recognize on this inherent authority to take
action? Where do they come from?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well I think that --
Mr. Chief Justice, I think that they're the same sorts
of limitations that require the district court, when it
is considering invocation of its inherent powers,
whether to exercise them or not, we have always sort of
recognized a special situation for bad faith conduct and
clearly abusive schemes. Where those occur as in this
case, the bankruptcy court looks at the circumstances,
holds a hearing as was held this case, considers the
views of the parties who are involved, and then decides.
Now it is a relatively high bar. You know,
bad faith -- it is a continuum. Where you have the
honest but unfortunate debtor, abides by all the rules,
clearly no bad faith implication would apply. At
the other end of the spectrum where you have a debtor
who conceals assets, doesn't disclose, it's found out in
bankruptcy and then as soon as the trustee finds out and
is hot on the debtor's trail, then seeks to convert to
get out from bankruptcy, well, there you have a
clear-cut case of abuse that can't be tolerated.
Now I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Brunstad, are you going
to address the mootness point? Do you think the case is
moot?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Scalia. I think
candidly, the case is not moot. There is a good reason
why we do not allow in our system two separate
bankruptcy cases to be pending at the same time. Once a
first bankruptcy case has started, the court
jurisdiction attaches its exclusive jurisdiction, and I
think the second bankruptcy case that was filed while
the first bankruptcy case was still pending was filed
without jurisdiction and there was actually no
jurisdiction, because of the prior existing case.
Additionally, I think we have to recognize
that there were different debt levels at different
times. I don't know exactly what they were, but for the
first case there was debt level A. About three years
later, there was debt level B, which may well have been
higher. On remand if the debtor were to succeed, which
I hope the Court does not allow the debtor to proceed,
or succeed here, but on remand if it were determined
that with the first case the debt levels were properly
below the limits under 109(e), then the debtor would be
eligible to convert as far as that criteria is
concerned. We do not know absolutely that that would
not be able to be satisfied in the existing case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did you make the
jurisdictional objection before the second bankruptcy
court?
MR. BRUNSTAD: We did not participate in the
second case and make that objection, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How so?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think that it was
primarily, it was, the debtor was litigating and we did
not make the jurisdictional argument.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I find that extraordinary.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So it wouldn't be
before the First Circuit.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That particular issue, I
think the appeal of the second case is pending before
the district court. I think that the bankruptcy judge
disposed of the case pretty summarily and decided that
while this particular debtor, just looking at the
schedules, does not have the eligibility requirements
for the second case, and therefore dismissed it.
That does not necessarily preclude a finding
upon the facts in the first case which is still pending,
that it could be converted. I think candidly, I need to
say that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It's hardly a summary
disposition. The opinion goes on for pages and pages.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, this particular
bankruptcy judge obviously had a lot of experience with
this particular debtor, having presided over the first
case as well, Justice Ginsburg. So I think the
bankruptcy court was very fully apprised of the facts
and circumstances surrounding the case, with the record
and having written several opinions already in the first
bankruptcy case which was still pending.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This case, your case?
MR. BRUNSTAD: The current case today, yes,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this question.
If the remedy of not allowing them to convert to Chapter
is denied, are there other remedies that the
bankruptcy court can impose against the debtor who
engages in misconduct of this kind?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Stevens, but
they're not tailored to this particular problem or
abuse. They are remedies, for example, the denial of
the discharge for concealing assets under section 727.
But that won't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are there any criminal
sanctions?
MR. BRUNSTAD: There might be criminal
sanctions for willful -- basically, in essence, it's
sort of an idea of theft, you know, by not disclosing
assets, but it's a relatively high bar for criminality.
But that won't protect the creditors in the Chapter 7
case.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then how are the creditors
hurt by this series of events?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, the creditors are hurt
because in the chapter 7 case, once the bankruptcy case
is filed, the trustee takes possession of all the
debtor's property, which becomes property of the estate.
The trustee's role is to liquidate the property and
distribute the proceeds to creditors. When the case is
converted to Chapter 13, under 1306, the property
revests in the debtor, including any concealed property.
At that point, under section 348, upon conversion, the
Chapter 7 trustee is disenfranchised. His services
terminate. What debtors in bankruptcy who are
perpetuating this kind of concealment scheme want you to
do is say oh no, you can go ahead and convert, and then
maybe we'll deal with it later, because maybe later on
in the proceedings something will happen. The Chapter
trustee might not be apprised of it.
The case might go to a different bankruptcy
judge. In some jurisdictions, the Chapter 13 docket is
heard by an entirely separate bankruptcy judge. They
would like to get the benefit of delay in conversion,
because perhaps they can get away with it in the
subsequent Chapter 13 case. Or alternatively in the
Chapter 13 case, if the debtor doesn't file a plan, then
the Chapter 13 trustee, who may have hundreds and
hundreds of Chapter 13 cases he or she is responsible
for, on a check list might simply check off no plan
filed, case dismissed, in which case the creditors don't
get the benefit of the liquidation, they don't get the
benefit of the assets being recovered, they don't get
equality of distribution under the Chapter 7 scheme, and
the debtor's fraud is in essence gotten away with. So
that is why, when a motion to convert comes up and the
bankruptcy court sees --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Wouldn't a Chapter 7 case
be refiled immediately?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Not necessarily, Your Honor.
Not necessarily. The debtor could move to another
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But the creditors aren't
--
going to let him just run away with the assets, are
they?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, Justice Stevens, in
many many Chapter 7 cases, in many many bankruptcy
cases, you have creditors, most of the creditors may
hold claims of $500, $1,000, $3,000. This case is
unique because there happened to be a creditor, Citizens
Bank, who was owed hundreds of thousands of dollars who
had an interest in pursuing the case. In many other
cases -- that's why -- one of the reasons why we have a
Chapter 7 trustee, to represent the interest of myriad small
claimants who collectively have no individual incentive
to really incur all the costs to monitor the system.
By converting the case from 7 to 13,
disenfranchising that representative of all the
creditors, the debtor who wants to play the game of
concealing the assets, and catch me if you can, can in
essence get away with it. This bankruptcy judge
understood this. This bankruptcy judge denied the
conversion so we would keep the case in Chapter 7, the
Chapter 7 trustee could do his job, collect the assets
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Could the Chapter 7
trustee be appointed the trustee in the Chapter 13, the
same trustee who has now been -- he's terminated because
the Chapter 7 has been converted. Could the court in
the Chapter 13 format appoint the same trustee?
MR. BRUNSTAD: No, Justice Ginsburg. There
is a standing Chapter 13 trustee in Chapter 13 cases
that handles all the Chapter 13 cases, unless for some
reason that Chapter 13 trustee must recuse him or
herself. Under section 348, once the case is converted
from 7 to 13, the Chapter 7 trustee services are
terminated.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What does the trustee do?
He's not really a trustee under 13, is he?
MR. BRUNSTAD: The Chapter 13 trustee --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, the property
doesn't vest in him, you've told it. It remains in the
ownership of the debtor?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Scalia. The
Chapter 13 trustee is probably characterized mostly an
administrative person, who supervises to see that the
Chapter 13 procedures are complied with, has the debtor
filed the Chapter 13 plan. If not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He's called a trustee,
though?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Correct, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well that's really not his
capacity.
MR. BRUNSTAD: In practical reality, that's
correct, Justice Scalia. What the Chapter 13 trustee
does is, if a plan is not filed, moves to dismiss the case.
If a plan is filed, may look at the plan. If the
plan is confirmed, acts as the disbursing agent. The
debtor typically makes payments under the plan to the
Chapter 13 trustee. The Chapter 13 trustee then makes
distributions to creditors. And on Chapter 13 day in
many jurisdictions, one day a week or every other week,
the Chapter 13 trustee will come to court with hundreds
and hundreds and hundreds of files.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's called Chapter 13 day?
MR. BRUNSTAD: In many places it is, Your
Honor, and they have a Chapter 13 bankruptcy judge.
Often it's assigned to the most junior bankruptcy judge
sitting in the particular jurisdiction. With hundreds
and hundreds of cases, the Chapter 13 trustee has
neither the incentive nor the resources to do the things
that a Chapter 7 trustee does every single day. And not
only that, the Chapter 13 trustee does not have the
power to go after collecting all of the property and
liquidating it. It's denied that power under the
statutory scheme.
So it makes no sense. It's pointless to say
we must -- the bankruptcy judge must idly sit by, grant
a motion that's part of this abusive scheme, allow the
case to be converted to Chapter 13, hold another
hearing, have a second set of papers perhaps, only to
send the case back to Chapter 7.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The sense it makes
is that that's what the statute provides, and rather
than relying on this alleged inherent power that
apparently is not boundless, and that the bounds of
which will have to be articulated in case after case
after case, the statute provides a very clear mechanism
to address the issue of fraud which allows him to
reconvert it back to Chapter 7 promptly.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, I think, Mr. Chief
Justice, in the Link case, the Court rejected that
argument in construing section 41(b), where the Court
said, quote, "neither the permissive language of the
rule, which merely authorizes a motion by the defendant,
nor its policy requires us to conclude that it was the
purpose of the rule to be abrogate the power of courts
acting on their own initiative to clear their calendars
of cases that have remained dormant because of the
inaction or dilatoriness of the parties seeking relief."
Likewise in Chambers, I think the same principle
applied. The Court said, we don't need to wait and deal
with these subsequently occurring procedures to remedy
the problem. We should do it now.
And that is the -- that is the clear import
of this Court's unanimous decision in Pepper versus
Litton. There was a remedy of equitable subordination
for the fraudulent claim that could have been invoked
far later in the proceeding. And this Court unanimously
said no, you don't have to wait for that proceeding
later. Where it's clear that there has been fraud, the
creditor's scheme has been fraudulent, a fraudulent
claim, the court can act at the time of allowance of the
claim and simply deny the claim. The reason for it, I
think, is the reason articulated in Chambers. The
integrity of the court itself is implicated if it has to
sit back idly by and watch the abusive process unfold.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I still
haven't gotten an answer, I think, on what the prejudice
is. Who is prejudiced by the procedure set forth in
the statute? The conversion takes place. The judge
then says, because of this fraud, I'm going to reconvert
it to Chapter 7. Who suffers under that? You say sit
idly by, but I don't see the long passage of time.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, the creditors suffer,
Mr. Chief Justice. And they suffer because there are
additional administrative costs that are incurred that
compete with their distributions. We're already talking
about dividing up an inadequate pie to satisfy all
claims in full. Having a second set of procedures
prejudices the creditors. It prejudices the court.
Bankruptcy judges can have thousands and thousands of
cases on their dockets. To have to have a second set
of procedures, a second hearing, it burdens the court
unnecessarily. And again, it also implicates, again,
and I think this is fundamental, the integrity of the
process.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it true or not what I
said, because I don't know the area, that if in fact you
had a dishonest debtor, the present -- the proceeding is
dismissed on 7. He gets the papers back. The papers
permit him access to a hidden source of resources, and
he steals them basically. Is that possible or is that
fanciful?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Justice Breyer, that is
certainly possible, and I think that is why Congress has
said you don't have an absolute right as a debtor under
section 707 to dismiss your Chapter 7 case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear from
Ms. Blatt first.
Mr. BAKER: I beg your pardon.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Blatt.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LISA S. BLATT
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE
SUPPORTING RESPONDENTS
MS. BLATT: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
A bankruptcy court has the inherent
authority to sanction a debtor who has acted in bad
faith by denying his request to convert a Chapter 7 case
to Chapter 13. Courts have the inherent authority to
take appropriate action to prevent an abuse of process.
Nothing in the Bankruptcy Code or section 706 purports
to impair or limit the bankruptcy court's power to
police the integrity of its own proceedings.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why isn't the power to
reconvert sufficient?
MS. BLATT: The power to reconvert under
section 1307(c) is in this case, where the court is
already confronted with an adjudicated bad faith
litigator, it's indirect, it's inefficient, and it's
inadequate to protect the bankruptcy process. The
potential for abuse is very significant if the case
languishes in Chapter 13 for any period of time because
the bad faith debtor gets control over the very asset he
fraudulently sought to conceal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what are the
odds that that's going to happen if you have a judge
who's exercised enough by the fraud to exercise inherent
authority to deny relief? He's not going to let it
languish under Chapter 13.
MS. BLATT: Well, he may or may not.
Bankruptcy courts have thousands of cases, and if there
is an absolute automatic right to convert, a court with
thousands of cases may put off that Chapter 13
reconversion to another day. Moreover, there may be
individual creditors without a sufficient stake to raise
the issue, and the Chapter 7 trustee who typically will
uncover the fraud cannot oppose conversion if there's a
right to convert in bad faith, and the Chapter 13
trustee or the United States --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why wouldn't
that trustee recommend to the bankruptcy judge that he
reconvert it to Chapter 7?
MS. BLATT: Well, the Chapter 7 trustee is,
he's terminated on conversion. It doesn't raise Chapter
issues. The much more likely scenario is the Chapter
trustee will tell the United States trustee or the
Chapter 13 trustee, but they may or may not learn about
it until after the case converts. In jurisdictions
where there is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why can't they just have an
order to the bankrupt -- to disclose the asset in the
Chapter 13 proceeding?
MS. BLATT: An order to disclose the asset?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In the Chapter 13
proceeding.
MS. BLATT: Well, we're talking about a case
the court may or may not know about the fraud, and
the trustee may or may not tell someone in time. If
there's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, in this case they
knew about it, didn't they?
MS. BLATT: Yes, and there was a basis to
oppose conversion. In jurisdictions where there's an
absolute right, and bad faith is not a grounds for the
conversion --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Whenever he denies the
motion, he must know about it. He must have a reason to
deny.
MS. BLATT: We're by hypothesis talking
about an absolute right to convert, and what I'm trying
to say, in jurisdictions where there is an absolute
right, the practice of bankruptcy courts is not to
simultaneously convert. It does happen on occasion, but
the more likely scenario is that a significant period of
time passes. But the other point is that if there's a
simultaneous conversion it's a completely pointless and
burdensome process, and here's why: A conversion and
simultaneous conversion causes the termination and
reappointment of the Chapter 7 trustee, the appointment
and the immediate termination of the Chapter 13 trustee,
and to the extent there's already pending Chapter 7
proceedings for dismissal or denial of discharge, the
conversion would appear to us to moot those proceedings
and require their reinstatement. And this is a completely
unnecessary waste of everyone's time and energy.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I just clear up one
detail that's confusing to me. The -- are there two
judges? Does the same judge rule on both the motion to
convert and the motion to reconvert?
MS. BLATT: Yes, in the majority of
jurisdictions. There are one or two jurisdictions where
there are different judges, but the vast majority it's
before the same judge. But a -- if a -- if there's a --
if there's a right to convert in bad faith, all you have
is a notice of conversion and, assuming the eligibility
is met and it hasn't previously converted, a court may
say, well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I wouldn't call it a
right to convert in bad faith. If it's a right, it's a
right to convert despite the allegation of bad faith.
It's not a right to convert in bad faith. No one is
arguing for that.
MS. BLATT: Well, I think that our point is
that the absence of bad faith is implicit in the statute
because there is this background rule. When a litigant
comes to a court that's already abused the court's
process or seeks relief of bad faith, it is a core
element of a court's inherent authority to simply deny
relief. You can toss out an entire complaint when a
litigant seeks it in bad faith. If there was an
apparent benefit to this, go to 13 first or deny it, the
United States trustee wouldn't be here. We see no
benefit to the debtor to require the court to convert
and then reconvert. All it is is an unnecessary waste
of everyone's time, and this is a core element of an
inherit authority.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about the idea
that the debtor can come in and say under 13, look,
whether the facts bear this out in this case or not,
I've got a job now. I can pay off my debtors -- my
creditors according to this plan, and, as the statute
requires, the creditors get more under 13 than under
under 7. That's a benefit to everybody.
MS. BLATT: Here's why. I don't think
there's any dispute under --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And he says, I'm
sorry about that bad faith business.
MS. BLATT: Sure. Right. And there's
nothing to stop a debtor who truly converts and has
found religion and wants to come clean for arguing: Let
me convert, it's in the interest of everybody if I do
convert. This is a discretionary right to deny relief.
The court is free to allow conversion.
But under the plain terms of section
70(c), the court has the power to dismiss or reconvert
a case to Chapter 7 without waiting for a plan to be
filed. There's no requirement that the court has to sit
there for 15 days and see if there's a plan. A Chapter
-- excuse me --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If the statute
didn't provide that a Chapter 13 plan could be
reconverted to a Chapter 7, would the court have the
inherent equitable authority to do that?
MS. BLATT: To reconvert to Chapter 7?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sure.
MS. BLATT: I don't know if that would be an
appropriate remedy. It might be because you can have an
involuntary Chapter 7 case. But on this point about a
court sitting in Chapter 13, if on day one a Chapter 13
debtor files a plan in bad faith, the debtor can say:
Please wait, I've got a plan, I'm working on it, give me
a couple extra weeks, and the court can say:  No, I have
the authority to throw it out. And what's particularly
odd about this proposal is that in 2005 a court is
categorically prohibited from allowing a Chapter 13
debtor to proceed under Chapter 13 if the petition is
filed in bad faith. The court can't confirm a plan.
So Congress had no interest in protecting
bad faith debtors after 2005 and they didn't before
05. There's no policy preference in the code for bad
faith debtors or allowing a debtor either proceeding in
Chapter 13 or moving from Chapter 7 to Chapter 13, and we
think this is a modest exercise of a court's inherent
authority simply to deny relief when the court is already
confronted with a clear case of abuse while the case is
in Chapter 7 or the debtor has otherwise abused the
bankruptcy process.
The last thing I'd like to say is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what about the
difference in language under 706(a) and the other
provisions? 706(a) says the debtor may. The other
provisions call for action by the court, which suggests
at least that the authority to convert is greater under
6(a).
MS. BLATT: I think section 706(a) is fairly
read as granting a statutory right to convert absent the
two statutory exceptions or the court's proper exercise
of inherent authority. But the 706(b) and (c) just
explain that the court may do something or the court may
not, or the court shall do something. So we think our
position -- section 706(a) isn't even addressed to the
court at all. It just gives the debtor the right to
convert, and it doesn't purport to limit or speak to the
situation when the debtor seeks that relief in bad faith
or has otherwise abused the bankruptcy process. And I'd
just like to end by saying that a debtor's bad faith
concealment of assets or misrepresentation of financial
affairs is really the most serious abuse you can have in
a chapter 7 case. It threatens the very structural
foundation of the code and its integrity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does the government have
any position on the mootness question here?
MS. BLATT: Well, our position is that it's
not moot because it's on appeal. If that decision is
affirmed, it would in a sense practically be moot
because there would be an alternative grounds and the
debtor wouldn't be eligible under Chapter 13 in any
event. But we didn't see that as necessarily an Article
III mootness problem.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess I've been
assuming -- but the eligibility under Chapter 13 even
under the present case is a present day question, right?
In other words, we don't go back and see if he was
eligible for Chapter 13 when the conversion was denied?
The question would be whether he's eligible now?
MS. BLATT: We have not compared the two,
the two chapters -- well, there was never a Chapter 13
petition. We have not compared the Chapter 7 petition
with the -- after this case, this Court granted
certiorari, then the Chapter 13. But it is on appeal
to the district court, so it's not presently moot.
We would ask for those reasons that the
First Circuit's decision be affirmed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Ms. Blatt.
Now, Mr. Baker.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID G. BAKER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BAKER: Thank you, Your Honor and
Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. You have
two minutes remaining.
MR. BAKER: Thank you, Your Honor.
The first thing I would like to say is that,
having been counsel to a Chapter 13 trustee many years
ago, I can assure the Court the Chapter 13 trustees
exercise all of the powers and authority that a Chapter
trustee does, with the exception, as was said, of
possession of property of the estate. The property of
the estate remains vested, however, in the Chapter 13
trustee throughout the length of the case. It does not
revest in the debtor until the case is either dismissed,
a discharge is issued, and the case is closed.  So the
concerns about leaving a debtor to do anything it wants
to with property of the bankruptcy estate simply is not
a reality, and I think it does a disservice to the many
fine Chapter 13 trustees that there are around the
country.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure I understood
what you just said. You said until the plan is filed
and approved the property remains in the possession of
the Chapter 13 trustee.
MR. BAKER: No, it does not remain in her
possession. The Chapter 13 trustee technically never
has possession. The title remains vested in the Chapter
trustee.
JUSTICE BREYER: So is it possible if it's
in 13 that then the debtor, let's say a dishonest
debtor, could get back pieces of paper which would admit
that debtor to the possession of certain property which
he could then take and hide in a way that that couldn't
happen in 7? Is that possible or not possible?
MR. BAKER: It's certainly possible. But
then again, there are statutory and rule-based remedies
for that sort of activity. And our position is that those
rules and those statutes are what should control in the
case.
Thank you very much, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Baker.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the case in the
