IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
NEW JERSEY,                       :
Petitioner            :
v.                         :  No. 134. Orig.
DELAWARE.                         :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, November 27, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
H. BARTOW FARR, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Plaintiff.
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Defendant.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF                                  PAGE
H. BARTOW FARR, ESQ.
On behalf of the Plaintiff                        3
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Defendant                       26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
H. BARTOW FARR, ESQ.
On behalf of the Plaintiff                       54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
next in case 134 on our original docket, New Jersey v.
Delaware.
Mr. Farr.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF H. BARTOW FARR
ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF
MR. FARR:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Although the 1905 Compact between Delaware
and New Jersey did not settle the boundary dispute
between them, New Jersey nevertheless agreed to dismiss
the suit that it had filed before this Court to
determine the boundary.  And the reason for those two
seemingly contradictory facts, I think, is because the
Compact did resolve permanently certain issues of
jurisdiction, implementing rules that could be
administered without regard to where the boundary was.
Thus in particular Article VII, the
provision of the Compact that's particularly at issue in
this case, provided that each State could continue to
exercise its traditional riparian authority over the
riparian owners on its side of the river according to
its laws.  Now, the Special Master I think fundamentally
changed the nature of the Compact by superimposing the
boundary line into the terms of an agreement that was
meant to operate without it.  And I think he did so
because he mistakenly applied the presumption that all
promises with respect to jurisdiction and territory must
be unmistakable; and this Court, however, had said
several years before, in Virginia versus Maryland, that
that presumption simply is not applicable to compacts
that are entered into when the boundaries between the
States are disputed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Farr, one of the
striking things about this Compact is that to the extent
that it is definite, there is a lot in here in detail
about service arrests on the river and about fishing,
but then you get to these two articles at the end and
they certainly don't have that same definite detailed
quality.  As I read the Article VII that you're
stressing, it says -- let's see -- "may continue to
exercise."  So it seems to me that "may continue to" was
just whatever was the status quo, that will continue;
not to do anything dispositive, just whatever was will
continue.
MR. FARR:  Well, several things about that,
Justice Ginsburg.  First of all I think that the
language "continue to" necessarily brings in the
historical antecedents of regulation of riparian matters
by both States.  It's undisputed in this case that on
New Jersey's side of the river, that is with respect to
riparian owners on the New Jersey side, New Jersey had
exercised full and exclusive authority over, for
example, wharfing out to navigable water, the building
of piers and wharfs to do that, the granting of lands,
without any involvement whatsoever by Delaware.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Was it clear that New
Jersey believed when it had authorized somebody to wharf
out, that the person who wharfed out was not subject to
New Jersey's environmental laws?
MR. FARR:  No.  I think what --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The history doesn't show
anything about that?
MR. FARR:  The history doesn't show
anything --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So if --
MR. FARR:  -- specific about that kind of
law.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- if it -- if it would
have been subject to New Jersey's environmental laws,
had New Jersey owned the bed of the river into which the
wharf was extended, by parity of reasoning it seems to
me the wharf would be subject to Delaware's
environmental laws if Delaware owns the bed of the
river.
MR. FARR:  I think without the Compact that
would be true, but I think what the Compact is saying is
that you get to retain the degree of power on your own
side of the river that you had before, without regard
ultimately to where the boundary is determined to be.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  So your -- your argument --
it seems to me it's not that easy, because your argument
is assuming that by virtue of the "may continue"
language, the State of New Jersey acquires a new power,
and the new power in effect is to -- is to make grants
of subaqueous land that belonged not to New Jersey but
to Delaware, and that's the stretch.
It -- it seems to me that that is such an
extraordinary position or proposition, that you've got
to have something more specific than "may continue" in
order to construe that as meaning an agreement which was
intended to give New Jersey the power to grant away
Delaware land.
MR. FARR:  Well, Justice Souter, I think
that the difficulty with that question is it assumes
knowledge of where the boundary is.  In other words,
when one talks about New Jersey getting a new power to
grant lands that are within Delaware, that is a -- that
is a question that necessarily assumes that the boundary
has to be part of that understanding.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  No, I'm simply saying that
your position --  and I accept your position -- that the
Compact is intended to continue to operate whether or
not the boundary is -- is ultimately determined, and if
so, after it is ultimately determined -- and once we get
to that point of continuing to operate after, then
necessarily the only way it can operate on your theory
is to give New Jersey the power to grant Delaware land.
And if New Jersey has that power, it must have been a
power that was intended in the 1905 Compact, and that
intent strikes me as a very extraordinary intent; and --
and my -- the point of my question was the application
of the Compact in the new circumstances, as you claim it
to be, would be so extraordinary that you ought to have
language more specific than "may continue" in order to
establish that extraordinary result.
MR. FARR:  Well, of course.  It is -- it is
saying "may continue to grant riparian rights and lands
under its laws."  So it is not simply the language "may
continue."
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Well, if you emphasize
"under its laws," then don't you lose?  Because New
Jersey does not -- I presume New Jersey does not have
law, for example, in its constitution, providing that it
can grant Delaware land.
MR. FARR:  Well, I don't think that the laws
have to refer specifically, obviously, to granting
Delaware land.  It did have provision for granting laws
beyond the low-water mark in New Jersey.  Many of the
grants before 1905 specifically --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  But I'm going on the
assumption that it, in fact, had jurisdiction; that it
had land below -- beyond the low-water mark.
MR. FARR:  But what I think you're
suggesting, Justice Souter, I think, is what -- what
fundamentally alters the nature of the Compact is to
assume that New Jersey had certain powers up until the
time the boundary line was determined, and then it lost
those powers after the boundary line was --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  It didn't so much lose -- I
mean it had a generalized recognition of power.  In
order to exercise that power, it had to possess certain
attributes, i.e., land.
Once it lost that land, it had nothing to
exercise the power over.  In fact, it had a little bit
left.  It had the distance between the high- and the
low-water marks, so it still had the power.  But the --
the recognition of the power in 1905 was, in effect, a
formula; and the formula depends on facts to be applied;
and the facts changed once the boundary was determined.
MR. FARR:  You see, I think there are two
problems with that, Justice Souter.
First of all, the very notion that there
would be something left if the boundary line was
determined to be at the low-water mark on the New Jersey
side -- in other words, that Article 7 would continue to
operate; it would just operate subject to the boundary
-- at least in the context of the riparian right that we
are talking about, the right to wharf out to navigable
water, that right is essentially meaningless if you stop
at the low-water mark.
In other words, what you're saying and what
the Special Master's recommendation essentially does, it
says New Jersey has no right to authorize wharfing out
to navigable water without Delaware's consent.
JUSTICE ALITO:  What right do you think --
MR. FARR:  I --
JUSTICE ALITO:  What right do you think New
Jersey has now with respect to the subaqueous land?  Is
it simply to authorize it to be disturbed to the extent
necessary to construct a wharf, or does it go any
further than that?
MR. FARR:  Basically, I think what you have
said, Justice Alito, is exactly right.  It is --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I have a more basic
question.  Assume -- assuming that the subaqueous land
belongs to New Jersey and that New Jersey gives a
private individual a right to wharf out into the
Delaware, does that individual acquire ownership of the
land under the water, assuming New Jersey owns the
subaqueous land?
MR. FARR:  It depends on the form of the
grant, but, typically, if New Jersey --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But, normally, authority to
wharf out doesn't convey the land with it; does it?
MR. FARR:  It conveys an interest in the
land that allows the doing of the activity --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of the wharf.
MR. FARR:  -- for which the --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of the wharf.
MR. FARR:  That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Now, if -- if merely
authority to wharf out would not even convey New
Jersey's own land, how can you argue that, by reason of
this Compact, it implicitly conveyed what is now
Delaware's land?
MR. FARR:  Well, because Delaware has
essentially said in Article VII, we believe, Justice
Scalia, that New Jersey may continue to do this.  It was
doing -- I mean this land --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  May continue to wharf out,
but not continue to grant subaqueous land, which you say
doesn't go with wharfing out.
MR. FARR:  Well, what we are -- what we're
talking about, I think, is we're talking about granting
the interest in land that is necessary for the riparian
owner to be able to wharf out.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So that if you have
one of these wharves that goes beyond the low-water mark
and there are two people at the end of it and one of
them shoots the other, would they be prosecuted for
murder in Delaware or New Jersey?
MR. FARR:  Well, in -- in -- there was a
gambling offense at the end of a pier in -- in -- that
proceeded from the New Jersey shoreline, in 19 -- in the
late 1950's in a case called the Federenco case, which I
don't have the cite for immediately.  The New Jersey
Supreme Court held that that was within the jurisdiction
of New Jersey, and Delaware filed a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I suspect the New
Jersey Supreme Court would.
MR. FARR:  Delaware filed a brief, Mr. Chief
Justice, supporting that position.
So -- but if I could return just for a
second to Justice Souter's point and Justice Scalia's
point, if one thinks for a moment -- we're -- we're
trying to, I think, interpret the -- the 1905 Compact as
it must have been understood by the commissioners who
drafted it.
And so I think that, unlike the Special
Master, who at the time he's interpreting it, knows
where the boundary line is, we have to think about,
first of all, would the commissioners essentially have
been saying to New Jersey, as your hypothesis would
suggest, that each State on its own side of the river
has the right to grant riparian rights and lands and
exercise riparian jurisdiction subject to the boundary
line, which for New Jersey would mean that, in fact, if
it lost the boundary case, it would effectively have no
riparian jurisdiction at all?
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Farr, what about the
article that follows Article VII?  Article VIII says:
"Nothing herein contained shall affect the territorial
limits, rights, or jurisdiction of either State in or
over the Delaware River."  So that's a qualification at
least on every other article.
MR. FARR:  Well, Justice Ginsburg, if I may
say, the quote is longer than that and in a critically
important way.  It says it may not do that "except as
herein expressly set forth."
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Yes, and I don't see
anything expressly set forth in VII, which just says
"may continue to," which says the status quo is
maintained.
MR. FARR:  Well, I mean, obviously, we're --
we're debating the meaning of Article VII, but it seems
to me that Article VII is an express provision herein,
meaning in the Compact.  So that what Article VII is
aiming at, it seems to me, if we are correct that it is
essentially meant to operate without respect to the
boundary, would expressly set forth a cession.
And I might point out that when this case
was before this Court or the two States were before this
Court back in 1934, Delaware's counsel before this Court
said pretty much exactly what I'm saying this morning:
that -- and this is on page 44 of our blue brief, but
said that the Compact of 1905 in his view ceded to the
State of New Jersey all the right to control the
erection of those wharves, meaning wharves that were
constructed by New Jersey riparian owners past the
low-water mark, and to say who shall erect them.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, are you asking us to
reject the concept of concurrent jurisdiction in all
circumstances?
MR. FARR:  As far as State jurisdiction
goes, it seems to me there is not concurrent
jurisdiction over riparian structures such as piers and
wharves and other kinds of acknowledged riparian rights.
With respect to matters that are nonriparian, for
example, if a riparian owner in New Jersey wanted to
construct a hotel that was beyond the low-water mark,
that would not be a riparian use.  And Delaware --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How do we split that
difference?  I mean let's --
MR. FARR:  Pardon me?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I mean, how do we
decide the difference between those two cases?  And
applicable here, for example, let's say it's perfectly
fine for New Jersey to build a wharf out there, but they
can't use it for liquified natural gas, which Delaware
may conclude poses particular problems that other uses
don't.
MR. FARR:  But I think what you've done, Mr.
Chief Justice, if I may, is I think you've detached the
purpose of a wharf from the wharf itself.  The purpose
of a wharf is the loading and unloading of goods.
That's what -- what they are used for.  Vessels draw up,
tie up and unload or load goods and/or passengers.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Could New Jersey -- could
New Jersey prevent its use for liquified gas?
MR. FARR:  Under State law, yes, it could,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well -- but New Jersey had
given this riparian owner the right to wharf out.
MR. FARR:  Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So, obviously, the right to
wharf out does not include the right to use the wharf
for whatever you like, and the only thing we're arguing
about is whether it is New Jersey or Delaware that can
impose limitations.  But that it is subject to
limitation is, it seems to me, absolutely clear.
MR. FARR:  I agree with that.  There's no
question that it is subject to limitation.  The question
is, whose laws apply?  Who -- and it seems to me that is
the question that Article VII expressly answered.
Article VII again says "each State on its own side of
the river" -- which is not a designation that is limited
by the boundary, because Delaware made that argument to
the Special Master, the Special Master rejected it, and
Delaware did not file exceptions in this Court.  So "on
its own side of the river" I think is properly taken to
mean with respect to the riparian owners on its bank of
the river.  Those riparian owners -- I mean, excuse me
-- "each State may continue on its own side of the river
to exercise riparian jurisdiction of every kind and
nature, make grants of riparian rights and land under
the respective laws of the States."
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And in your view to what
extent does this involve subaqueous lands toward -- and
I'll just put "toward" -- the New Jersey side?
MR. FARR:  Unfortunately, I'm not sure I
understand the phrase "toward the New Jersey side."  I
mean, between the low-water mark --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I'm not sure I understand
your position on where New Jersey's jurisdiction begins
and ends with reference to subaqueous lands.
MR. FARR:  Well, it's -- literal ownership
of the land begins at the high-water mark on the New
Jersey side and ends at the low-water mark on the New
Jersey side, its actual ownership.  Under the Compact,
we believe Delaware has ceded to it the right to grant
certain interests in subaqueous land to the extent but
only to the extent that they are necessary to allow
owners in New Jersey, riparian owners, to exercise
riparian rights, provided that the New Jersey State law
grants them that right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  That suggests --
MR. FARR:  If they were --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- it's still an
extraordinary power for one State to give up.  If
Delaware -- if that land -- they didn't settle the
boundary, but it might be on the Delaware side.  If
Delaware was giving up so much, what did it get in
exchange?
MR. FARR:  Well, again, the question that
you're asking assumes that the negotiators were coming
into the negotiation with their boundary positions fixed
and that they were essentially horse-trading within the
bounds of the different positions taken by the two
States.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  No, I'm not assuming
that.  I'm assuming it's unknown, but there is the
possibility that it's going to end up --
MR. FARR:  There's the possibility that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- end up --
MR. FARR:  I'm sorry.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  There's a possibility
that it will end up on the Delaware side.  And you're
suggesting that Delaware relinquished all of its
regulatory authority and gave it to New Jersey, no
matter where the boundary turned out to be.
MR. FARR:  That is what I'm suggesting with
respect to this narrow category of riparian rights.
Just as that's true, for example, in Article I.  New
Jersey has the right to serve criminal process with
respect, for example, to crimes that occur on the
eastern half of the river, which is something that New
Jersey clearly would not have had if it ultimately lost
the boundary dispute; whereas Delaware got, in Article
II, the authority to serve process for crimes occurring
on the western half of the river, which it would have
had anyway, whether it won or lost the boundary dispute,
assuming that the half of the river refers to the
channel.  So I mean -- let me --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But that's -- Article I --
that's an exception.  And you don't have the benefit of
that exception when you're talking about Article VII.
MR. FARR:  The exception --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  The exception is not that
specific as to the -- as to the extent of the
jurisdiction.
MR. FARR:  Well, Justice Kennedy, I think
you've asked a very good question, but -- but I guess I
think it is -- it's quite specific, because the question
is, what do the terms "on its own side of the river"
mean?  Those obviously have some geographical impact
here, and indeed in -- before the Special Master,
Delaware's position was yes, that is a geographical
designation, but what it means is "up to the boundary
line."  In other words, up to the low-water mark.  AS I
say, the Special Master rejected that position.
Delaware did not file exceptions from that position.  So
I think we can accept at this point in the case that's
not what "on its own side of the river" means.      So
the question then is:  What does it mean?  And it seems
to me what it means is, with respect to the riparian
property owned by New Jersey citizens on the New Jersey
side of the river, Delaware citizens on the Delaware
side of the river.  And what it is therefore doing is
saying each State may control and determine the rights
of its citizens who own riparian property --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Mr. Farr, is there --
MR. FARR:  -- regardless of where --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Is there a limit on New
Jersey's rights?  As long as it's building a wharf, can
it do anything it wants to on that or is there -- for
example, could it dam up the navigable part of the river
in order to build a superstructure on the wharf?
MR. FARR:  Well, there are two questions
there, Justice Stevens, if I can separate them for a
moment.  As far as State law goes, purely State law, I
think the answer to that question is that New Jersey
determines what can and cannot be done --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Well, then I should --
MR. FARR:  -- on a wharf.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  I should rephrase it.  To
what extent, if any, does Delaware place a limit on the
way in which New Jersey may exercise its riparian
rights?
MR. FARR:  Under State -- by applying
Delaware State law, I think it cannot impose any limits.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Any limit whatsoever?
MR. FARR:  With respect to the exercise of
riparian rights.  Because once it --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Even if -- even if the
building of the wharf interfered with the navigation on
the river?
MR. FARR:  Well, this is, I think, why I was
trying to separate it into two parts.  What I've left
out, the part I've left out so far, is Federal law.
Federal law has a significant amount to say about what
happens with respect to piers and wharves --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Well, I'm just asking, is
it --
MR. FARR:  -- in any State.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  -- does Delaware law place
any limit on what New Jersey may do in exercising its
riparian rights?
MR. FARR:  I mean, it does impose a limit,
but we don't think those limits are valid under Article
VII of the Compact.  I think the --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  I mean, can they validly
impose a limit?
MR. FARR:  No, no, they cannot.  They --
what this does is it says, for New Jersey riparian
owners, when they are building wharves and piers, they
are subject to the laws of New Jersey.  "The respective
States" means that the laws of one State or the laws of
the other State, depending on which side of the river
you're on.  So they are subject to New Jersey law.  Now,
obviously, any pier or wharf that interfered with
navigation interferes with the Federal navigational
servitude.  So that would be subject to review under
Federal law.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  And what about the example
of using a -- setting a gambling casino or something at
the end of the wharf, well into Delaware territory?
You'd say Delaware has no right to object to that.
MR. FARR:  No, I would say it does have a
right there because that is not a --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  That's not a riparian use.
MR. FARR:  That's not a riparian use.  We're
talking about --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Anything involving loading
and unloading of ships and so forth would be
permissible?
MR. FARR:  Exactly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Then how come your
position in my murder hypothetical was what it was?
Because I assume murder is not a riparian use either.
And yet, why would Delaware have jurisdiction over a
casino but not over a crime?
MR. FARR:  Because I think we're talking
about now what happens with respect -- I mean, if we're
talking -- this was a gambling -- it wasn't a casino.
This was a gambling offense that took place on a
facility that actually was used for the loading and
unloading of ships.  The gambling was an outside
activity not relating to the use of the wharf.  So I
think the understanding was that riparian jurisdiction
of every kind and nature would be sufficient to say,
once you have built the wharf and it is a legitimate
riparian purpose not subject to Delaware laws, then New
Jersey would apply its criminal laws as well.  And as I
say, Delaware filed an amicus brief -- unfortunately, we
don't have a copy of it in the record -- but the New
Jersey Supreme Court noted that Delaware supported New
Jersey's jurisdiction over that gambling offense.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Mr. Farr, could you tell me
-- one thing in Article VII perplexes me.  Why does it
say that each State may "make grants, leases, and
conveyances of riparian lands and rights"?  "Rights" I
can understand.  But why would they say "conveyances of
riparian lands"?
MR. FARR:  I assume --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I mean, obviously each
State can -- riparian lands are within each State.
Nobody questioned that at the time.
MR. FARR:  Well, I think the fact is that
this is why one needs to give some sort of practical --
take a practical view of what Article VII is talking
about.  Article VII -- the two riparian rights that are
of particular interest and were established clearly in
1905, obviously subject to the State limitations, were,
first of all, the right to draw water, the riparian
right that was at issue in Virginia v. Maryland, where
the Court said Maryland can't apply its police power, I
might point out.  The second was piers and wharves.
Obviously, a pier and a wharf that stops at the
low-water mark is of no use at all.  It's got to get out
to the navigable water.  That's where the ships are.
It's the Willie Sutton principle.  So once have you
that, if you're going to have riparian rights, you've
got to have the ability to grant some interest in lands
so that they can exercise their right out to the point
where it becomes meaningful.  And that's, it seems to
me, why --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So you say "riparian lands"
means the land under the wharf?  That's a strange use of
"riparian lands."
MR. FARR:  No, that's what -- I mean,
"riparian lands" could mean the lands on the bank, but I
think that's not what they're talking about in this
context.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Do you know of any other
instance where people talk of riparian lands and they
mean land extending under the water?
MR. FARR:  I think, because of the context
here, when it's linked with the rights, that the
necessary -- the limitation that Justice Alito mentioned
gives -- colors it essentially to say this is what we're
talking about.  And after all, this is similar --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's your position, that
"lands" means the lands under the water?
MR. FARR:  That's correct, because this is
settling -- 1 the point of it is to settle and avoid
future controversy with respect to the river, and those
are the lands that are under the river.
If I could reserve --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And there was in fact in
this project, was there not, there was required dredging
of 1.24 million cubic yards of submerged soil that would
be --
MR. FARR:  That's true.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- on the Delaware side
of the boundary?
MR. FARR:  That's true.  Although I might
point out that, as the Weggle Declaration says in the
record -- and I can get a citation to that in a moment,
it's in our brief -- that actually is a relatively small
amount compared to much dredging that went on prior to
1905.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I thought this extended
out more than any prior exercise of riparian rights.
MR. FARR:  In the Delaware River, I believe
that is correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Yes.  This was going to
be 2,000 feet, and the greatest extension up until then
was between 500 and 600.
MR. FARR:  I'm not -- I think the second
figure may be short.  But nonetheless, I don't argue
with the premise.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, Mr. Farr.
MR. FARR:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Mr. Frederick.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID C. FREDERICK
ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT
MR. FREDERICK:  Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
Our position can be summarized in two words:
Boundaries matter.  Boundaries determine where States
can make grants of land, and they determine where a
State can exercise its police powers.  And with respect
to both principle, the Special Master got it exactly
right.  Nothing in Article VII or elsewhere in the
Compact of 1905 precludes the State of New Jersey from
exercising its police powers within the boundary
determined by this Court in its 1934 boundary decision.
And, in fact, at 291 --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  May I just interrupt right
there, Mr. Frederick?  Do you contend that they may no
longer build wharves that go beyond the State line?
MR. FREDERICK:  No.  Our position is that --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Well, then boundries don't
matter completely.
MR. FREDERICK:  No, they can -- under
Delaware law, a riparian owner in New Jersey can extend
past the low-water mark as has been permitted by New
Jersey, by Delaware in every single instance since 1961
when Delaware enacted subaqueous land laws, except the
two times where New Jersey riparian owners sought to
violate Delaware's laws by building LNG facilities:  In
1972 when the El Paso Company sought to build an LNG
facility and was denied by Delaware and New Jersey
acquiesced in that denial, and then in 2005 when
Delaware made the status determination that the Crown
Landing facility was a prohibited bulk transfer facility
precluded by Delaware law.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  What if Delaware took the
position that there simply is the maximum amount of
allowable building in the river, and from now on it will
not, in fact, agree to grant, authorize, whatever the
title is, any further wharves and piers on New Jersey's
side?  Does Delaware have the authority to do that?
MR. FREDERICK:  Delaware can exercise its
police authority as --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  It's passed a statute.
MR. FREDERICK:  Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Is the statute effective?
MR. FREDERICK:  The statute is not effected
in the hypothetical that you give.  Nothing in Delaware
subaqueous land laws goes to clutter, visual or
otherwise, on the bank.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  I'm talking about a new
statute.  Delaware says enough is enough; no more wharfs
and piers from the New Jersey side.  Is that statute
effective and enforceable?
MR. FREDERICK:  That statute would be
subject to Delaware takings law, and Delaware has found
that --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  But, Mr. Frederick, if
the -- if the legislature of Delaware passes that
statute, I assume they intend it to mean what it says.
And as against a claim by New Jersey or on behalf of a
New Jersey grantee, is that Delaware statute effective?
MR. FREDERICK:  It depends.  Justice Souter,
it depends.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  It depends on what?
MR. FREDERICK:  The Constitution of the
United States and the constitution of Delaware.  A
private --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Forget the Federal right
now.  We're talking about construing a compact.  So far
as this Compact is concerned, so far as the domestic
laws of the two states, New Jersey and Delaware, are
concerned, would the Delaware statute be effective?
MR. FREDERICK:  The Delaware statute would
not be affected by the 1905 Compact, Justice Souter,
because Delaware would assert presumably, if defending
that law, that it was subject to regular police power
restrictions.  But those police power restrictions --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  I'm not asking you what
Delaware would say.  I think I can imagine what Delaware
would say.  I want to know whether Delaware would
prevail when it got here --
MR. FREDERICK:  No.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  -- in your view?
MR. FREDERICK:  I don't think that Delaware
would prevail on a blanket prohibition of the exercise
of riparian rights by New Jersey landowners.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Why?
MR. FREDERICK:  Because Delaware has always
permitted the exercise of riparian rights because --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Well, that is before there
was all these wharves were out here, and Delaware is now
saying the facts have changed.
MR. FREDERICK:  Delaware certainly has the
power, under our theory of the case as recommended by
the Special Master, to implement its police powers.
Those police powers are always subject to constitutional
constraints.  And under the hypothetical you posed, as
extreme as it is, Justice Souter, the Constitution, both
under Delaware law and under the United States
Constitution, might well say the State has gone too far
in exercising its police --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  It seems to me you're
running away from the hypothetical.  I have the question
that Justice Souter has, basically to what extent does
concurrent jurisdiction apply, what are the limits that
we will apply in later cases to implement this concept
of concurrent jurisdiction?  In the laws of some States
you can't overburden an easement.  If you give a power
company an easement, it can't put huge 300-foot
structures on the easement without taking -- is that the
kind of analysis that we have to apply in order to make
your concurrent jurisdiction and the Master's concurrent
jurisdiction theory work?
MR. FREDERICK:  I'm not sure that you would
need to go that far, certainly in light of the practical
realities of the 150 years of shared use of the Delaware
River, Justice Kennedy.
Importantly, under New Jersey's theory, to
go to your hypothetical, Justice Souter, where the
entire bed of the river within the Twelve-Mile Circle
would be built out, that would be a functional
abrogation of this Court's boundary decision, because
this Court held that the land under the piers was not
belonging to New Jersey and that an attempt to extend
the entire boundary outward, water-ward, would be
overriding what this Court determined was the --
easement.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  But again, you're changing
the hypothetical.  Your answer, I -- the answer that you
just gave, I presume would be the same whether Delaware
had passed any particular statute regarding wharfage
from the New Jersey side or whether it had -- you were
giving an answer which took into consideration the
Compact but which basically depended upon we'll call it
the general riparian law.
The question, however, is the effectiveness
of a Delaware statute directed specifically to this
issue that says "no more."
MR. FREDERICK:  That becomes a dormant
Commerce Clause problem, Justice Souter.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  He is asking about under
this thing.  Forget about the Commerce Clause.  And it's
obvious what the purpose of the hypothetical is.  You're
saying that to give you the right to wharf out does not
mean that you can use the wharf for any purpose that's
contrary to the police power prescriptions of Delaware.
That is reasonable enough.
Well, what if one of the police power
prescriptions is you can't have a wharf?  Now, you know,
can you flatly contradict what Article VII says?  And I
really think you ought to give that one away.
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK:  Justice Scalia, under a
broad theory of where the boundary is in matters, it
would require New Jersey to have access to grant
Delaware lands.  And under our theory as accepted by the
Special Master, that would not be permitted.  If it is
simply a question of use, we would acknowledge that the
New Jersey riparian owner can --
JUSTICE ALITO:  I think you're eliminating
the right to wharf out.  Before 1905, New Jersey was
allowing the construction of wharves, isn't that
correct?
MR. FREDERICK:  There were only two proven
in the record, Justice Alito, and neither of which was
proved in this record to go beyond the low-water mark.
But, yes, you're right.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It was a wharf that didn't
go beyond a low-water mark?
MR. FREDERICK:  Yes.  Parts of the Twelve
Mile Circle --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  What did they do, jump onto
the land?
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK:  No.  In parts of the Twelve
Mile Circle, Justice Scalia, particularly in Gloucester
County, there's marshy area where the low-water area
extends hundreds of feet into the river.  And that is
where the boundary is -- is determined.  And it was not
necessary in some places within the Twelve Mile Circle
to go beyond the low-water mark in order to build a
pier --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Isn't it true -- we can look
and see what was authorized or not before 1905.  But
isn't it true that the ability to wharf out is a classic
American -- a classic riparian right --
MR. FREDERICK:  Certainly.
JUSTICE ALITO:  -- under U.S. law?
MR. FREDERICK:  Certainly.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And in deciding whether to
allow someone to wharf out, the State with jurisdiction
would decide whether the wharf was consistent with State
objectives, safety objectives, interference with
navigation and so forth?
MR. FREDERICK:  Yes, Justice Alito.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And Article VII says that
each State on its own side of the river may continue to
make conveyances of riparian rights.  So why doesn't
that mean that each State is continued -- continues to
have the ability to authorize the wharfing out and to
decide whether particular wharves are consistent with
the State's police powers?
MR. FREDERICK:  The last part of your
question, Justice Alito, is where the rub lies, because
riparian law was subject to the individual determination
of what a riparian right was, and how the State's
regulation of that right as a private property right
would be determined.  What this Court's cases uniformly
hold is that the police power trumps that private
riparian right, and this was recognized by the attorney
general for New Jersey.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If you separate these two,
then the riparian right is worthless, is it not?
MR. FREDERICK:  I beg your pardon?
JUSTICE ALITO:  It's worthless if you
separate those two.
MR. FREDERICK:  No.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If you say, New Jersey can
authorize wharfing out, except Delaware can say you
can't wharf out, because it's inconsistent with our
police power, then -- then the authorization to allow
wharfing out is meaningless.
MR. FREDERICK:  No, because wharfing out is
always dependent on whether or not it is so far into the
river to impede the navigable channel, to become a
nuisance, and none of the cases by this Court talking
about wharfing rights concern the police powers issued
by the State.  Cummings v The City of Chicago held that
the Federal riparian right given to the wharf owner in
Chicago was not -- could not override a State's
determination of how the wharf could be built, that
police power.  Hudson v McCarter --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But that assumes that
there is going to be a wharf.  You want us to say that
the police power means that there cannot be a wharf if
New Jersey says no.
MR. FREDERICK:  No.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And that seems to me
inconsistent.  If Delaware says no.
MR. FREDERICK:  Justice --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  That seems to me
inconsistent with saying that New Jersey has a right to
wharf out.
MR. FREDERICK:  We are not going that far,
Justice Kennedy.  What we are saying --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I don't know where -- what
-- where do you draw the line, what is your distinction?
MR. FREDERICK:  A wharf that impedes
navigation is a nuisance that is subject to classic
police power restrictions.  A wharf that does not have
any of those consequences is permitted and Delaware has
permitted those wharves.  In fact even recently when the
State of New Jersey petitioned to Delaware to obtain a
permit for the Fort Mott State Recreational Park,
Delaware granted that to them.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So a wharf that is just
ugly is okay.  Your answer to Justice Souter is,
Delaware can't say no more wharfs.
MR. FREDERICK:  Delaware cannot say no more
wharfs, but that doesn't answer the question that's
really at the rub of this case, which is what you do on
the wharf.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So we here decide --
under your view the case comes down to whether or not
use of the wharf for a liquified natural gas terminal is
a traditional riparian right.
MR. FREDERICK:  And all of the law and
evidence suggests that it is not.  In fact, the riparian
grants that New Jersey issued after its Wharf Act of 18
never contained a specification of use.  They admitted
in the record --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So let's say
Delaware, it's not liquified natural, gas but it's, you
know, bulk shipments.  Is that a traditional riparian
right that Delaware could not prohibit or is it
something that it could prohibit?
MR. FREDERICK:  Delaware has permitted that.
The Keystone facility allows for bulk shipments of coal
to be delivered and offloaded within the Twelve Mile
Circle.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Under your view a riparian
right exists only to say whether there should be a
wharf.  The -- the State with jurisdiction over the
riparian right has no interest in what's going to happen
on that wharf, or what the wharf is going to look like?
MR. FREDERICK:  They are distinctive rights.
It's like -- it's like zoning laws, Justice Kennedy.
You can own a piece of land but that does not mean that
you can override the police powers of the State by what
you do on land.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, what's the point you
just made that Delaware can't permit a coal wharf but it
cannot prohibit a liquified natural gas wharf?
MR. FREDERICK:  Delaware's Subaqueous Lands
Act makes that distinction.
JUSTICE ALITO:  No, but --
MR. FREDERICK:  As a matter of police power
--
JUSTICE ALITO:  -- not what Delaware will do
or did do.  Can it, could it do that?
MR. FREDERICK:  Delaware has to --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Could Delaware prohibit a
coal wharf?
MR. FREDERICK:  It -- yes.  It could.  That
if -- if it were deemed to be a proper exercise of its
police authority, yes, it could.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Well, that's the question.
MR. FREDERICK:  And the answer, Justice
Souter, is not decided by the facts on the case here but
rather on the individual circumstances.  I appreciate
that there are hypotheticals that --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Then your answer to Justice
Alito is, tell me more about the circumstances and I
will then give you an answer.
MR. FREDERICK:  Indeed.  Because there are
constitutional constraints.  There are dormant Commerce
Clause considerations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No.  So what we want
to know it whether or not there are constraints in the
Compact.
MR. FREDERICK:  The Compact does not contain
the constraints, the Attorney General of New Jersey
recognized it, and this is at the appendix starting at
905 of the Delaware appendix.  In 1867 in New Jersey,
Attorney General Robeson issued a very lengthy and
scholarly opinion on the difference between the powers
that a State could exercise over riparian rights, and he
distinguished in that opinion between what he called the
great public uses, which would be for defense, for the
environment, for protection of the people's safety, and
what were deemed to be public uses.  Those who would be
using those riparian lands for a railway bridge or a
terminal that would be for commercial purposes.
And he said that in the instance of the
great public uses, there would not be a need to pay
compensation because that great public right overrided
the riparian proprietor's exercise of riparian right.
With respect to the public use, however, and this is at
page 910 to 911 Delaware's appendix, he said that with
respect to those public uses, there might be a
requirement for a taking or a payment of compensation.
And so Justice Souter, I appreciate that our
position has a frustration, in the sense that it does
require individual facts.  But I would submit to you
that in the 160 years in which the -- New Jersey
citizens have been wharfing into the Delaware River,
Delaware has permitted that in every single instance,
except two.  And there are both liquified natural gas
facilities.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  It's rather recent that
Delaware has gotten into the business of regulating at
all.  I thought that for most of this period until the
'60s, Delaware just wasn't doing anything unless
something was a nuisance, and that didn't come up.
MR. FREDERICK:  It is correct that Delaware
regulated by the common law, Justice Ginsburg, but as
the Special Master correctly found just because the
limitation under the FX judicial precedents is for
nuisances does not mean there is no regulation.  When
Delaware chose to override its common law riparian
jurisdiction by implementing statutes, New Jersey
acceded to them to the point that in its consideration
of coastal zone management laws in the 1970s, the
attorney general of New Jersey was specifically
consulted whether compliance with the Federal statute
and Delaware statutes was necessary.
And in 1980 issued a coastal zone management
plan, New Jersey did -- that recognized that if there
was an LNG facility, the agreement of both states was
necessary.  The deponents in this case, every single one
of them from the New Jersey side, including persons who
had worked for the State for nearly 30 years, said that
the entire time they had worked for the State, if the
project crossed the boundary there had to be a permit
obtained from the State of Delaware.  We would submit
that the constant --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  A permit -- a permit
for the project or a permit for the wharf?
MR. FREDERICK:  If the wharf extended beyond
the boundary line, Mr. Chief Justice, a permit for the
wharf, and that permit --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, then what does
the 1905 Compact give New Jersey?
MR. FREDERICK:  It gives New Jersey the
right to say who shall be the riparian owners to
exercise their rights, what they can do, and up to the
point where there would be an encroachment of the police
power of the State, the permission to do that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  What case -- and I could
ask Mr. Farr the same question -- do I consult in order
to give content to the term riparian rights?  Where can
I see what the substance of riparian rights is, in the
-- in the decisions of this Court or in other leading
decisions.
MR. FREDERICK:  The leading decision of this
Court, Justice Kennedy, is a case called Shively v
Bowlby, which was decided a few years before the 1905
Compact; and in that case this Court went through an
exhaustive determination to show what the riparian
rights were, State by State by State.  The purpose there
was to determine whether or not an Oregon riparian land
owner had rights that were consistent under Oregon
common law with those granted in a deed by Congress, and
in order to do that the Court went through a very long
examination and analysis of riparian rights as they
existed in all --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  If I understand you
correctly, Mr. Frederick, you say that the -- that the
police power of Delaware, despite Article VII, includes
the power to require you to get a license before you can
wharf out from the New Jersey Shore?
MR. FREDERICK:  I'm saying yes, that under
Delaware's -- no, it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  In other words, Delaware
can say no you can't wharf out unless, you get a license
from us, despite Article VII.
MR. FREDERICK:  If it goes beyond the
boundary, that is the position New Jersey --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of course it goes beyond
the boundary.  If it --
MR. FREDERICK:  They have --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  If the other side of the
boundary you don't need Article VII.  New Jersey can
allow anything to be done up to -- up to the low water
mark, but you're saying that despite Article VII
Delaware can say no, you cannot wharf out until you get
a license from us?
MR. FREDERICK:  Yes.  There are prohibited
uses, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Oh --
MR. FREDERICK:  You have to get a license
under New Jersey law, too, and that's the whole point of
State officials by New Jersey saying compliance had to
be with both laws.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You've just read Article --
Article VII out of the Compact.
MR. FREDERICK:  No.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It gives nothing to New
Jersey.
MR. FREDERICK:  It protects the New Jersey
landowners who in the interregnum between the 1905
Compact and this Court's boundary determination would
have faced the uncertainty that their grants would be
deemed puerperous by Delaware.
What this Court said in its boundary
decision was that the mere use of those was recognized
by Delaware under the common law, was not deemed to be a
nuisance, but in this Court's decision in Coffee versus
Groover, a grant made by a state that does not have
lawful title to the land would be deemed invalid.  That
case, which was decided in the late 1880s, invalidated
grants that had been made by the State of Florida at a
time when the boundary was uncertain.  And this Court
said that those grants were invalid in light of the
uncertain title that the State had when it made those
grants.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Why wouldn't Delaware's
police power allow it to require the demolition of all
existing wharfs?
MR. FREDERICK:  Those would be deemed
takings, Justice Alito.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's fine.  They can do
it.
MR. FREDERICK:  But it can be acquired by
compensation, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So long as it pays.
MR. FREDERICK:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What's left under
your reading of Virginia v. Maryland?  I understood that
case to say -- I mean it's the same thing, the Maryland
boundary goes to the low-water mark on the Virginia
shore.  Yet this Court held that that did not include
police power to prevent the particular riparian use at
issue there.
MR. FREDERICK:  The decision in Virginia v.
Maryland is distinguishable in a number of ways, and if
I could take a moment to go through those ways.
The first is that it involved a different
Compact with different language.  The 1785 Compact
between Virginia and Maryland specifically provided that
each -- the citizens of each State shall have "full
property in the shores of the Potomac River."  The court
construed the phrase "full property" to include riparian
rights.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me.  New Jersey does
not have full property in the shore of the Delaware?
MR. FREDERICK:  Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, then that's no basis
for distinguishing.  What else is there?
MR. FREDERICK:  The Black-Jenkins award
issued to resolve the boundary line was decided in 1877.
And in that arbitration decision, Maryland specifically
represented that the boundary should be drawn around the
wharves that were on the Virginia side of the boundary
so that the boundary, instead of being at the low-water
mark, would carve out every pier that had been
constructed.
The arbitrators rejected that, but in the
process provided that the riparian owners on the
Virginia side could go beyond the low-water mark -- that
is a direct quote -- "beyond the low-water mark to
exercise their riparian rights."  Congress --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  That's the case here
as well.  There's no doubt that New Jersey under the
Compact has the right to grant riparian rights,
including wharfing out, that go beyond the low-water
mark.
MR. FREDERICK:  The doubt here, Mr. Chief
Justice, is what the phrase "own side" means.  And we
think the better reading of own side is captured by the
grants part of the Special Master's recommendation is
that own side means the boundary.  But to the extent
that a right can be exercised, a riparian right
authorized by New Jersey beyond the low-water mark, it
is still subject to the police powers.
And at page 10 of the Special Master's
report in Virginia v. Maryland, the Special Master
specifically said this case does not concern the
exercise of the police powers, but rather the mere
withdrawal of the water.  There is no issue here as to
the types of general police powers that would apply to
the riparian right.
And finally, I would note that the Special
Master was the same.  He was uniquely positioned in this
case to assess the applicability of Virginia v. Maryland
because he had been the special master in that case,
too.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  I don't understand the
difference between withdrawing water as not being
subject to the police powers.  That could mean they
could drain the river, in effect.
MR. FREDERICK:  Well, what the court held
and what was decided in that case was that the taking of
the water by Virginia was not to the level where it
would give rise to the kind of police concern that
Maryland might express.  The court left that issue open.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't understand that.
It's up to Maryland what's a concern.  If Maryland
doesn't want any water taken, why isn't that a valid
exercise of Maryland's police power?
MR. FREDERICK:  It would be a valid
exercise, but I was answering Mr. Chief Justice's
question about what is left of it.  And the question,
what is left of it is that Virginia can continue to
withdraw water from the Potomac River.  Whether there
should be a problem in the future about overwithdrawing
or an exercise --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  As I understand our
decision in Virginia v.  Maryland it's that withdrawing
of the water is a carve out of Maryland's police power
that would otherwise apply.
MR. FREDERICK:  It would -- it would be a
limited carve out, that is correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Right.  Now why
isn't there a limited carve out on the New Jersey side
of similar riparian rights?  In other words, New Jersey
has the authority to authorize wharfing out and to that
extent, it's a carve out of Delaware's police power.
MR. FREDERICK:  It is a limited carve out to
the extent of permitting the wharfing out, Mr. Chief
Justice.  But that --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You don't even acknowledge
that.  You deny even that.  You have said that Delaware
can prevent the wharfing out and say you can't wharf out
unless you get a license from us.
MR. FREDERICK:  If it is a nuisance you
cannot get a license.  That is classic riparian law,
Mr. -- Justice --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Well, I understood your
earlier answer to be exactly what Justice Scalia said.
Are you now saying that Delaware can prevent it only on
the grounds of preventing a nuisance?
MR. FREDERICK:  I'm saying yes.  That would
be a classic exercise of riparian --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  I'm not saying whether that
would be a classic exercise.  Is that the only
circumstance in which it can be exercised, or
conversely, does Delaware have the authority to say no
simply because it says no?
I thought your answer the first time around
finally was the latter.  It can say no.  And I think
that's what my brother Scalia thought.
Now are you saying it can say no only if
there is a nuisance or some other specified reason?
MR. FREDERICK:  Let me try it this way.  As
a limitation of a riparian right, the State of Delaware
can limit the length of the wharf, whether the wharf
goes in ordinary circumstances, but as to a prohibition,
it cannot do so unless it is a nuisance as a matter of
riparian jurisdiction.  As a matter of police power --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I don't.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Wait.  He is not done.  As
a matter of police power, however, they can do anything?
MR. FREDERICK:  No.  The State can limit the
activities that can occur on the wharf.  And that is the
crucial distinction here.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  And it can limit it, I
presume, subject to some reasonable rule of health and
safety?
MR. FREDERICK:  That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Okay.  It simply cannot say
as a matter of legislative view case no more wharfs?
MR. FREDERICK:  That's correct.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Who decides whether it's a
nuisance?  If Delaware says that docking a sailboat is a
nuisance, who decides that?  Does all of this have to be
decided by us in original cases?
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK:  Typically the Corps of
Engineers determines that issue as a matter of
application of the 1899 Rivers and Harbors
Appropriations Act.  Section 10 of that act, Justice
Alito, the Corps of Engineers has the authority to
determine whether or not a docking or wharfing in a
navigable waterway of the United States would constitute
a nuisance to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But you're not talking
about nuisance.  You're talking about Delaware's
environmental laws.  That's what this project concerns.
MR. FREDERICK:  That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And you were saying
Delaware's environmental laws trump whatever riparian
right New Jersey can grant?
MR. FREDERICK:  The environmental laws would
apply to the project.  The position of Delaware is not
that BP can't build its wharf.  It's that it can't
engage in a prohibited use on that wharf.  The wharf
itself is not a nuisance.  It does not violate any
normal standard of riparian use.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Could the State of New
Jersey allow the wharf to be built for some unspecified
purpose, just let it stick out there until it decides
what it wants to do with it?
MR. FREDERICK:  As I matter of both States'
laws, Justice Kennedy, that's not how either state does
it.  Both States now require as part of the
environmental --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I'm asking a hypothetical,
could it do that?  It would seem to me that would be a
very stupid riparian use, but could it do that?
MR. FREDERICK:  I think that, yes, it could
do that if its intent was to achieve access to the
navigable waterway.  But both states, both New Jersey,
outside the Twelve-Mile Circle, and Delaware apply
police powers now so that permits have to be required
when --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How does that work?
What if New Jersey says to the wharf owners you must
dredge around your wharf because we think it's -- you
know, silt is depositing, and Delaware says you may not
dredge around your wharf because we think it's going to
disturb the oysters?  Who -- how do you concur
jurisdiction work in that case?
MR. FREDERICK:  That is an easy one, Mr.
Chief Justice, because New Jersey has conceded that it
does not have the authority to regulate dredging within
the Twelve Mile Circle.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, it's something
they do have the authority to regulate.
MR. FREDERICK:  That's the point.  Riparian
jurisdiction is quite limited.  It concerns only certain
aspects of the riparian owner's access to the waterways,
and that limitation of that property right has been
recognized for centuries by this Court and others
courts.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You used the word
"riparian jurisdiction."  We have riparian rights.
That's a familiar term.  Riparian jurisdiction which is
used in Article VII is a novelty.
MR. FREDERICK:  That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg.  I'm using it in the term that the Special
Master did it, which is the State's jurisdiction to
govern the exercise of riparian rights.  It is not a
term of art.
Farnham's treatise, which is another source
of where riparian rights traditionally have been
recognized, did not use that phrase, and the parties
could not find any --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Mr. Frederick, does the
riparian right include the right to dump refuse or
sewage into a river?
MR. FREDERICK:  It is a -- yes, it is a part
of the classic riparian right, intakes and discharges,
Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  And even though that would
create a nuisance across the river, you could -- they
still would have -- who would trump?  Who would prevail?
MR. FREDERICK:  The police power would
prevail on that, because what you dump is what -- is
where everything matters.  If the dumping is simply
water that doesn't have any ecological effects, that --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  No, I'm assuming something
that pollutes the river.
MR. FREDERICK:  That would be subject to the
environmental laws.  That's classic police power
recognized by this Court in Hudson v. McCarter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you,
Mr. Frederick.
Mr. Farr, you have three minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF H. BARTOW FARR
ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF
MR. FARR:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
May I just say two things, and, first of all, something
that we haven't really talked about this morning.
With respect to matters of nuisance and all,
Federal law provides a substantial array of laws:  The
Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, the Coastal Zone
Management Act, the Rivers and Harbors Act, all of those
things.
Anything built out from New Jersey has to
undergo Federal review; and, subject to the Compact,
Delaware has rights to participate at that Federal
level.  So what we are talking about here, and what the
bill of complaint deals with, is the question of whether
Delaware can do what it did here, which is apply its
State law enacted under its police power to say that a
proposed project, riparian project, for the New Jersey
side is impermissible and cannot be built.  So we are
dealing just with the law of State versus State.
Now -- so I'd like to suggest if -- if we
put ourselves in the shoes of the Commissioners who were
negotiating this Compact in 1905, what is the likely
reaction if Article VII -- if, now, Delaware had
proposed at the time that, instead of the language as it
is now, at the end of Article VII the words were added
"subject to the police power of the other State"?
New Jersey obviously would have had the
reaction to that that that is something that depends on
the boundary.  There is no chance that New Jersey is
going to be able to exercise any police power on the
Delaware side, because there is no boundary dispute that
would involve that.
So this would essentially be a one-way veto
that Delaware would be trying to add to the contract to
say:  Could we -- we'll be able to override any riparian
structure under our police power.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's a one-way pass.  Why
shouldn't it be a one-way veto?
MR. FARR:  Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It doesn't give Delaware
anything.
MR. FARR:  Well, except for the fact that,
again, if we put ourselves in their shoes, it seems to
me what New Jersey would say is:  If you are proposing
that you can veto all of our riparian projects using
your police power because of your view of the boundary,
why are we dismissing the case that we just filed, or
filed in 1877 --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  You are saying that the --
MR. FARR:  --to determine the boundaries?
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  You are saying that the
concept of "riparian rights" displaces the police power,
to a large extent.
MR. FARR:  To the extent that the exercise
of the police power is inconsistent with the power of
the State, the authority of the State, to authorize a
pier or wharf for the purposes for which piers and
wharves are used, which is the loading and unloading of
goods.
If that is what the State -- if that is what
New Jersey has done, that is not subject to an override
or a veto by Delaware exercising its police power.  I
mean this was an important value at the time that the
Compact was enacted, and New Jersey would not have
lightly let Delaware veto it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Mr. Farr, can I ask
you a question as purely a --
MR. FARR:  Of course.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- matter of
curiosity?  The parties talk about the Duke of York's
grant to William Penn in this case, but nobody ever
explains where Delaware came from.  How did that --
where did Delaware -- I mean a grant to William Penn is
Pennsylvania.  Where -- when did Delaware --
MR. FARR:  Oh, there were -- I think there
were further grants along the process and further
division of -- of territory.  I think some of that is
actually explained in New Jersey v.  Delaware, too.  I
may be leading you in the wrong direction, but I don't
think so.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you.  The case
is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the case in the
