IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
KLEIN & CO. FUTURES, INC. :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 06-1265
BOARD OF TRADE OF THE :
CITY OF NEW YORK, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, October 29, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DREW S. DAYS, III, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Petitioner.
ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DREW S. DAYS, III, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 20
ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DREW S. DAYS, III, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in case 06-1265, Klein & Co. Futures
v. Board of Trade of the City of New York. 	 Mr. Days?
MR. DAYS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
A clearing futures commodity merchant, an
FCM, such as Petitioner, has standing to sue contract
markets and clearing organizations of contract markets
under Section 25 (b)(1) of the act for their bad faith
failure to enforce rules that are required by the act
and by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. The
court of appeal's contrary ruling should be reversed for
three reasons, because it's contrary to the text of
(b)(1), it ignores the essential rule of clearing
FCM's such as Petitioner recognized by the Commodity
Exchange Act, as well as long-standing industry rules
and practices -- an assessment with which the expert
Federal agency, the Commodity Future Trading Commission
concurs -- and it's in cross purposes with the goal that
Congress sought to achieve in enacting an express
private right of action in 25(b)(1) against contract
markets, namely to ensure the existence of fair and
orderly markets through a system of effective
subregulation. The plain language of the Commodity
Exchange Act confers statutory standing on Petitioner to
bring this private right of action against Respondents.
(b)(1) makes no reference to buyer or seller but
instead confers standing on any person who engaged -- a
person who engaged in any transaction on or subject to
the rules of a contract market or licensed board of
trade.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Days, can I interrupt
you there, and ask, if you would --
MR. DAYS: Yes, Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- if you would define
the transactions -- the particular transactions on which
you rely to come within that provision and what rules of
the exchange or the clearinghouse do you say was
violated?
MR. DAYS: Justice Ginsburg, we view this as
several subsidiary transactions that ultimately end in
the consummation of the contract, but with respect to
the rules that we have in mind -- first of all Rule 6
(a) talks about -- that can be found in the blue brief
at 1a -- that such contract executed or consummated by
or through a member of such contract market. This is a
clearing FCM that does this. And 6 (a), along with the
knife rule, that is the contract markets rule 121(f) and
6(i)(2), essentially indicate the following
arrangement: No contract can be dealt with or entered
into on a contract market without a guarantee from the
clearing FCM. The FCM becomes the buyer and seller with
respect to that particular contract. It assumes that
contract and then, after assuming that contract, has to
clear it immediately, indeed, within one hour. So
that's -- those are the rules under the statute and with
respect to the contract market.
With respect to the clearing
organization, Rule 401(a), which is found at the red
brief at 6a, indicates that the clearing point, the
clearing FCM is the point that deals with the clearing
organization. And at that point, there's no
communication, no contact -- no contract between the
investor and the clearing organization. The clearing
organization becomes the buyer and seller. In other
words, the contract is between a clearing FCM on one
side of the contract and a clearing FCM on the other
side of the contract. The clearing organization becomes
the buyer and seller, but before that happens, it's
clear that the clearing organization views the clearing
FCM as the party to the contract. It is not the
investor. It is not any other party.
The important thing also about this
process is that the clearing FCM is always financially
liable from the very beginning of this transaction, this
process, to the very end. That is, from the --
executing the contract and the consummation of the
contract. For the Court of Appeals to talk about buyer
or seller and treat a clearing FCM as a mere creditor or
agent really misses entirely the role that clearing
FCM's play in this process.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You think you --
MR. DAYS: I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You've talked about
the transaction, but I also ask you, what were the rules
that the Defendants violated, the rules of the statute?
MR. DAYS: Well, it's -- it is clear, as
I indicated with respect to the rule of the contract
market, that the clearing FCM is required to clear that
particular order or contract. And, therefore, at that
point, the clearing requires some information about the
settlement price. Here the allegation is that there was
fraud at the point where the settlement price was set.
That then created a problem with the clearinghouse, and
at the clearing process there was also a continuing
violation because at both points the contract market and
the clearing organization should have been applying
their rules effectively and carefully, and we suggest
here that that was done in bad faith.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I think --
MR. DAYS: The cause of action, we
understand, requires that there be a showing of bad
faith.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is -- I don't want to
reduce the issue down to something too simplistic, but
is there a rule that says don't lie, don't commit fraud?
MR. DAYS: Yes. In fact, the -- in order to
be a contract -- a market designated by the CFTC and by
the statute, there has to be a commitment to avoiding
price manipulation and cornering the market or various
other things of that kind. So that's in the statute,
and it's also subject to the rules of the CFTC. That's
a basic understanding. That's a given. Indeed, with
respect to the whole question of settlement prices and
margins, the understanding of those who participate in a
commodity futures market is that they will establish
their margins with the expectation that those rules will
be applied fairly and firmly and in good faith.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Am I -- am I right that we
really do not have to --
MR. DAYS: Excuse me?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Am I correct that we really
do not have to determine that issue this morning?
MR. DAYS: What --
JUSTICE SOUTER: All we have to determine is
whether it is possible for the Petitioner here to be
within the class of those with standing?
MR. DAYS: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. DAYS: This is a standing case, sir.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Days, suppose
that the exchange has a standard sort of
nondiscrimination provision with respect to employment
practices, and it -- an employee asserts that she was
discriminated against in the promotion review. Would
she be covered by this provision?
MR. DAYS: No, Your Honor. I think that
Congress had in mind a limitation of the standing
position -- that is standing -- a right to those who
participate in the process, when it talks about a person
who engaged in a transaction on or subject to the rules
of the contract market --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I suppose the
transaction would be her annual employment review that
she alleges violated the exchange rule saying the
exchange would not discriminate on the basis of sex.
MR. DAYS: I don't believe that that would
be a transaction on or subject to the rules of the
contract market. She would not or he would not be a
person whose transaction, that is the employment
contract, would be carried out on or subject to the
rules of the contract.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But suppose, to narrow
that hypothetical, that there's a rule that you can't be
an employee of the clearinghouse or the exchange if you
have a conviction for fraud, and they don't -- they're
negligent and careless about enforcing that rule and
that fraud causes the loss. Under either your theory or
the government's theory, would there be liability, and
is there a difference between those two theories?
MR. DAYS: Well, the statute itself talks
about the responsibilities of the contract market or the
clearing organization. And it describes transactions,
and transactions are described broadly but not in a way
that would encompass the examples that you gave, Justice
Kennedy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- so, the
transaction has some substantive limitation that is
derived from where?
MR. DAYS: Well, it's derived from the
statute, if one looks at Rule 2(i) in the statute. That
describes transactions in a variety of ways. It's not
in any of the appendices, but it can be located, I
believe, on page 5 of the yellow brief, where we talk
about that and indeed the interpretation that was given
by the Second Circuit in the Ken Roberts case, which we
also cite at that page in the yellow brief.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But in my hypothetical
there is a transaction and there are actual damages --
I'm reading from -- from (b)(c). There's been a
transaction and the liabilities for damages sustained by
a person who engaged in the transaction or subject to
the rules of the buyer.
MR. DAYS: Well, Justice Kennedy, I want to
focus on transaction. There's nothing that I've been
able to find, nothing that the CFTC has indicated in
this respect that would cover the hypothetical that you
and Chief Justice Roberts had mentioned. Theoretically,
yes, but I don't think that -- in fact not
theoretically, yes, I would say the transaction does not
incorporate those ancillary rules of an operation of a
contract market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why aren't
these ancillary rules? When I think of a futures
exchange market and the transaction, I think of the
buyers and the sellers, you know, the longs and the
shorts, and this strikes me as just kind of the
paperwork in the back office. Why is that, why should
we assume that's covered by the term "transaction"?
MR. DAYS: Well, it is a broad definition,
but it focuses on the process of the execution and
consummation of the contract, not matters that are
unrelated. I would view, as was indicated in the
American Agricultural Movement case, these people as
nonparticipants in the operation of the core function of
a contract market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: These people -- you
mean the ones in our hypotheticals.
MR. DAYS: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can I ask you -- I find it
difficult -- I'm finding it difficult to follow the
exact language on page 4a of the appendix, of (b)(1)(C).
To you, that's probably the key provision, right? And
that's in the blue brief. And catch me when I read it
wrong, if I do. As I -- as I see it, it says -- and
here it says "a clearing organization." That's what we
are interested in here, the clearing organization.
MR. DAYS: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, a clearing
organization that doesn't enforce a bylaw properly or a
rule or reg properly, which is what you're saying
happened?
MR. DAYS: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: The clearing organization
got all mixed and it all --
MR. DAYS: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, they're liable for
actual damages to a person who engaged in a transaction
in a contract market. That's what it says. And the
contract market is the futures exchange.
MR. DAYS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Not the clearing
organization.
MR. DAYS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And they're liable to that
person for the actual losses that resulted from his
transaction in the futures exchange --- as such
transaction.
MR. DAYS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: So what your claim -- they
were caused by the failure of the clearinghouse to
follow its rules.
MR. DAYS: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: If they just read that, we
have a case where the clearing organization didn't
follow its rules the -- my client engaged in a
transaction over the futures exchange.
MR. DAYS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it was caused harm
because the clearing organization didn't follow its
rules. You say that's what it says.
MR. DAYS: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's what happened?
MR. DAYS: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Did I understand that
correctly?
MR. DAYS: Yes. I don't know, Justice
Breyer, whether you're heading toward the concern that's
expressed by the Respondents, namely that 25(b)(1) does
not contain in that second part of the statute a
reference to a --
JUSTICE BREYER: Clearing organization.
MR. DAYS: -- clearing organization.
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, but then the
response I'm going to ask them is, so what?
MR. DAYS: Well, I think that is -- "so
what" is a proper response, I'm glad you said it rather
than I, that --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know you're going to --
but I --
MR. DAYS: We have -- we have, we think,
standing with respect to a transaction that occurred on
the contract market even if the Respondents' argument is
persuasive that it didn't happen on the clearing
organization or subject to the rules of the clearing
organization.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It would be an argument
for this case because that absence has been cured.
Wasn't that in the 2000 amendment that -- that they
changed the --
MR. DAYS: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the list to registered
entity and which does include clearinghouse.
MR. DAYS: Yes. Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So --
MR. DAYS: Yes?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The concern on the
other side, I take it, is that it's not just limited to
transactions on the exchange, but transactions subject
to the rules of a contract market. And I understood
you, in response to the hypothetical that Justice
Kennedy posed, that you indicated that transaction has
some substantive limit to it, and if that's the case,
which seems to me an awfully large concession, then we
have to figure out what the limit is. And it seems to
me that it could just as easily be limited to the
transaction between buyers and sellers of futures
contracts as between all these subsidiary, ancillary,
collateral, whatever transactions that simply implement
that broader transaction.
MR. DAYS: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, there
are limitations with respect to 25(b)(1). As I
indicated, nonparticipants in the market are not
explicitly covered by this, but also one has to
understand that there has to be a showing of bad faith
and there are no punitive damages. There are actually
damages and, therefore, this limits the extent to which
this provision can be used by someone who is not within
the category that I described.
JUSTICE BREYER: Correct me if I'm wrong,
but you're going to be more favorable to this than I
expect your opponent. I mean, there is nothing really
linguistically or otherwise wrong if you had a statute
that said people in the badminton court have to play
carefully. And if they hurt somebody on the
merry-go-round, they are liable.
And so people in the contract market have to
play carefully, and if they have hurt somebody over at
the futures exchange, they are liable.
But it says those people in the futures
exchange are people who engage in a transaction on the
futures exchange.
MR. DAYS: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: And so they said well, by
odd fluke of fate, your clients didn't. It was the --
rather, their client who actually went into the futures
exchange and bought the commodity.
Your point, I take it, is -- well that's
true, but my client did something, he guaranteed that
commodity transaction in accordance with the rules of
the futures exchange, and that's what makes him a player
in the futures exchange.
MR. DAYS: Yes. As to him, yes --
JUSTICE BREYER: He --
MR. DAYS: -- that is right.
JUSTICE BREYER: He guaranteed through the
clearinghouse the payment of the contract made on the
futures exchange --
MR. DAYS: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which he didn't make,
but he guaranteed it.
MR. DAYS: Well, that's not correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: He made it.
MR. DAYS: Well, that's not correct, Justice
Breyer. The clearing --
JUSTICE BREYER: He didn't walk on to the
floor and make it. It was his client who walked on to
the floor and said whatever. Is that right?
MR. DAYS: Well, it's hard to know who walks
on what floor. I think what is clear about this
industry is that it is the clearing FCM who is always at
the center of this, the essential participant in this
entire process.
The FCM's may not know who the customer is.
They certainly don't know who the customer is on the
other side. The clearinghouse doesn't know who the
customer is, or the investor is. So the investor
actually plays a very small role other than putting up
his or her money at the beginning of the process.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. I mean the --
the market is about investors. It's about buyers and
sellers. Now, you're -- the clearinghouse and these
FCM's may or may not be covered by the language of the
statute, but it's an awful big stretch to say they are
central to the market.
What's central to the market are the
investors. That's why they have these. They wouldn't
have this market for -- for your clients, I mean for the
clearinghouse or anything else. The market is there for
the buyers and the sellers. That's the central
transaction.
MR. DAYS: We don't argue that investors are
barred from bringing suits under 25(b)(1). They would
--
be persons who engaged in transactions on, or subject
to, the rules of the contract market.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Didn't Judge Friendly
refer to the FCM as a central player or a principal in
MR. DAYS: Yes. That -- that's certainly
been the case in Leist where Judge Friendly wrote the
opinion. And also --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is the transaction --
what is the single transaction that you think brings
your client within this language?
MR. DAYS: Well, I mentioned --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is the transaction,
the guarantee?
MR. DAYS: The one -- the contract market
requires that the clearing FCM clear a contract with one
hour -- assume the contract. So the assuming of the
contract and the clearing required by the rules of the
contract market is a violation of the CEA.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not talking about what
the rule is that was violated. It says "who engaged in
any transaction on or subject to the rules of such
contract market." What is, in brief, "the transaction"
you're relying upon?
MR. DAYS: Well, Your Honor, as indicated,
the transaction is the process of assuming this contract
and then going toward the clearing -- clearing
organization to clear it, and it's the clearing
organization, setting the settlement price, which really
dictates what happens on the clearing organization. So
it's the setting of the settlement price which is the
key point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The transaction does not
require two parties?
MR. DAYS: Well, there are two parties here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have a one-party
transaction?
MR. DAYS: There is a -- we can view this as
one sole transaction, as one transaction with a number
of subsidiary activities along the process between
execution and consummation, or one can view various
transactions that ultimately end up with the
consummation of the contract.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why isn't it just --
MR. DAYS: I don't think it makes any
difference one way or another.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the guarantee, the
relationship between the clearing organization and the
clearinghouse -- the clearing organization has to give a
guarantee and has to put up margin?
MR. DAYS: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So there is a transaction
between the clearinghouse and the clearing organization.
MR. DAYS: Oh, absolutely. Well, they are
same thing. You mean the clearing FCM and the
organization. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Days, we'll give
you a minute for rebuttal. Mr. Stewart.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MALCOLM L. STEWART,
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AMICUS CURIAE SUPPORTING PETITIONER
MR. STEWART: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
For purposes of this case, the Court may
assume that the word "transaction" in Section 25(b)(1)
is limited to the purchase and sale of futures and
options contracts.
The Court may also assume that, in order to
engage in such a transaction, a person must be a
necessary and direct participant in the transaction.
Even under those --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where -- where do
all of those assumptions come from? I would have
thought the limitation of "transaction" beyond the plain
language would be a significant concession in this case.
I mean --
MR. STEWART: When I say "assume," I am
saying that the Court need not decide at this point how
far, if at all, beyond the core transactions that occur
on contract markets the statute breaches. That is, with
respect to the hypothetical case of an exchange or a
clearinghouse that has an anti-discrimination rule and
is alleged to have violated that rule.
Yes, on the one hand, you could say that in
literal terms that is a transaction subject to the rules
of the exchange. On the other hand, I think there is
significant force to Respondents' contention that that
seems very far afield from what was the core of
Congress's concern. And with respect to the
anti-discrimination hypothetical, there would also be
the argument that there is a different Federal statute.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So we have to figure
out what was the core of Congress's concern and limit
"transaction" in that way?
MR. STEWART: I think the Court can at least
start from the assumption that Congress referred to
transactions on, or subject to, the rules of the
contract market. And none of the things that have been
posited in the hypotheticals, the anti-discrimination,
would be transactions on a contract market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But they would be
subject to the rules of the contract market.
MR. STEWART: They would be subject to the
rules. But our point here is that the United States and
the CFTC have not had occasion to decide how far, if at
all, beyond the core transactions on the contract market
the statute extends.
But our point is, even if we look at the
core of what Congress was driving at, the buying and
selling of futures options contracts, the clearing FCM
is a proper plaintiff because it assumes direct
contractual liability to the clearinghouse. Even before
the clearing process is completed, it was defined as the
buyer or seller of the contracts in the NYFE rules, and
its participation is essential.
Now -- now, we have a somewhat different
conception of the relevant transaction than does the
Petitioner. In our view, when Eisler executed his
trades on the floor of the exchange, he set in motion a
process that would quickly and inevitably culminate in
the clearing of the trades by the clearing organization,
and at the end of the day there would be an array of
contractual relationships.
Klein would have a contractal obligation to
the clearinghouse. The clearing FCM on the other side
of the trade would have its own obligation to the
clearinghouse. Klein would have an agreement with its
customer, First West, that would entail rights and
obligations running between them. And there would be a
similar set of rights and obligations on the other side
of the trade.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the argument
that if we accept your view of it, allowing the FCM to
sue, then there could be multiple liability?
MR. STEWART: I think that's incorrect. I
think the customer would also be an appropriate
plaintiff, that is, the customer would have his own
rights and obligations arising out of the -- the
contract with the clearing FCM. But the fact that they
might both be conceivable plaintiffs wouldn't mean that
they could both recover in the same case.
Remember that the statute limits recovery to
actual losses. So if the customer here, Eisler and
First West, had paid the required additional margin to
Klein, and Klein had discharged its obligation to the
clearinghouse, Klein would still be a person who had
engaged in a transaction. But Klein wouldn't be able to
recover because he would have suffered no actual losses.
So it's the person who bears the actual loss
at the end of the day who would be the appropriate
plaintiff.
And the fact that in some cases that might
be the customer and in other cases it might be the
clearing FCM doesn't mean that there would be
duplicative recovery in a single case.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, when you began by
saying we could begin -- we could assume certain things,
was it included in the things that we could assume --
was it the proposition that the transaction was limited
to a purchase or sale?
MR. STEWART: A purchase or sale, although
we would extend -- I mean we would interpret the
clearing process as part of the purchase or sale. And
the reason we would do that is that clearing occurs
inevitably by operation of law, as it were. That is,
once Eisler executes his trades, Klein has no discretion
as to whether to discharge its obligation to clear the
trades.
Klein had previously entered into a
commitment to guarantee the trades that Eisler made.
And, therefore, what -- Klein's obligations to the
clearinghouse followed directly and inevitably from the
initial trade on the floor of the exchange.
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that different from
saying under the exchange rule the FCM is actually the
party that enters into the trade.
MR. STEWART: I think it is a different
thing and there are two different bases on which the
Court could rule in our favor, that is, Rule 306(i)(2)
of the rules of the exchange that were in effect at the
time of these trades specified that -- and that's
reproduced, I guess, at page 14a of the blue brief. And
it said -- a second sentence of Rule 306(i)(2) says
every such contract when made by a trading member shall
be made on behalf of a clearing member, who shall be the
buyer or seller of said contract on the terms set forth
therein.
So one way to rule for Klein in this case is
to simply say even if we focus entirely on the moment at
which the trade was executed, under the rules of the
exchange, Klein was deemed to be the buyer or seller.
But we are also making the different argument and in a
sense we think the more important practical argument,
that regardless of where the contract ran during the
brief period before the clearing process was
consummated, the salient factor is that at the
conclusion of the clearing process, the clearinghouse
would look directly and only to Klein for satisfaction
of any obligations arising out of unsuccessful trades.
In a sense the clearinghouse could be
analogized to a department store in which only the
clearing members have charge accounts. And in order for
anyone else to make a purchase, he has to make
prearrangements with a charge account holder to have
permission to charge things to his accounts. And that's
essentially what was done here. In order for Eisler to
execute trades on the floor of the exchange, he had to
have the prior commitment from Klein that Eisler would
be allowed to charge trades to client's account.
And in that situation, we think it's
entirely natural to say that Klein engaged in the
transaction, even though Eisler was making the decisions
as to exactly what trades to execute.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Stewart --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that why the Second
Circuit was wrong in saying it was just like a
securities broker?
MR. STEWART: Yes. I think the Second
Circuit's error was not really that it had a
misconception of how narrow or broad the private right
of action is. The Second Circuit's error was that it
misunderstood the role that a clearing FCM plays in the
process. The clearing FCM doesn't simply facilitate the
formation of contracts between other people. The
clearinghouse assumes direct contractual -- I'm sorry.
I mean the clearing FCM assumes direct contractual
liability to the clearinghouse.
And that's fundamental to the operation of
the contract markets. That is, the point of the
clearinghouse is to give investors assurance that if
their trades are successful, they will get paid. And in
order for the clearinghouse to pay the winners, it has
to have confidence that it will be able to collect from
the losers.
And the way that it has that confidence is
by identifying a small number of people, clearing FCM's,
who have demonstrated financial wherewithal and
integrity, and saying we are going to look only to you
to satisfy these obligations. We are not going to put
ourselves in the business of going after large, large
numbers of individual investors to ensure that losing
trades will be paid.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Stewart, may I go back
to the question of multiple recoveries. And by that
term, as I understand it, the term does not mean
duplicating recoveries. And I don't understand -- and
this is what I want you to explain -- why there couldn't
be a recovery in a case analogous to this both by the
FCM and by the ultimate customer.
Let's assume that the settlement price is,
in fact, rigged. The FCM cannot meet the resulting
margin call and folds, and hence a situation like this.
And this happens quickly enough so that the ultimate
transaction is never consummated. So that the -- the
contracting party on the FCM side of the trade doesn't
get the benefit of what would have been a favorable
contract. Couldn't you have recovery in that case both
by the customer and the FCM?
MR. STEWART: I'm not sure if I -- if I
fully understand the hypothetical.
JUSTICE SOUTER: It may be that I don't
understand how it works.
MR. STEWART: To answer a variant of it, I
think there could be cases in which both the customer
and the clearing FCM recovered something. That is, say
there is a loss of a million dollars that's attributable
to malfeasance by the exchange, and the customer comes
up with half of that money -- $500,000. And the
clearinghouse uses that to discharge half of its own
obligation to the clearinghouse.
Now, in that case, both the customer and the
clearing FCM might have a cause of action for $500,000.
So there would be -- there could be multiple recoveries
in the sense that you're describing.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But in my hypo, the FCM is
claiming damages because his business folds. So the
damages are not limited simply to those flowing from
this transaction itself. The customer is claiming
damages for failure to consummate a contract that would
have been favorable to him.
MR. STEWART: If you assume that
consequential damage is arising out of the loss of the
business --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right. And I am
assuming --
MR. STEWART: -- could be part of actual
losses, then there would be no barrier to each party,
the clearing FCM and the customer recovering what it
actually lost.
Our point is that there is no danger that
because the clearing FCM is -- there is no danger that
because the clearing FCM is liable for a million dollars
to the clearinghouse and the customer is liable to the
clearing FCM, each for a million dollars, that they will
both get a million dollars. It's only the person who
bears the actual loss.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Stewart.
Mr. Pincus.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANDREW J. PINCUS
ON BEHALF OF THE REPONDENTS
MR. PINCUS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
I'd like to return to the language of the
statute, because I think it explains why the comments
that Mr. Stewart started with are, in fact, compelled by
the language of the statute. 25 (a) talks about a
person who engages in any transaction on or subject to
the rules of a contract market. And I'm focusing on the
"on or subject to the rules."
If the Petitioners claimed in their opening
brief any -- the fact that any transaction was governed
by any rule, as in the Court's discrimination
hypotheticals, was enough, then the "on" would be
superfluous. There wouldn't be any need for "on",
because surely a transaction on a contract market has to
be governed by the rules of the contract market.
So I think that shows why "on or subject to
the rules of" is a term of art. It has a special
meaning here. And the only kinds of transactions that
are either on or subject --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but under that
reading they should have used the word "and" rather than
"or."
MR. PINCUS: No, Your Honor.
--
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Or which is subject to.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Justice Kennedy, I think
what Congress was explaining there is it wasn't saying
any transaction subject to the rules of a contract
market, because that would be all of the Court's
hypotheticals and discrimination and everything else,
and the word "on" wouldn't be there. And so by using
"on", which by definition "on" has to be subsumed in the
rules because if a transaction is on a contract market,
surely is in some way governed by a rule.
So if Congress meant to cover every
transaction that is in any way governed by a rule, it
wouldn't have had to include "on."
So the reason -- the fact that "on" is there
means, as we discussed in our brief, that this is a
special transaction on or subject to the rules singles
out a very special category of transactions. And that
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I'm not
following you. I think Justice Kennedy's question still
applies. Your argument assumes that the "or" is an
"and." I mean, you don't need to have a transaction
"on" at all. It can be simply one subject to the rules.
MR. PINCUS: Yes. But the fact that
Congress put "on" in there means that it was trying to
capture something other --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The fact that
Congress put "on" in there and then followed it with
"or" means you don't have to worry what "on" means if
you're subject to the rules of the contract market.
MR. PINCUS: Yes, Mr. Chief Justice. But I
think the reason that "on" is there is that Congress was
signaling that it wasn't, that the second part of the
clause or "subject to the rules" didn't literally mean
or subject to any rule, because if it literally meant
that, there would have been no reason to include "on."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: This is like ejusdem
generis argument. You're saying, we should interpret
"subject to the rules" in the same light that we
interpret "transaction"?
MR. PINCUS: No. This is an argument that
on or subject to the rules that a transaction on or
subject to the rules is a special kind of transaction.
It's a term of art in the statute, and a term of art
that refers to trades.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But even if it's a term of
art, do you contend that client was not engaged in a
transaction subject to the rules.
MR. PINCUS: Yes, we do. Your Honor, our
view is that the transaction that is referred to there
are the transactions that include, either at the trading
pit or a small category of off pit trades that are
permitted by Section C of the Commodities Exchange Act.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What is the scope of the
term "transaction" in your view? What does it cover?
MR. PINCUS: It covers the trade -- the
contract that occurs at the pit at the moment -- during
open when one --
JUSTICE STEVENS: In fact between either the
buyer or the seller and the clearinghouse, not the
clearinghouse, the FCM or whatever?
MR. PINCUS: Well, FCMs may or may not be
involved. In this case Klein wasn't involved, because
Eisler was a floor, had floor privileges and he
actually -- he was the person who was at the pit
engaging in these transactions. So our -- our view is
that the transaction, to start with that, either occurs
at the pit when an offer is made, an open outcry, and
it's accepted at that moment that transaction and --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And who are the parties to
the transaction?
MR. PINCUS: The parties to that transaction
are the buyer and seller, the customers, the people that
the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And the intermediaries are
not subject to the transaction either though they are
liable either for the purchase rights or the sale
rights?
MR. PINCUS: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They are not parties to
the transaction.
MR. PINCUS: They are not parties to the
transaction.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you can expose them to
millions of dollars in liability.
MR. PINCUS: At the moment, Your Honor, they
may not even be identified. At the moment that
transaction occurs --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But they are subject to
liability if the transaction doesn't -- isn't
consummated.
MR. PINCUS: Under the rules of the clearing
organization. Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the -- the buy and the
sell contract will be worth nothing if it isn't cleared.
MR. PINCUS: Well, it could -- what the
clearing process does after the -- after that contract
is formed is to eliminate, to provide a way to strip out
the credit risk that ordinarily wouldn't be there.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I know. But you want --
you want us to say that the clearing is no part of the
transaction, but the clearing is necessary to make a
transaction go forward. Otherwise the contract is just
a nullity.
MR. PINCUS: No, Your Honor, we don't
believe that the contract is a nullity. And in fact, if
for example a he contract was made at the pit, and for
some reason the -- the clearing member who was to clear
the transaction went bankrupt that day and didn't exist,
and therefore that transaction was not cleared, that
transaction would still be enforceable as between the
buyer and the seller.
JUSTICE BREYER: So they had to pick it up
in an hour.
MR. PINCUS: Well, it has to be cleared in
an hour to go through the clearing process.
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. So therefore any
transaction wouldn't happen in your hypothetical,
because if I understand it correctly -- the buyer and
the seller, who by the way are normally represented by
clearing-houses by Klein, or by brokers like Klein, but
in this case apparently they weren't -- they make the
transaction in the pit and then the rules of the
exchange say that the clearing-house has to pick it up,
a clearing member within one hour, and at that point
that person -- the clearing member, the broker, I guess,
this Klein type person -- becomes legally responsible
for seeing that the money is put up.
Now, it doesn't require a big stretch -- in
fact, zero stretch, of the word transaction, to think
that word transaction covers that entire process. From
the moment -- and by the way the whole process is
governed by the rules of the futures exchange -- so
there are rules in there. So why do you -- what reason
is there for taking that word transaction, cutting out
about two-thirds of the important event, ignoring the
fact that it is covered by the rule of the future
exchange, and limiting it to the physical moment when
somebody enters the pit in an unusual case and says "I
buy for" -- and then another person says "I sell for"?
MR. PINCUS: Well, let me first point out,
Your Honor, it's not an unusual case. There frequently
may be a case even where -- either where -- even where
both sides are represented by floor brokers, where the
floor broker who is -- who is representing the party in
the trade is not the clearing member. That happens all
the time and that's why the rules say that the clearing
member doesn't have to even be designated until one hour
after the trade. So hard to say that the clearing
member engages in that transaction on the floor when
he -- when it may not be designated.
The reason for the division is that Congress
set out a clear rule here. The transaction it referred
to, it used the language that it used elsewhere, as we
discuss in our brief, particularly in defining the
functions of floor trader and floor broker.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Pincus, if your view
were correct it would have been so easy for Congress to
say "buyers and sellers" or even "trade," but it used a
word "transaction" that you say has a special meaning in
this context, but "transaction" appears all through the
law and usually it's a term that has encompassing
meaning, like in the Federal rules "any transaction or
occurrence," and you would say that Congress has given
it here this very constrained meaning.
MR. PINCUS: We do say that, Your Honor.
Because -- let me address first your question about why
Congress couldn't use buyer or seller. Here Congress
had to -- needed a construction that would link the --
the transaction that was being targeted with the rules
of the -- of the contract market, because that was going
to be the test here, was it's all about whether or not
contract market violated its rules, and so it needed a
construction that referred to a transaction because
those are the things that are governed by the rules of
--
the contract market that might be misapplied in the
work -- in the way that A, B and C talk about.
So it would have had to -- even if it had
used the phrase, you know, "purchased" or "sold," a
commodity for future delivery or an option on a contract
for future delivery -- it would still have to say on or
subject to the rules of a contract market, in order to
link back to what it was doing, which was creating a
cause of action for the violation of the contract
markets own rules with respect to a transaction that was
subject to those rules.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why didn't it just say
sustained by a buyer or seller? "Shall be liable for
actual damages sustained by a buyer or seller." Why --
why would it need to be any more complicated than that?
MR. PINCUS: Well, because it -- it would
have to talk about --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When everything else is
the same, instead of "a person," just "buyer and
seller."
MR. PINCUS: Well, because then in the --
several lines down it talks about actual loss and it
would have to say buyers and sellers there as well. And
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't know why.
MR. PINCUS: Well, it would be referring
back to buyer or seller. But I think the key here is
for Congress, given the structure of the act, "any
transaction on or subject to the rules of the contract
market" is -- are these transactions. Those are the
only transactions that -- that meet that test. Those
are the transactions, that very same phrase is used in
defining the functions of the floor broker and the floor
trader who execute the transactions on the floor, and so
by using that phrase, Congress was tying back to
something that it had a clear definition of. Let me --
JUSTICE ALITO: Where is the clear -- there
is no clear definition. There is no definition
whatsoever, anywhere, of "transaction."
MR. PINCUS: Well, there is no definition of
transaction, Your Honor, but in the definitions of floor
trader and floor broker, the phrase "on or subject to
the rules of a contract market" appears again in
defining what they do, and so those are the people who
are at the pit, either executing for their own account
or for a customer's account, the trades. And so by
using that very phrase in defining what they do -- which
appears by the way on, in the discussion on pages 5 and
--
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are they persons engaged
in contracts subject to the rules -- are they persons
engaged in transactions subject to the rules?
MR. PINCUS: No, Your Honor, we don't -- we
don't think they are, because they are acting as --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Who are subject to the
rules in your view? It doesn't include the FCM, it
doesn't include the broker, it doesn't include the
trader.
MR. PINCUS: Well, certainly a floor trader
is because that's someone who is trading for his own
account. A floor broker who's merely representing a
customer is just like someone at a house closing, if you
can't make the house closing you appoint someone to
close the house. They aren't the ones who engage in the
transaction; you do.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Neither are they the person
who can end up personally liable, and -- I mean, they
don't have -- they are not subject to margin calls.
There is something very different about this set of
relationships from the broker/seller relationship in
buying and selling a house.
MR. PINCUS: Well, those people also have --
well, the -- the floor broker is not subject to a margin
call. He is subject to liability for other things that
he may do wrong, but for his role as a floor broker he
--
is not subject to margin responsibility.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You recognize that the
Second Circuit was wrong when it said that this FCM is
just like a securities broker. He is just making a deal
for a commission. It seems to me that that -- that was
not proper.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, if that was
all the Second Circuit said, I would agree with you that
would be wrong, but the Second Circuit recognized that
the -- Klein here had a risk, a credit risk because it
had backed up the credit of its customer, Eisler, and
that's why in the lessons learned report that the CFTC
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it's not just Klein.
It's every FCM. That is the job of an FCM.
MR. PINCUS: That is the job of the clearing
member of what an FCM does.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So that's not -- not
comparable to just a broker who executes my order for
shares and gets a commission for it.
MR. PINCUS: No, Your Honor, but as the
Second Circuit went on to note, the fact that there is a
credit risk here, that Klein is taking a risk based on
the credit of his customer Eisler -- as the CFTC noted,
there is nothing in the rules that require clearing
members to only accept minimum margin, and it's the job
of a clearing member to -- to look into both the
credit-worthiness of its customers and the risks of the
various transactions that are open and demanding more
margin.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I was under the impression
from the briefs, and maybe I'm wrong, that you did not
defend the reasoning of the Second Circuit. Am I right
or wrong?
MR. PINCUS: Well, we don't -- to the extent
Petitioners claim that the Second Circuit based its
reasoning on -- on the imputation into 25(b) of the
limitations in 25(a), we don't agree with that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Which was the principal
basis for its decision.
MR. PINCUS: But there was a second basis to
its decision, which talked about the fact that Klein
didn't engage in trading, and we agree with that basis
because that's what we're arguing here.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, on that subject and
you -- your client obviously has an institutional
interest in the case, assuming you don't prevail, is the
government's theory much broader and more undesirable in
your view than that offered in Klein brief? I didn't
have an opportunity to ask Mr. Days if he accepted the
government's position.
MR. PINCUS: Well, it -- it certainly would
be better if the phrase "transaction on or subject to
the rules of the contract market" meant "trade" and we
were only discussing how expansive, how elastic the
definition of "trade" was.
We would still take the position that it's
not elastic enough obviously to include clearing
members, but we think that, given the language that
Congress used and the fact that that language is used to
refer to that "on or subject to" formulation is
repeatedly used to refer to trades, we think it's very
clear that trades have to be what it is. Otherwise,
when the statute talks about the fact that a floor
broker engages in activities on or subject to the rules
of a contract market, it could be talking about
discrimination and all kinds of other activities. But
even with respect to the narrower formulation urged by
the Solicitor General, we think that it is not right for
several reasons: First of all the language of the
statute, as I said, but there's a clarity problem. If
once you move beyond that contract that is executed and
becomes complete on the pit, how far do you go? There's
clearing before the contract is executed on the pit --
at the pit. There may be antecedent activities -- for
example, someone who doesn't have floor privileges has
to go through an FCM. There may be an introducing
broker that introduces that customer to the FCM or all
of those activities which are specified in the statute
just like the subsequent clearing activity is specified
in the statute. Are they also shoe-horned into the
definition of trade?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Pincus --
MR. PINCUS: And that's where --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Justice Kennedy was
asking you about the government's position. One of the
positions -- one aspect of the government's position is
that -- that you would not dispute that a person who
engaged in a transaction subject to the rules of a
clearinghouse would be a proper plaintiff under the
current law. Well, certainly the FCM is a person
subject to the rules of a clearinghouse.
MR. PINCUS: Yes, although obviously the
parties haven't briefed the current law. We would take
the position that the current law doesn't change the
equation and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's what I thought
your position was. So that's not an accurate.
MR. PINCUS: No.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- characterization.
MR. PINCUS: No. Our position is, again,
the "on or subject to" language, we believe, quite
clearly refers to trades and that Congress's technical
correct substitution of registered entities doesn't
change that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you're saying that
because a trade is on or subject to, the only thing that
can be on or subject to is a trade. And it seems to me
that that -- that's the point at which we have
difficulty following your argument. Why -- what is your
reason, textual or otherwise, for saying that because a
trade is on or subject to, no other subtransaction can
be on subject to?
MR. PINCUS: Because -- because trades are
the only thing that fit those two criteria. Only trades
are -- can be under the statute either on the contract
market, either because -- because they are executed at
the pit or so-called off-market trades as referred to in
Section 6(c) -- very small categories of off-market
transactions --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But even if the --
MR. PINCUS: -- that are the equivalent of
trades but can occur off-market.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But, Mr. Pincus, even if
you limit it to the word "trades," it does not
necessarily follow that the only parties to the trade
are the original buyer and the original seller. There
are two intermediates who participate in the execution
of the trade.
MR. PINCUS: I agree, Your Honor, and that's
the second part of our argument. Once we reach the
point where it's trade, then the question is what does
trade mean? And --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Does it include this
transaction?
MR. PINCUS: Well, we believe that it --
there are -- at the pit, again, that the transaction,
the on transaction, the transaction that occurs on, is
the open outcry transaction where, in this case, Eisler
made an offer and some other floor trader accepted it,
and that was complete there. Klein has no role in that
transaction, and clearing members do not have a role in
that transaction.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why do you say --
MR. PINCUS: They come in later.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why do you say that Klein
had no role in it? It was an indispensable party to the
transaction.
MR. PINCUS: It was a subsequent party. It
had subsequent role --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Before it was completed he
participated, he was -- he functioned as a guarantor.
MR. PINCUS: Well, it was not -- it need not
be clear at the moment of that the trade is executed at
the pit who the clearing member will be. Often it won't
JUSTICE STEVENS: It was cleared by the time
it was over.
MR. PINCUS: No -- well, it depends what you
mean by "over," Your Honor. What happens in the
process, if I can just lay it out for one minute, is the
transaction occurs at the pit. It's recorded. The
clearing member --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There is no distinction
between A and D, but before it can be consummated B and
C have to play a role.
MR. PINCUS: Well, that activity is over.
I'll try to use neutral words. That activity at the pit
is over. The next -- that data, who bought, who sold,
and maybe the clearing members for those two parties are
identified. Maybe they're not. They might not be
identified for an hour according to the rules. So
something happened at the pit. It's then entered into
the computers, and at some subsequent point, yes, the
clearing members will be identified and the trade will
be cleared.
Our point is that is subsequent activity.
That is activity -- that's the clearing process. It's
important, but there is enforceable contract before the
clearing event occurs. Nothing in the rules say that
the contract is unenforceable.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's true, but is there
any reason that the word "transaction" would have --
serves a purpose by being so limited?
MR. PINCUS: It does, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: What -- what Congress would
Congress have wanted to do that?
MR. PINCUS: In -- because in the
environment that Congress was operating just following
this Court's decision in Curran, the focus entirely was
on protecting investors.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's not a reason. I
want to know what reason, what harm will be done if in
fact we take the word "transaction" and say the word
"transaction," while it's capable of the interpretation
you give, is also capable of an interpretation that
includes all the near contemporaneous events, including
the financing and guarantees? Like a mortgage in
selling a house.
MR. PINCUS: Because --
JUSTICE BREYER: And that also is
linguistically possible. What harm will be done --
MR. PINCUS: The harm that will --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- if the second is chosen
and not the first?
MR. PINCUS: The harm -- two categories of
harm: First, a lack of clarity. We don't know, as I
said, how far back are we going. The statute requires,
for customers that are not trade, not exchange members,
they have to go to an introducing broker. They have to
go then to an FCM.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the only one that has
this relationship that's different from an ordinary
broker, the only one is the FCM.
MR. PINCUS: But that's true, Your Honor,
but if the Court were to adopt a rule that says we're
going to read "transaction" broadly, and so anyone who
has anything to do with any aspect of the trade, either
before it or afterward, is covered, all of these
antecedent people, just in terms of the statutory
language, are people who have a role.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But they're not people
who are at risk. I mean if there -- if it's a broker
who was just executing a trade for a commission is not
at risk, but this FCM is at risk, in this transaction,
series of transactions.
MR. PINCUS: But it's hard to see in the
language where Congress would have drawn the line. I
think the problem is the lack of clarity. We certainly
won't know, if the Court says we are going to move
beyond this core transaction and encompass some of the
ancillary activities --
JUSTICE BREYER: I got that.
MR. PINCUS: Okay.
JUSTICE BREYER: I got that when you said
there were two. What's the second?
MR. PINCUS: Well, let me just add to the --
to the first that there are subsequent activities.
There also are arrangements set up with banks that
automatically supply margins, that facilitate
transactions. And so the question will be, aren't those
banks who play an important liquidity role, aren't they
part of a transaction?
The second reason is the reason involved --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The answer would be
that those transactions are not subject to the rules of
the exchange.
MR. PINCUS: Well, they are --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: They don't care what
kind of arrangement the FCM might have with its bank.
That's up to the FCM. There's no exchange --
MR. PINCUS: But it has to have an
arrangement, and that fact is a rule of the exchange.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there some --
MR. PINCUS: So it depends what rule.
Again, we're --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Pincus --
MR. PINCUS: -- on the rule where we're not
going to know what the answer is.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the agency that's
supposed to be the supervisor of this area, the CFTC, is
taking the position that the government presented to us
today. Apparently, it doesn't have the concern that you
have just expressed about reaching people who are not
themselves subject to the regulation of the exchange,
the clearinghouse.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I think it does have that
concern, Justice Ginsburg, which is why Mr. Stewart said
that the Court should sort of take this case on certain
assumptions because, as he recognized, the theory that
even the government put forward in its brief --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that what he
was telling us was that, even if you assume that Klein
has that, even if you've assume that.
MR. PINCUS: Well, it's certainly their
position that Klein has standing, but in terms of the
consequences of a ruling by the Court that the statute
goes beyond the core activity, I think the government's
suggestion sort of shows that even the government is not
sure, once you embark on that exercise, where the
boundary line is. And I would point out the government
is not asking for deference in this case nor could it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think you still
owe Justice Breyer his second reason.
MR. PINCUS: I do, Your Honor, and the
second reason is involved in the government's response
to Justice Souter's question about multiple recoveries.
If all of these various people can assert
claims, then there is certainly a risk, and a
significant risk, that all of these various people will
assert different kinds of monetary harm that they will
claim is actual loss.
In this case the principal, actual loss, as
we discussed in the second argument in our brief, is
claimed as the loss from the destruction, allegedly
caused from the destruction, of Klein's business.
If there was a bad-enough event on an
exchange, all of the people in this -- in the row from
the introducing broker down to the end, down to the
bank, could claim that, because there was a foul-up in
the electronic reporting system and trades were
misreported for a week and, when they were unwound, the
consequences of that where lots of bankruptcies in the
futures industry, that all of those liabilities get
pegged to the contract market. As -- as the FIA --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Aren't there lots of
situations in which a various -- serious -- harms a
whole bunch of people, and they all recover?
MR. PINCUS: There are, Justice Stevens, but
this is a particular kind of industry. As the -- as the
Futures Industry Association notes in its brief, every
day more than $5 trillion worth of contracts are traded
on futures exchanges. There is a huge amount of
concentrated risk in contract markets.
If the contract markets are going to be made
liable to a vast array of people, there is a very
serious risk that financial jeopardy --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You would agree if the
client had been trading on its own account with a
scalper, it would have been able to recover for the --
for its loss to itself; right?
MR. PINCUS: Yes, if it had been trading for
its own account.
JUSTICE STEVENS: If it's trading for itself
and some for other customers, it only can recover half
of those. Does that make sense?
MR. PINCUS: Yes, it does, because Klein is
a market insider.  It has ways to protect itself other
than suing the contract market.
It can certainly sue its customer. It has
ways of protecting itself, as the CFTC report said, in
terms of demanding more margin, in terms of watching the
risk in its customer's portfolio, in terms of -- of
hedging its own risk. It's an insider, and it can do
that.
What Congress was concerned with here -- and
the reason our construction of the statute makes sense
-- is that it protects the outsiders, the PC investors
who are at the core of the concern here, without
imposing a broad array of liability on the contract
markets, who are in the middle of a huge, huge amount of
financial risk, which really puts them in the position
of shouldering risk that's intolerable.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are there instances where
multiple parties who are injured sue under state law, or
is this generally deemed preemptive, or it just doesn't
happen, or --
MR. PINCUS: Well, there are options. I
mean one of the things that Klein says here is that this
is its only option. It can go to the FTC.
In this case, for example, the FTC order
against Eisler assessed a civil penalty but then said
the order could be -- it said that obligation could be
fufilled by paying the injured parties. Klein -- to the
extent Klein has an injury, the FTC -- the CFTC in a
similar case could do the same thing. There are state
law claims. There are --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Pincus, will you
satisfy me on one point. I -- I understand your
argument about what "transaction" means. But even if I
accept that argument, explain to me again why "or
subject to the rules" doesn't add anything?
MR. PINCUS: Well, it does. It adds -- in
our construction "the transactions that are on" are the
transactions that occur on the floor. The transactions
that are "subject to the rules" are the ex-pit
transactions.
Once you say "or subject to the rules"
involves more than ex-pit trades, off-exchange trades,
then you're into the world of the Court's hypotheticals
to Mr. Days of anti-discrimination rule.
So it has to have a limited meaning; and, by
coupling it with "on," we think that Congress made clear
it was referring to trades.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why wouldn't it have been
enough to just say "transactions on" if that was their
meaning? Why did -- did they --
MR. PINCUS: Because then you wouldn't
capture a category -- because then Congress would have
left out a category of trades. Congress meant to
capture investors who trade. There are two categories
of transactions that meet that test: Those that occur
on the exchange, on the -- physically on the pit, and
those that are within the industry called off-exchange
or off-pit transactions defined in Section 6(c) of the
act -- of the -- of the statute.
And so by -- the second phrase is meant to
capture those trades that may involve investors but
don't occur at the pit.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I take if -- if your
ultimate, let's say, policy reason for confining it to
that is the -- is the policy against multiple recovery.
MR. PINCUS: Yes. The policy reason is the
risk of multiple recoveries in an area where there is a
huge amount of risk. The contract market is at the
center of things, of these $5 trillion a day. And so
Congress wrote very carefully, and Congress's focus was,
in the wake of Curran -- and given what it said -- was
investors.
Because the -- the implied cause of action
that the Court recognized in Curran was all about
investors. The rationale --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Their current argument is,
basically, that's all Congress was thinking about.
MR. PINCUS: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But, as I understand your
position, it's something more. Congress was also
thinking probably about multiple recovery, and it didn't
want that. And we will impute that intent to Congress
because multiple recovery would be a very bad thing for
the industry. That's basically your argument.
MR. PINCUS: Yes. That is our argument.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. PINCUS: Um, let me say a word about the
rules and whether the rules are relevant here. It seems
to us that Congress used a phrase in the statute, and
that it -- that that cannot be changed by a rule that
says -- if an exchange adopted a rule that said some
transaction was on, or subject to, the rules of it, that
wouldn't be enough to put it into the statutory
language. The test is what Congress meant. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Pincus. Mr. Days, you have a minute.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DREW S. DAYS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. DAYS: Your Honors, Mr. Pincus has
identified what he views as some temporal gap between
the entering into a contract and the involvement of this
-- the clearing FCM. That simply is not the case.
Klein had a prior commitment to clear
Eisler's trade; so even at the time that Eisler was
trading, that had to be done with the understanding that
Klein was going to back him up.
If one looks at the gray brief at page 21,
it references to the rule of Knight -- rules of Knight
6 and 118 that make this very clear. The story is, as
we've indicated, that throughout this process the
clearing FCM is financially liable and, therefore, is on
the hook.
When Congress enacted the statute, it was
concerned with protecting the public and maintaining
credibility. We think that this cause of action, this
express cause of action for allowing FCMs to sue, is
most reliant to the objectives of Congress: The
faithful execution by an FCM that deals directly with
these entities, the clearinghouse and the commodity
contract market. Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Days.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:06 a.m. the case in the
