IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JAY F. HEIN, WHITE HOUSE OFFICE :
OF FAITH-BASED AND COMMUNITY :
INITIATIVES, ET AL., :
Petitioners, :
v. : No. 06-157
FREEDOM FROM RELIGION :
FOUNDATION, INC., ET AL., :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, February 28, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:06 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
GEN. PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf
Of Petitioners.
ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
On behalf of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
GEN. PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ.,
On behalf of the Respondents. 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
GEN. PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 58
P R O C E E D I N G S
[10:06 a.m.]
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument this morning in case 06-157, Hein versus
Freedom From Religion Foundation.
General Clement.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL D. CLEMENT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
GENERAL CLEMENT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
In Flast against Cohen, this Court
recognized narrow circumstances in which a taxpayer
could satisfy the requirements of Article III in
challenging a congressional exercise of its spending and
taxing authority. This court in doing so rejected the
suggestion of Justice Douglas that it allow all
taxpayers to sue in all manner of claims, as well as the
slightly more modest suggestion of Justices Stewart and
Fortas that the Court allow taxpayer standing for all
establishment clause challenges.
This Court's subsequent cases such as Valley
Forge have made clear just how narrow the rule of Flast
is. In order for a taxpayer to satisfy the requirements
of Article III, the taxpayer must challenge a
congressional exercise of the taxing and spending
authority, and assert that the act of spending itself is
what gives rise to the establishment clause violation.
The court of appeals in the decision below substantially
expanded the scope of taxpayer standing and in doing so,
the court adopted a doctrine that I think can fairly be
only understood as an exception to, not an application
of normal principles of Article III standing.
The court did so on the rationale that there
is much that the executive branch can do to violate
the establishment cause, but there is much that all
three branches of Government could conceivably do to
violate the establishment clause, and that has never
been thought a sufficient reason to extend taxpayer
standing to all Government action, nor has it been
thought a sufficient reason to relax the irreducible
minimum requirements of Article III.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If I understand your
position correctly, if Congress enacts a program that
favors religion over non-religion, which is supposedly
what the establishment clause prohibits, that's bad; but
if Congress enacts a perfectly valid general program and
the President implements it in a fashion that favors
religion over non-religion, that's okay, insofar as the
ability of anybody to challenge it is concerned. Is
that an accurate description?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I don't think so,
Justice Scalia. I mean, first of all --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why not?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I mean, I think that may
be sort of over inclusive and under inclusive.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Which is to say, it's not
a congressional program, it's a congressional spending
statute that is the key predicate. And then once
there's a congressional spending program, whether it's
facial challenge or an as-apply challenge that relies on
an intervening ministerial act of the executive branch,
taxpayer standing will lie under this Court's precedent.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If this -- if Congress
had enacted this executive order that's in question
here, if it had been congressional legislation, would
there be standing?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I don't think so,
Justice Ginsburg, but let me just be clear. I don't
think it's just a matter of this executive order that's
challenged in this case and Congress could have enacted
that into statute. As I understand it, the -- what is
really at issue here is not the executive order. It is
the way that certain conferences were conducted by
executive branch officials. That's what the dispute --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I had the same question as
Justice Ginsburg, and I think was also suggested by
Justice Scalia's question. Suppose that Congress passed
a statute that said we hereby appropriate a million
dollars to the President to use to call religious
conferences, and then it spelled out these conferences.
Is there standing there?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I don't think so,
Justice Kennedy, because I look at this Court's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But --and I of course want
the answer, but then, why is that consistent with what
you told us at the beginning that there had to be a
statute?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Because there has to be
two things. There has to be a statute. And then there
has to be an allegation that the statute creates a
unique injury in the context of spending that affects
taxpayers differently than anybody -- than any other
citizen. And if you have a situation like your
hypothetical statue, where you don't have any spending
that goes outside of the Government, then you might have
an establishment clause problem, but it wouldn't be an
establishment clause problem where the nub of the
problem is the fact that money is spent. Because if
there's a problem with what's going --
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're saying if the
Government, the executive, or the Congress, if the
congressional statute authorizes the giving of money for
the billing of a church, that's bad; but if it
authorizes -- it makes a general authorization to the
President -- no. If the congressional statute says the
Government will build a church, that's okay, because
then the money doesn't go outside the Government?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, importantly,
Justice Scalia, it's not a matter of it being okay.
It's a question of whether it logically --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, as far as standing is
concerned.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Yeah, it logically gives
rise to taxpayer standing. So -- and I think there is
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is your answer to
that? That in fact it's bad in the first situation and
okay in the second, as far as standing is concerned?
GENERAL CLEMENT: What I would say is in
either case it's bad. I would say that there is
taxpayer standing to challenge the disbursement of funds
outside the Government but not your horrible
hypothetical about an internal Government church.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There is no standing for
the internal Government church?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Not taxpayer standing.
Anybody who's subjected to the mass at the church
probably has standing as a matter of direct --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, we're not forcing
anybody in at gunpoint. We're just building a
Government church.
GENERAL CLEMENT: With respect,
Justice Scalia, nobody forced Van Orden to walk by the
Ten Commandments display in Texas at gunpoint, and yet
this Court said that he could bring an establishment
clause challenge. So I think there would be directly
injured people who could challenge your sort of end of
the slippery slope --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we're talking taxpayer
standing. And you think there is a real difference
insofar as whether the taxpayer is harmed between the
Congress saying we're going to give the money to a
religious organization to build a church and Congress
saying we're going to build a church. You really think
there's a difference?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I think there's a
difference in the extent to which there is a
conceptually direct injury for the taxpayer as taxpayer.
The citizens are clearly injured when the Government
sets up the church.
JUSTICE SCALIA: In both cases money is
being used for a purpose that is contrary to the
establishment clause, according to the taxpayer.
GENERAL CLEMENT: But with respect, in the
context of the internal Government church, the fact that
money is being spent to establish that church is the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Taxpayer money.
GENERAL CLEMENT: -- least of your concerns.
It's the fact that the Government is establishing it
that's the principal concern.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't care whether it's
the least of the concerns, it's a concern. It's the
same establishment clause concern in both cases. Now
you may well be correct that there's a freedom of
religion clause violation in one case and not in the
other, but as far as the establishment clause violation,
I find it difficult to understand the difference between
the two.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Scalia, I
think it's a difference suggested by this Court's cases,
and they do make an important distinction between the
distribution of money outside the Government where the
spending itself is the injury and what this Court has
termed the incidental expenditure of money in the
context of an executive branch activity that itself is
alleged to violate the establishment clause.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And why should that make
any difference if the entire theory behind it is sort of
a Madisonian theory, if not threepence from the pocket
for a religious purpose? If you start with the
Madisonian view, there should be no distinction of the
two cases that Justice Scalia puts.
GENERAL CLEMENT: I'm not quite sure that's
right, Justice Souter, because I think that there's
really two ways the Government can establish religion.
One is they can do it themselves directly. And if they
do that, I think that the primary problem is the primary
executive branch conduct in doing so. The other way
they can establish --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but let's talk about
establishing -- maybe this is what you're going to do,
establishing religion by spending the threepence.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Exactly. And that is
precisely what --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And in this case, when you
build the church, you're spending the threepence whether
-- whether a -- a Government employee is laying the
bricks or a contract -- an outside contractor is laying
the bricks or a third party institution to which a grant
has been made is laying the bricks. It's the same
threepence.
GENERAL CLEMENT: With respect in the one
respect it is the three pence itself that is the
establishment violation. It is the act of handing
Government money into the coffers --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Taking the money out of the
pocket and using it for a particular purpose, and the
money comes out of the pocket in each case. The purpose
is the same in each case.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Again, I would take issue
with that and say the primary concern that Madison was
focused on was the taking of the money and then giving
it to the outside religious entity.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would -- you've covered
the case where the Government itself, the executive is
the actor and said that's not covered by Flast. But it
is covered -- what is covered is if the give the money
directly to the religious organization.
If the money goes instead of to the
Government -- take this case, if the conferences are run
by a private contractor -- contractor with the
executive, where would that fall?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I think it might depend on
the nature of the claim actually. If the nature of the
claim --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This claim, these
conferences are run now instead of within the executive
branch by various agencies, they are run by contractors,
specialists in conferences that have been engaged by the
executive to help people make grant applications.
GENERAL CLEMENT: But I think the better
view, is the challenge is exactly this one, which is not
that there's something wrong with the recipient, but
that there's something wrong with what goes on at these
conferences. Then in that context, I don't think there
would be -- standing --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's --that's a
question on the merits. Right now we have to take the
allegations of the complaint on the merits as -- the
allegation is, I take it, that religious organizations
are being favored over secular organizations; but that's
a merits question.
You've -- you've -- you have been clear that
if the Government itself spends the money, then there's
no standing. You've, you've been clear that if it gives
the money to the religious group, there is standing.
Now money is going outside the Government.
Going outside the Government. But is not going to the
religious organization. Where do you fit that?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Again, I think if I
understand the question, I would say that there's no
taxpayer standing there. And I think -- but, but and I
apologize for sort of bleeding over into the merits.
But with all due respect, I don't think you can really
meaningfully talk about the Flast nexus test without
bleeding over a little bit into the merits, because the
Court did it itself in Flast. And what I would say is
if you have a challenge where the problem is that it's
the very act of money going to the third party
conference organizers that's the problem, then it really
is a spending case, and I think the taxpayer standing
would logically lie.
But if it's really, what the concern here is
the primary conduct of what was done at the conferences,
and not the fact that there's spending on the
conferences at all, then I think it's more -- it is a
case there would not be taxpayer standing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: There wouldn't be
tax -- taxpayer standing, but of course there would be
regular Article III standing in the sense that in a
party claiming to be injured because they didn't get a
grant, and a religious organization did, and the reason
was religion, can bring any kind of claim they want
under Article III. It's just they wouldn't qualify for
the special exception to the general rule that there is
no taxpayer standing for establishment clause cases.
GENERAL CLEMENT: That's exactly right. And
it's a very important point. Because for example, when
this Court recognized that the Bible reading in Doremus
did not give rise to taxpayer standing, that didn't stop
the parents who were directly injured by the same
practice in Shemp from bringing an establishment
clause --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- just one, one more
question on this, on this line. And I won't belabor the
hypothetical. Again there's a Federal statute for this
conference, and the moneys go for air tickets to various
religious ministers and priests. Does that meet your
outside the Government test for standing?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I think there would be
taxpayer standing if I understand that. And I realize
that, you know, one could say well, that's is a fairly
artificial distinction. But I do think that it is
suggested by this Court's precedents and the reason that
it makes sense is that when you have injury -- where the
real injury is the spending, the fact that you're not
supposed to pay for plane tickets for ministers, that's
an establishment clause injury, then it makes sense to
say that people that provided that money in the in the
first place have a distinct injury.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But not -- but not if the
President just gives the money out of a general
appropriation, authorizing him to give money to people
who are helping in the programs that the Faith-Based
Initiative was -- was designed to help?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If the President hands over
the money, that's okay?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Not necessarily,
Justice Scalia, but it's important to focus on what this
case is about.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why, why not necessarily?
I thought that was your -- you proposition, that it has
to be a congressional violation not an executive.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Right. And it would
depend a little bit on about where the President is
getting the money. I think the way that we would look
at it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He's getting the money from
Congress under a general, under a general appropriation.
If he takes this money and he says here, use it for a
religious purpose, that's okay?
GENERAL CLEMENT: He --
JUSTICE SCALIA: As far as standing is
concerned, he can't be sued?
GENERAL CLEMENT: If he, if he's taking it
from a general appropriation that makes no indication
it's to go outside the Government so one could not in
any way articulate that as an as-applied challenge to
the appropriations, then I suppose that there would not
be standing. But I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't understand. I'm
back -- I really -- I'm surprised. And it's probably my
fault. But that I thought -- I started where
Justice Scalia was with his first question. I thought
this had something to do with whether Congress passed a
statute or the President acted on his own. But
listening to you now I think, I can't decide -- I think
you have a different argument.
Suppose -- I'm just trying to understand.
Suppose that Congress passes a law and it says it's a
very nice thing to commemorate the Pilgrims by building
a Government church at Plymouth Rock, where we will have
the regular worship in the Puritan religion. Now can a
taxpayer from California in your view challenge that?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I would say that that's a
much harder case than this --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but --
GENERAL CLEMENT: -- but I say no. I would
say no, no.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not? Because I thought
Flast made clear that they could.
GENERAL CLEMENT: No. What Flast makes
clear is that you can challenge a congressional statute
that is a taxing and spending statute. And I think to
understand the circumstances in which you should give
rise to taxpayer standing, you need two things: You
need a congressional statute that is an exercise of the
taxing and spending authority; but then you need the
money to go outside the Government.
And that's precisely what --
JUSTICE BREYER: Then you go to a private
group?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Right. Because there's,
again, there's two ways --
JUSTICE BREYER: So you're saying that if
the Government has the most amazing, let's -- I'm trying
to think of something more amazing that what I just
thought of.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: All over America, they
build churches dedicated to one religion; and Congress
passes a statute and says in every city, town, and
hamlet, we are going to have a minister, a Government
minister, a Government church, and dedicated to the
proposition that this particular sect is the true sect;
and they pass a statute like that, nobody could
challenge it?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Horrible hypothetical.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that what you're saying,
then?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I mean, I think the bottom
line is that there would not be taxpayer standing.
Plenty of people could probably challenge that.
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know, I mean --
GENERAL CLEMENT: Probably --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- everybody else who
doesn't want to go just avoids it. So that they don't
have to do anything. They just have to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Any, presumably any
other denomination that is not of the established church
could bring a challenge that they're being discriminated
against, because they're favoring a particular church
over them. Your proposition is simply that somebody --
somebody in Oregon can't challenge the fact that they're
building a church in Florida simply because the person
in Florida pays taxes, right?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Exactly, and not just the
person in Oregon. But everybody in between Oregon and
Florida all have the same amount of standing. No, what
we're saying is plenty of people would be able to
challenge that. But not --
JUSTICE BREYER: Who? Who?
GENERAL CLEMENT: As -- as the Chief Justice
suggested I think anybody from a different denomination
that said that this was discriminatory probably could
bring a claim. I also think that anybody who walked
into one of those churches could bring a claim. And
again, this Court -- this Court --
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe they don't walk into
it because it is not "our church." So they don't walk
into it.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, we --
JUSTICE BREYER: And moreover, they don't --
they don't feel it's discriminatory. It's just we're
doing this to commemorate the Pilgrims, and we'll give
the money to any group that's a Pilgrim.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL CLEMENT: With respect -- with
respect, Justice Breyer, I think you're underestimating
the ingenuity of plaintiffs to think that somebody that
walked by going to Plymouth Rock okay thinking I was
going to see a nice historical exhibit, and is and to
see a church, wouldn't bring a -- an action. And that
there wouldn't be Article III standing for that
particular individual, not the taxpayer --
JUSTICE ALITO: General Clement, are you --
are arguing that these lines that you're drawing make a
lot of sense in an abstract sense? Or are you just
arguing that this is the best that can be done that this
is the best that can be done within the body of
precedent that the Court has handed down in this area?
GENERAL CLEMENT: The latter, Justice Alito.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL CLEMENT: And I appreciate -- I
appreciate the question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why didn't you say so?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I've been trying to
make sense out of what you're saying.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, and I've been trying
to make sense out of this Court's precedents.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL CLEMENT: And the best that I can do
-- the best that I can do, when I put together Flast --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do we think have a duty to
follow precedents that don't make any sense?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I think -- as a
matter of first course, the Court tries. And here -- if
I could put the precedents on the map, though, I do
think they make a modicum of sense in the following way.
You start with Flast. Flast says that you can bring a
challenge to a congressional spending statute. Okay,
fair enough. Valley Forge comes along and says that
you, that you don't have taxpayer standing to challenge
an executive branch action. Now that raises a very
obvious --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The difference was that
it was because it was under the property clause, and
made a distinction between property and money.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We are talking about
money, not property?
GENERAL CLEMENT: But Justice Ginsburg, in
fairness, the Court could not have been more clear in
Valley Forge that there were two reasons that there
weren't taxpayer standing there. One was there was a
challenge to Executive Branch action. The second was
that it was the property clause rather than the spending
clause.
Now, you could sort of take the view that
the third of the cases, Kendrick, overrules the first
aspect of the decision in Valley Forge. Now I think
that's wrong. I think the way to understand Kendrick is
as follows: You have a decision that says you can --
you can challenge congressional spending, not Executive
Branch action. That naturally poses the question what
about an as-applied challenge to a spending statute?
Surely, I mean, because spending is something only the
Congress does, and disbursement is a ministerial act
that only the Executive does, what do you do when
there's an intervening ministerial act of disbursement?
Does that mean that it's still an as-applied challenge
to the spending statute? Or does --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was it just --
GENERAL CLEMENT: That mean that it's
Executive Branch action?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was it just a ministerial
act or did the Executive have discretion involved, about
who would receive the grant?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Ginsburg,
two things. One, in Bowen, there was -- there is
certainly always a degree of discretion. But it is
worth noting that in Bowen as in Flast, the statute
itself on its face made clear that money was to go to
outside entities that were religious. In Bowen it did
so in express terms by four times referring to religious
organizations. In Flast it did so by saying money was
going to go, or in-kind aid, rather, was to going to go
to private schools. And that was at a time when this
Court roughly contemporaneously, in Lemon v Kurtzman
that 93 percent of the private schools were religious.
The both of those, the gravamen of what's the complaint,
that money is being spent by Congress on religious
entities, was not within the discretion of the Executive
Branch.
And again, the way I would understand
Kendrick is simply reconciling Valley Forge and Flast
and Cohen to preserve, not broad challenges to Executive
Branch action, which would have overruled Valley Forge,
but rather to simply preserve the notion that you can
bring an as-applied challenge to a spending statute.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you can reconcile
Valley Forge simply by saying when it's money from the
Federal Treasury, whether it is a general appropriation
or a specific appropriation, it is money from the
Treasury, and that's what Flast is about. Because
whether it is spent by the Executive under an Executive
program, which you have said can violate the
establishment clause as well as a congressional program.
So why isn't that the line to draw based on
Flast, that it's money from the Treasury that makes the
difference?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Ginsburg, it
is certainly not the line I would draw from reading
these cases side by side and together.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or to, or to put it another
way, to put Justice Ginsburg's point another way, every
Executive action that involves the expenditure of
congressionally authorized funds is an as-applied
challenge to an expenditure statute. Because the only
way the statute is applied is through executive action.
And whenever the executive spends the funds improperly,
you have an as-applied challenge to the congressional
statute authorizing the funds, whether it's a general
statute or a -- or a single shot statute.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Justice Scalia, I would
have said that no one would have conceptualized that as
an as-applied challenge to a general appropriation
statute. I mean, I guess you would. But I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's a --
GENERAL CLEMENT: Even, even if you would do
that in another case, I don't see how you could do it in
this case. If you look at their complaint they don't
identify a single appropriation statute that they take
issue with. Even before the Tenth -- the Seventh
Circuit, if you look at page 10 a of the Petitioner's
appendix --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's the essence of an
as-applied challenge. You say the statute's okay. It
is just what is being done under this statute that is
bad. You don't have to identify a bad statute. You're
saying it is a perfectly good statute, but the President
is -- is violating the Constitution in the way that he's
applying it.
GENERAL CLEMENT: With respect,
Justice Scalia, I've never heard of an as-applied
challenge to a statute that doesn't identity that's
unconstitutional as applied. And it's your right --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Under that, under
that approach, when a U.S. Marshal executes a search and
there's a Fourth Amendment claim that the search is
illegal, that's really a challenge to the appropriation
of the Marshals Service on an as-applied basis.
GENERAL CLEMENT: That's exactly right,
Mr. Chief Justice. And every constitutional right could
be sort of transmogrified into a claim that oh, that's
an as-applied appropriations challenge, because the
Government's not supposed to spend money to do unlawful
things.
JUSTICE BREYER: So what's wrong with just
saying that Flast stands for the proposition that when
the Government spends money in violation of the
establishment clause, a taxpayer -- after all, the money
comes from the taxpayer -- can bring a lawsuit? And the
reason that they do that is because the establishment
clause is an important joint part of the religion
clauses; and there'd be no other way to bring such a
challenge. And sometimes it's that simple principle,
and when we depart from that principle, say by giving
property away instead of giving money away, you don't
have the standing. So we have a pretty clear, simple
rule. That rule applies whether it's Congress or the
President acting under congressional authority, et
cetera, which I think is close to what the other side --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Can I just add this
thought before you answer. And isn't that exactly what
Justice Stewart said in his concurring opinion?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Absolutely. I mean, if
this Court wants to go the route of Justice Stewart,
which it pointedly rejected, the majority of the Court
pointed rejected in Flast, and say, establishment clause
challenges, we're going to relax the normal Article III
standard -- now, I'm not quite sure where the Court gets
the authority to relax the normal Article III standards.
But assuming that, that would at least be --
JUSTICE BREYER: Because there is a real
case or controversy, because people become terribly
upset when they see some other religion getting the
money from the State for the -- for building a church,
for example, and that's why: There's a real
controversy.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Getting upset is a
constitutionally adequate reason to bring a lawsuit? If
people get upset about spending money for purposes that
the Federal Government is not allowed to spend money for
because of States' rights, that also would justify
Article III standing, wouldn't it?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I suppose under that
theory, and obviously the plaintiffs in Richardson and
Schlesinger were very upset as well, and the Court said
that --
JUSTICE BREYER: It is the kind of upset
that is a genuine injury if you look to the objectives
of the establishment clause and possibly that kind of
genuine injury is not the case when you look to
objectives of various other clauses of the Constitution.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Justice Breyer, let me try
to answer in two ways if I can. One is to say that that
way of looking at it takes you even beyond where Justice
Brennan was in Valley Forge. Even Justice Brennan would
have drawn the line at what he called bestowals of
Government largesse to third parties.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's what I was saying.
I said that Flast then encapsulates that principle drawn
out of the objectives of the establishment clause in a
rule; and the rule is what I suggested.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, again, but he --
JUSTICE BREYER: Based on money.
GENERAL CLEMENT: But again, he didn't say
just spending of money to do the Executive Branch's
everyday operations and maybe -- and one day they go a
little too far in praising religion. He said bestowal
of Government largesse outside the Government. The
second point I would make is I still don't understand
where in just being upset you satisfy the irreducible
minimum requirements of Article III, and even though
Flast is probably the outer limit of what's an Article
III injury under normal principles, there is at least
what Judge Leventhal in Public Citizen against Simon
called conceptual directness between the injury to the
taxpayer and the injury that comes when tax money is
spent outside the Government to a religious entity. He
differentiated that from what happens when you have
general Executive Branch activity that's unlawful, where
he said there's no similar arrow between the action and
taxpayers as a class. It's a classic injury that's
inflicted on everybody. It's a generalized grievance,
which has never been said to satisfy Article III.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You're talking about an
incidental expenditure as part of a regulatory program
is quite different from looking at a discrete program.
The Faith-Based Initiative is a discrete program, and
one component of it is this set of conferences. This is
not an incidental something pursuant to a large
regulatory program. Faith-Based Initiative is the name
of this program.
GENERAL CLEMENT: But Justice Ginsburg,
their challenge is not that the money that's spent on
conferences can't be spent on conferences. Their
challenge is that what happened at the conference is
there was too much promotion of religion. The fact that
the money was spent on the conferences is incidental to
the gravamen of the complaint.
If I may save my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
General Clement.
Mr. Pincus.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ.
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MR. PINCUS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The Government's argument here is that Flast
needs major surgery and, as the discussion I think in
the first part of the argument shows, it's proposing two
very substantial limitations that bear no relation to
the relevant establishment clause principles, the
history of the clause, or the history of this Court's
decisions. And we think there's no basis for drawing
the arbitrary lines that the Government suggests. And
maybe I can follow up on some of the points that my
colleague made and that the Court made during the
questioning.
First of all, with respect to the argument
that the money has to go outside the Government.
There's certainly nothing in this Court's cases that say
that and the lower courts and this Court at least in
part have found taxpayer standing to challenge the
salaries paid to chaplains that are employed by the
Government, and of course those would be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's -- I
guess that's my first question. I don't understand
under your theory why any taxpayer couldn't sue our
Marshal for standing up and saying "God save the United
States and this honorable Court." Her salary comes from
Congress. You can trace that under your traceability
requirement. So any taxpayer under your theory could
bring that lawsuit.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I don't -- I don't think
that lawsuit could be brought, Mr. Chief Justice, and
let me explain why. We think that the limitations that
are in this Court's opinions require the taxpayer to
identify a discrete and identifiable non-incidental
expenditure. In other words, it's not just any --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's very -- I can
identify it. It's the appropriations that Congress
extends to this Court that pay the salary of the
Marshal.
MR. PINCUS: But, Your Honor, those
appropriations don't do the trick, and maybe I can just
explain our test and explain why. The Court in Doremus
explained why there was standing in Everson to challenge
the payments for bus transportation by saying Everson
showed a measurable appropriation or disbursement of
school district funds occasioned solely by the
activities complained of.
In other words, there has to be some -- the
violation caused some unique expenditure. Not that the
moneys wouldn't have been expended, because in this
context the taxpayer doesn't have to show a lower tax
burden, but --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, Mr. Pincus --
MR. PINCUS: -- that there was a tie between
-- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- there have been Federal
spending programs declared unconstitutional under the
establishment clause, and can you cite any instance in
which such a holding ing has caused a reduction in tax
rates?
MR. PINCUS: No, and this Court has said and
the lower courts have said that that is not the
requirement, because the injury here that the taxpayer
complains of, as the Court said in Daimler Chrysler, is
not an increased tax burden. The injury is the
expenditure of funds in a way that violates the
establishment clause.
JUSTICE ALITO: See, your traceability
either covers every case or it covers no case. In real
world taxation terms, no case would ever meet the test.
But in, in purely conceptual terms, is any Federal money
being spent, every case involving any expenditure of
money, even the portion of the Marshal's salary that is
devoted to convening the Court in the morning, would be
sufficient.
MR. PINCUS: Well, respectfully, Your Honor,
that's not what the Court said in Doremus in describing
Everson. It didn't say the mere fact that Some money
being spent was enough. It said that there was a
measurable appropriation or disbursement occasioned
solely by the activities complained of.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let me give you something
more measurable. It is easy to tell from time sheets
and other things how much money is expended on Air Force
One and on security for the President when he goes to
address a religious organization, okay. And he urges
the importance of religion in American life and so
forth. The whole trip is about religion. That's
measurable. Would a taxpayer have standing to --
MR. PINCUS: I don't think so, because, as
the court of appeals said, that this Court has
identified a second limitation, which is not incidental.
The money has to be central -- the money that's being
challenged has to be central to the violation. Just as
you couldn't challenge a prayer breakfast --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I don't understand.
The money -- say it again?
MR. PINCUS: The money has to be central to
the violation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You mean Congress has to,
has to say that --
MR. PINCUS: No. It can be -- in this case,
for example, the challenge is that these conferences
were -- the entire conference program was a program to
further religion over non-religion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, what about Bowen?
The money wasn't central to the violation there.
MR. PINCUS: I'm sorry, Justice Scalia?
JUSTICE SCALIA: It was, you know, a
pregnancy program and the executive added to it certain,
certain restrictions that were challenged as being
religiously based.
MR. PINCUS: But the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And we allowed an
as-applied challenge.
MR. PINCUS: You did, an as-replied
challenge to the specific grants. But there were
specific grants identified and there was an as-applied
challenge. But the argument was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But this is a specific
grant. There is money allocated to the White House
which goes -- you can identify it in the budget, and
some of it goes to Air Force One. Some of it goes to
the payment of the security guards.
MR. PINCUS: Yes, Your Honor, but the money
that's identified in the budget is not -- well, it's not
the entire Air Force one appropriation that would be
challenged in the kind of claim you're talking about.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It wasn't in Bowen either.
MR. PINCUS: But it was a specific -- there
was a specific action that allocated a specific amount
of money to those grantees. And the argument was those
grantees weren't entitled to any of that money because
the way they were using it violated the establishment
clause. And so there was -- the government's own action
by designating a specific sum of money in that grant
identified a specific sum of money, and the challenge
was to that entire expenditure as identified by the
Government.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I really don't think --
there's an identified sum of money that goes to pay the
costs of Air Force One, too, to buy the gas and
everything else. There's an identified sum of money
that goes into the pockets of the security guards who
protect the President. I mean, it really doesn't make
any sense.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, I think, I
think, as I say, there are two tests. One is whether
there's an identifiable sum. We were talking about with
respect to grants are the easiest case. There's another
case as when there's a challenge to an entire program
that the Government has identified as a particular
program. And then the question, the second question
--
that the Court has identified in Flast, was is it
incidental or not. Is it something that is peripheral
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Take
Justice Breyer's Pilgrim church. Under your theory, if
the grant was to erect a memorial and suitable museums
or whatever at Plymouth, Plymouth Rock, then there
wouldn't be an identifiable sum if the Government said,
hey, let's use some of this money to build a church?
MR. PINCUS: If the Government then singled
out some of that money --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The Government
singles it out. By that you mean the executive who's
implementing it, as opposed to Congress?
MR. PINCUS: Yes. I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How do they -- in
other words, if they spend the money are they singling
it out? If it turns out it costs a million dollars to
build the little Pilgrim church is that an identifiable
sum singled out that would satisfy your requirement?
MR. PINCUS: Well, I don't think the
singling out -- I don't think whether it's discrete and
identifiable depends on the amount, Your Honor. I think
it depends on how --whether there is a way -- and this
really is part of both traceability and redressability.
There has to be a way to identify the expenditure that
the taxpayer is seeking to enjoin. And if there is some
separate Government grant for the building of a church,
yes, if it's -- if -- if there is some religious --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it doesn't
have to be a grant, just that you can say it costs so
much money.
MR. PINCUS: Or a contract.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. PINCUS: If the Government let the
contract for the building of the church, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or the contract hiring the
security guards who protect the President, right?
They're employed. That's an employment contract.
MR. PINCUS: Well, they are, and that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they're protecting him
for a religious purpose. He's going to this --
MR. PINCUS: Well, they're protecting him
for a protection purpose. His trip is for a religious
purpose. And I think our submission is that there is a
distinction that can be drawn there.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is money that is
expended in order to enable the President to do
something for a religious purpose. It wouldn't be
expended but for the fact that he chose to make this
religious trip.
MR. PINCUS: But -- but, as with buying the
bagels at a prayer breakfast, the cost of the bagels,
like the cost of the security, is not -- is not paying
for the center of what the violation is. And therefore
we think that that's the basis for a rule that rules
those types of expenditures out.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It wasn't, it wasn't the
center in Bowen either. The center in Bowen was
programs for -- to combat pregnancy. And some of the
organizations that were getting the money were placing
conditions on it. It wasn't central to the program. It
was something added that the challenger said shouldn't
have been added.
MR. PINCUS: But their claim was that the
spending of this entire grant is unconstitutional
because of the way the money is going to be used by the
grantees. It wasn't that $1.98 of the is
unconstitutional and the other million dollars is okay.
It was that because of the way the grantee was using the
money, the entire grant is unconstitutional. We think
that's a different case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I see. It would only came
within your theory if there was one Secret Service agent
who was assigned to religious trips of the President?
Then his entire salary could be challenged. But if it's
just some of the salary of a Secret Service agent who
protects the President for all sorts of trips, that
can't be challenged?
MR. PINCUS: Yes, and we think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that makes a lot of
sense?
MR. PINCUS: Well, it does make sense
because, unlike the Government's limitations, which have
nothing to do with the rationale of Flast or the
underlying threepence here of James Madison, that
does -- that is a particular amount of money that the
Government is spending and it's identifiable just
because of religion. We think that that's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if we rule in
your favor, then every Government agency has to make
sure that whatever activities they undertake are part of
a broader office? They don't set up a separate White
House office. They just run it out of the White House
office.
MR. PINCUS: Well, they may --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's purely -- a
purely formalistic distinction.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I don't think so, Your
Honor, because I think it preserves --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that would
decide whether it's central or not. If you have a White
House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives,
then you can say it's central to it. If it's just the
White House office, then the argument would be, no,
that's not central. They do a lot of other stuff as
went.
MR. PINCUS: Well, but if there are --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the Marshall in
both --
MR. PINCUS: -- if there are particular
people in that office for a particular, separately
called out program in that office that is focused on
faith-based initiatives only, yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We're trying to
decide whether it is central. You have to decide what
unit you're looking at before deciding whether the
activity is central. And you're just saying well, just
look at the people who are doing the offensive activity,
and it's obviously going to be central to what they're
doing.
MR. PINCUS: Your Honor, I think I haven't
been clear in the test that I'm suggesting.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Pincus, I would like
you to go back to an answer you gave because it sounds
to me like it wasn't right. The President needs
protection at all times no matter where he goes. The
President may be doing something that violates the
establishment clause, but protection is the job, and it
doesn't make any difference where the President is. And
so your answer to the question, well, suppose he had a
special protector who just took care of his religious
activities? I would still say that it's, protection is
the thing. So I don't think -- I think you didn't --
the answer you gave isn't consistent with your theory of
this case.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I think that's right, and
I think that's because there are two steps to our
analysis, Justice Ginsburg. One is, is there a discrete
and identifiable expenditure that only arises with
respect to religious activities.
The second question is, does that particular
expenditure, is that particular expenditure an
incidental one? Flast said incidental expenditures
don't give rise to standing. And I think you're right
in that situation, that expenditure --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But in response to
Justice Ginsburg's point, you could have said the same
thing about the expenditure in Bowen. That money would
have been spent anyway.
--
MR. PINCUS: But the question --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It happened to have been
spent badly, but it would have been spent anyway.
MR. PINCUS: But it would have been spent
differently, Your Honor, and I think that's the critical
JUSTICE SCALIA: That was her point, that it
would have been spent differently. If the President
hadn't gone to this religious event, he would have gone
somewhere else and the money would have been spent
differently. But that didn't make the difference in
Bowen. Why should it make the difference here?
MR. BOWEN: Well, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The fact is it was spent
for a bad purpose, and that's the essential grievance of
the plaintiff, it seems to me.
MR. PINCUS: We agree completely. But we
also agree that there are some limits that -- the Court
has said that every single dollar that's expended for a
bad purpose doesn't give rise to a challenge. My
example, if there's a prayer breakfast and all -- the
only money that's spent is on the bagels, we don't
believe the bagels are the basis for a taxpayer
challenge to the prayer breakfast.
JUSTICE BREYER: So in fact, you have --
just help me with one point here.
I mean, I see that deciding what's
incidental and what isn't incidental will be difficult.
I guess many of these cases would end up being decided
on the merits, there is no violation on the merits, or
maybe sometimes there is.
But I'd started thinking of the question of
standing by thinking that there are strong feelings when
the Government spends money in favor of one religion and
not another. After all, they led to the 30 Years War.
We see that in other places in the world today. People
feel strongly. And if, in fact, they have that terribly
strong feeling and can't make any challenge because the
feelings are shared by many, then there are no cases in
the courts at all, and the Government can do what it
wants without challenge.
So in Flast, they carved out an exception,
and the exception was where the taxing and spending
clauses were involved, because Madison and others said
this is aimed at "Government shall not tax and spend".
So that was my theory. And all we're saying is where
there's a big taxing and spending and it isn't
incidental, there's standing.
Now we're worried about the merits. Simple
and clear. To which the response was, which has me a
little worried frankly, was that, well, that was Justice
Stewart's position, or roughly speaking. But the Court
rejected that quite clearly, and if you look at later
cases, they reject it too. And therefore, whatever you
might think of it, it isn't the law. And I'm not free
to think whatever, I have to think exactly in accordance
with what the cases say. So what is your response? I'd
like you to focus on that.
MR. PINCUS: Well, respectfully, I think
that's exactly what Justice Stewart said. Justice
Stewart in his concurrence did not espouse a broader
theory than the one that the Court adopted in Flast.
And he said he joined the judgment, the opinion of the
Court, and he said, I understand that to hold only that
a Federal taxpayer has standing to assert that a
specific expenditure of federal funds violates the
establishment clause of the First Amendment.
JUSTICE BREYER: So you're saying that what
Justice Stewart's view, insofar as it was rejected, that
Flast suggested even broader standing, but it suggested
at least what Justice Stewart said?
MR. PINCUS: Yes. I think it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that right or not?
MR. PINCUS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If Justice Stewart
agreed completely with what the Court said, why did he
write a separate opinion?
MR. PINCUS: Well, in the -- sometimes
despite the Court's desire sometimes to have a less
separate opinion, sometimes justices do. And what he
said here is he was just explaining his reason why he
believed that Flast was distinguishable from
Frothingham, and notes specifically that taxpayers have
a clear stake because of the threepence comment.
Justice Fortas did say, did have a broader
theory, although he -- in addition, that the court did
not adopt -- but he also said, recognizing very similar
language to Justice Stewart, what the Court's opinion
held. So I think Justice Stewart's opinion is useful
because he doesn't talk about Congress, he talks about
expenditures.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It seems to me unduly
intrusive for the courts to tell the President that it
cannot talk to specific groups to see if they have
certain talents that the Government may use to make sure
that all of their energies are used properly by the
Federal Government.
It's almost like a speech rationale.
And perhaps you would say that's just a
judgment on the merits, but it seems to me that there's
a standing concern here, too, that we would be
supervising the White House and what it can say, what
it can -- who it can talk to. And it seems to me that's
quite intrusive from the standpoint of standing
purposes.
I'm not sure that this makes a standard
that distinguishes the case from Flast or brings it
within those -- within those cases.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, we believe
that the incidental test, and what I've been talking
about in terms of what the limits are, that it has to be
a non-incidental expenditure protects against that.
Because if the argument is that some Government
official, for part of his day met with three ministers,
and therefore we want to challenge because Government
shouldn't be meeting with ministers, I think it's both
for the reason, both because of the fact this is not an
argument that the expenditure on the hours of the day it
took to have those meetings is clearly not central to
anything.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You really want to condemn
the Federal courts to deciding case by case at the
instance of all these people who feel passionately about
this, case by case whether the expenditure was
incidental or not. It doesn't seem to me an intelligent
expenditure of any sensible person's time.
MR. PINCUS: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And just to add to
the question, before you answer, at the jurisdictional
stage. In other words, this would be litigation over
whether the individual taxpayer has standing. The Court
would first have to determine whether the activity
you're challenging is incidental or not.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, I think the
fact that there hasn't been a lot of these challenges
that the Government has been able to point to, indicates
that this may not be a big problem.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe they're
reading Flast different than you read it. There are not
a lot of these challenges because you don't have
standing under Flast.
MR. PINCUS: But the Court also said in
Allen against Wright, you know, the absence of precise
standards does not leave the courts at sea in applying
the law of standing. Standing isn't an area, really,
that is susceptible to precise definitions. It seems to
me that both because of the incidental test and the
concerns that Justice Kennedy articulated, if someone's
claim is that people in the White House have five meets
in the course of a year that they're upset about, it
--
does not take much at the jurisdictional --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what would
happen if --
MR. PINCUS: Even if it's true -- even if
it's true --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well then, five
meetings isn't enough. How many?
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about 10?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: 20?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I was about to ask, 20.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, our position
JUSTICE SCALIA: We'll litigate it. We'll
figure out a number eventually, I'm sure.
MR. PINCUS: Well, you know, in Allen
against Wright, and Linda R.F., there are a whole series
of cases where this Court has set up guidance, and the
lower courts have evaluated whether the connection
between the challenged conduct and the claimed injury --
here the expenditure -- is close enough for there to be
standing. And this -- the inquiry that we're suggesting
really isn't that different.
JUSTICE ALITO: What would happen if when
this program was set up, nothing said about faith
whatsoever? This was just going to be a general program
of outreach to community service organizations, but
plaintiffs claimed that as the program was being
administered it was heavily favoring religious
organizations. Would that come out the same way in your
judgment?
MR. PINCUS: If their challenge was that the
entire -- the whole program essentially, as the court of
appeals characterized the complaint here, the whole
program essentially is facially neutral, but in reality
is a preference, yes. Then it would come out the same
way and the question would be --
JUSTICE ALITO: It depends totally on how
they characterize?
MR. PINCUS: Well, that's true in many
standing questions. The question is, how do you
characterize the claim?
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the problem here is the
claim, the gravamen here is the Government is doing
stuff with money that's been taxed from me that it
shouldn't do. I fail to see how it makes any difference
to the people who care so passionately about this, as
Justice Breyer suggests, whether it's just an incidental
expenditure or whether it's part of a targeted program.
We don't do that in any other area of
constitutional law. If someone has been subjected to an
unreasonable search and seizure, we don't say well, you
know, it was just incidental. Yeah, we know you feel
badly about it, but this was just an incidental search
and seizure, and you don't have standing.
It doesn't make any sense, given the
gravamen that you're directing this law against, to
establish such a standard.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, it is a
standard that the Court established in Flast. It is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you also acknowledge
we're not here to try to make sense.
MR. PINCUS: No. I actually think the
Court's precedents line up pretty neatly. I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: But not neatly, I mean, in
terms of the purposes of the thing. Are your clients
claiming that it would violate the establishment clause
for the President to go to lots and lots of prayer
breakfasts?
MR. PINCUS: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. I never met anyone who
did, but I guess there is a legitimate concern, somebody
might think that, I guess. And I guess that if
people -- there is some tendency of the people that are
worried, you know, there are pro ses, there are all
kinds of people, somebody could claim that. So you want
a way to keep them out.
MR. PINCUS: You want a way to keep them
out --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's Justice Kennedy's
concern.
MR. PINCUS: Exactly. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: But what they're worried
about is will this word "incidental" and -- be
sufficient to keep out the people who might somehow
decide they want to claim, which sounds like a frivolous
claim, that the President can't go to a prayer
breakfast. Now does the word "incidental" do that?
That's what I think --
MR. PINCUS: Well, our submission is that it
does, Your Honor, because we think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Again -- I asked
this before, and I think you were cut off before you had
a chance. Incidental with respect to what? All of the
money for a particular meeting, a particular breakfast,
a particular whatever, is it incidental to that, or is
it incidental to however many times the President has
breakfast if he goes to a prayer breakfast?
MR. PINCUS: It's incidental to what --
what's the focus of the claim? The focus of the claim
isn't that bagels were served. The focus of the claim
is there was prayer and that it was a religious meeting.
If there was -- just to think of what such a claim might
be. And so the expenditure that -- that's been
identified is the bagels, it really is pretty tangential
compared to the focus of what someone's complaining
about. And so we think that's a rational test for doing
what Justice Kennedy was talking about.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So even if the
expenditure is very small, but to take a particular
religious symbol that might be offensive to some other
people, is that incidental because the meeting went on
longer and cost more than the particular religious
symbol?
MR. PINCUS: No. I think there probably
there would be two challenges, because there would be a
challenge to the government's purchase of the religious
symbol to have at the meeting in addition to the
meeting, and I think then --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if it was 2
dollars, you would say it's not incidental because it
covered the whole cost of purchasing the religious
symbol?
MR. PINCUS: Yes, but I don't think this --
and I think the Government agrees with this. I don't
think this is a test about how much. I think this is a
test about the relationship between the expenditure
that's challenged and the claim, what's alleged to be
unlawful this complex of Government activity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So there's no standing to
challenge a presidential directive which says we are
going to buy bagels for all evangelistic Christian
breakfasts.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay? But not for any --
MR. PINCUS: No, I think there would be
standing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why would there be
standing?
MR. PINCUS: Because there the challenge is
to the discriminatory purchase. It's not about the
prayer breakfast, it's about the idea that the
Government is purchasing bagels in a religiously
discriminatory way.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Of course. But the
point is that makes --
MR. PINCUS: So there absolutely would be
standing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that shows how
totally manipulable your incidental test is. You just
have to phrase your claim so that it covers
whatever expenditure --
MR. PINCUS: But, Your Honor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- is offending you.
It's not -- incidental doesn't protect you from
frivolous or insignificant claims in any way.
MR. PINCUS: Your Honor, I think it does,
because there would have to be an allegation in that
situation that bagels were being purchased on a
religious basis, and that's going to be awfully hard for
a lawyer to sign in good faith. I think the problem, if
I may --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How does that confer
standing? How does that confer standing?
MR. PINCUS: The purchase -- the idea that
bagels are being purchased only for evangelicals and not
for Jewish breakfasts?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. Right.
MR. PINCUS: Because the Government --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Standing by Joe Doaks, not
from somebody who's starting a Jewish prayer breakfast
and says, you know, what could be worse than not buying
bagels for a Jewish prayer breakfast.
(Laughter.)
With him I could understand, he has
standing. But I'm just talking about one of these many
people who feel passionately about this just in general.
You walk in and say he can't do this because I'm a
taxpayer, and you say I'm sorry, being a taxpayer is not
enough, we don't care how passionately you feel about
it --
MR. PINCUS: I don't think general passion
is enough. I think what the Court said is there has to
be a tie-in, and let me say that I think what's critical
here is any test obviously is susceptible to
hypotheticals, but the Government -- our test at least
keeps in taxpayer standing the core of what the framers
were worried about, which is Government expenditure of
funds --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Pincus, may I ask you
this question? Do you think your theory is consistent
with Valley Forge?
MR. PINCUS: Yes, Your Honor, we do, because
in Valley Forge, first of all, as Justice Ginsburg said,
the Court relied on the fact that it was a property
clause claim. There is a passage in Valley Forge that
refers to executive action, but the Court in Kendrick
when it talked about Valley Forge said, in
characterizing that case, said executive action pursuant
to the property clause. And we think those things are
tied together and there's a reason why. In the
appropriations context, there always is congressional
action with respect to the very money that's at issue
because there has to be a congressional appropriation.
That's not true in the property context. Congress
doesn't have to say, pass a statute to say, here are the
property sites that we want the executive to get rid
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think the distinction
between taxing, between taxing and spending and the
property clause, makes any sense? Do you think James
Madison would not be upset if the Commonwealth of
Virginia transferred 10,000 acres to the Anglican
Church? That would be okay, but the threepence in
taxation would not?
MR. PINCUS: Well, I think that the core of
what was the concern was -- was the taking of the money
and the using it for religious purposes. And I
think what the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's not the same
money used. It's not the same property.
MR. PINCUS: No, it's not the same money.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It goes into some pot of
fungible money and it's other money used. So instead of
using other money, you use land. Does that make a
difference?
MR. PINCUS: Well, I think that the Court
decided that it made a difference, and I think in terms
of cabining, in terms of the worry that perhaps Flast is
going to be overbroad and the need to have Congress
involved, which I think is key -- there was no
congressional involvement at all in designating those
properties and there is in the appropriations context,
and I think that's a key difference. But I think what's
important here, and the Court's colloquy in the first
part of the argument showed me this -- but the
Government's position, the idea that it's only grants to
third parties -- - the Government could hire a corps of
chaplains and send them out to civilians and to the
populace at large and that couldn't be challenged,
because all it is is executive pay; and the Idea that
there's some difference between a Bowen v. Kendrick
situation, where the executive had tremendous discretion
in terms of where it was going to give the money, and
the situation here, which is the exercise of Precisely
the same executive discretion, makes no sense.
The injury is the same. The conduct
that's -- that's the core of the violation is the same.
It's an Executive Branch decision to use funds in a way
that's impermissible under the establishment clause, and
we've been drawing the lines that the Government has
been trying to draw just makes no sense, and to leave
out, to insulate from any taxpayer challenge really huge
swaths of conduct that is really at the very core of
what Madison was concerned about.
So our submission is that that really makes
no sense. There's no basis in history, for example, for
the Government's claim that Executive Branch decisions
are somehow different and insulated with respect to
spending. It's the spending of the same threepence, and
if history indicates anything it's that concerns about
establishment were focused just as much on the King as
on the Parliament in terms of the history that the
framers understood.
And for the idea that the executive would be
given free rein to exercise discretion with respect to
spending and there would be no concern about the types
of injuries that gave rise to Flast we think is just not
right.
If the Court has no further questions, thank
you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Pincus.
General Clement, you have three minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL D. CLEMENT
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS
GENERAL CLEMENT: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice. Just a few points in rebuttal.
First of all, I think it's important to
emphasize that if this Court recognizes that there is
not taxpayer standing, that does not mean that there
won't be lawsuits, that there won't be directly injured
plaintiffs that can bring claims. Doremus and Schemp
prove that point. But even more broadly, any time the
establishment clause injury takes the form of alleged
coercive conduct the individuals who are coerced Are
going to have standing to bring the suit.
The second point to make clear is it's just
not an accurate description of this Court's cases to say
that the spending of appropriated funds by the executive
is enough to give rise to taxpayer standing. The
property distribution plan at issue in Valley Forge took
a tremendous amount of appropriated funds to run.
Nobody thought that was a basis for taxpayer standing.
The Bibles that were purchased and the salaries of the
teachers in Doremus presumably cost at least a
threepence. But that was not found enough.
Now, I think in trying to understand the
Court's cases you really have to focus on this word
"incidental." And I think that the colloquy in the
second half of the argument shows that you can't look at
incidental as being minimal. It doesn't mean that. It
doesn't mean minimal. It doesn't mean incremental. It
is trying to distinguish an incidental expenditure of
funds when -- as to something where the expenditure of
funds is central or vital to the establishment clause
violation. In the context of money going to third party
religious entities, nobody would say that the spending
is incidental. It's the whole violation. In the
context of Bible reading or anything else the Executive
Branch does, the fact that money went to fund the
Executive Branch to violate the establishment clause is
the least of the problems. The problem is the primary
conduct of the Executive Branch in violating the
establishment clause, but that's not a spending injury.
The funding that goes into that is incidental. I think
that's the way to make sense of this Court's cases.
It's important to emphasize what's at issue
here. It's not a general challenge to the Faith-Based
Office. It's not a challenge to the name of the office.
It is a challenge to the particular offices and the
assertion that the Executive Branch officials at the
conferences spent too much time talking about
faith-based groups and not enough talking about
community-based groups. If that isn't intrusive on the
Executive Branch, I don't know what is.
The last point I would leave you with is
that if something has to go in this area, if you have to
choose between the logic of Flast and the irreducible
minimum requirements of Article III, I think it's an
easy choice. You don't abandon the basic requirements
of Article III that distinguish the Judiciary from the
political branches of Government.
I think the Seventh Circuit, with all due
respect, lost sight of that. Its decision should be
reversed. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, general.
The case is submitted.
[Whereupon, at 11:05 a.m., the case in the
