IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
SPRINT/UNITED MANAGEMENT :
COMPANY, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 06-1221
ELLEN MENDELSOHN. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, December 3, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
PAUL W. CANE, JR., ESQ., San Francisco, Cal.; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
the Petitioner.
DENNIS E. EGAN, ESQ., Kansas City, Mo.; on behalf of the
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
PAUL W. CANE, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioner 22
DENNIS E. EGAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 33
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
PAUL W. CANE, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 58
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
this morning in case 06-1221, Sprint/United Management
Company v. Mendelsohn.
Mr. Cane.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL W. CANE, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. CANE: Chief Justice Roberts, and may it
please the Court:
Our basic principal of evidence of the need
for foundation explains why the court of appeals should
be reversed. An employment decision is made by the
person who made it, the decision-maker. If some other
person harbors bias, that's unfortunate; but it is not
probative of claims by a plaintiff who is not affected
by it. This Court's discrimination cases, both in the
employment context and in other contexts, consistently
focus on the decision maker's intent, not on the intent
of other persons.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If you were to read the
district court's minute order -- and this is that short
minute order -- as saying that evidence of pattern and
practice simply is not admissible, that would be error,
would it not? Error to -- if the -- if that had been
--
his ruling, that would have been error. In my Court,
you don't introduce pattern and practice. That can't be
MR. CANE: Yeah, if the district court had
held that under no circumstances could a pattern or
practice of discrimination be shown, I think that would
have been error.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is there anything in the
other parts of the record colloquy, comments by the
district judge, that you think Respondents have called
to our attention to indicate that he had this sweeping
view?
MR. CANE: No. I don't think that's what
the court was focusing on. The district court focused
on the nexus of the disputed witnesses to the plaintiff.
The district court did not hand out a cookie cutter
ruling at the courthouse door. The district court did
not say oh, this is a discrimination case, hear are the
rules of evidence I apply in a discrimination case.
What the district court here did was consider Sprint's
motion in limine, which was grounded in the evidence
that had emerged in discovery in this case.
Plaintiff then responded to that motion in
limine by trying to explain why the evidence was
relevant given the facts of this case.
The plaintiff then filed a witness list,
which explained what each of the disputed witnesses
would say in this case; and the plaintiff finally made
an offer of proof which again collaborated on what
plaintiff contended the disputed witnesses would say in
this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't really know, do
we, what the district court's order was based on?
Whether it was based on 401 or 403? Did the district
court explain its order at all? It didn't, did it?
MR. CANE: The district court did not
specifically invoke rule 403. I think it's -- my
reading of it that it is grounded in both 401 and 403.
The motion in limine relied on both 401 and
3, the district court told counsel that she wanted the
jury to be focusing on the claims of this plaintiff and
not be distracted by claims of others.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, to the extent it was
grounded on 401, it was error, wasn't it?
MR. CANE: I don't think so, because I don't
think there's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, if you have three
supervisors, and one is discriminating and another is
discriminating, isn't that some evidence that you're in
an industrial situation in which discrimination goes on,
and therefore doesn't it have the tendency that amounts
to relevance under 401?
MR. CANE: We have here five persons, who
out of 15,000 --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, what about my
question?
MR. CANE: The answer to the question is no,
it doesn't. As this Court taught in Teamsters --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No relevance at all?
MR. CANE: A pattern or practice is not
established by anecdotes. And what we have here are
anecdotes of 5 persons out of the 15,000 --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What about my question? We
have evidence that there are three supervisors, two of
them are discriminating. Isn't that some -- doesn't
that have some tendency to indicate that in an equivocal
situation, that one was -- it may not be strong
evidence, it may not win the case, it may not be
powerful, but it has the tendency that gets you over the
line on 401, doesn't it?
MR. CANE: That's why I started with the
importance of emphasizing foundation. To --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't want to -- I don't
want to emphasize my question, before we get the --
MR. CANE: For relevance to exist, there
would have to be a foundational showing.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What do you mean by that?
You repeated several times there must be -- must lay a
foundation. You do recognize, I think in your reply
brief, that some other supervisor evidence would be
relevant and admissible, but you refer to the
foundation.
Tell us what you think a proper foundation
would be.
MR. CANE: The foundation, Justice Ginsburg,
would be some linkage between the decision making
supervisor and the supervisors whose acts or conduct is
assailed by the plaintiff. And if there's no showing of
nexus other than the fact that they both happen to draw
a paycheck from Sprint --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What do you mean by
"nexus"? If they both work in the same physical
facility, is that a nexus?
MR. CANE: No. I think the nexus requires
more than a common zip code.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if you've got 20
supervisors and you've got evidence that 19 of them have
discriminated after making expressly discriminatory
remarks. The 20th is the subject to the action. Is the
evidence of the 19 admissible?
MR. CANE: I think --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is a nexus there?
MR. CANE: I think, in a company that was
not small, where a nexus could be inferred, that there
was consultation or that there were directions from more
senior management, then I think that would be an
appropriate foundation.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. So, if we've
got 19 and there's a question of 1, we've got a nexus.
If we've got three and there's a question, two are
accounted for as discriminatory, and the question is the
third, we don't have a nexus. Is that the way you're
doing the math?
MR. CANE: I'm sorry. Did I under your
question to be three supervisors in the whole company or
three supervisors out of this vast company that we're
talking about?
JUSTICE SOUTER: At this point, I'm saying
three supervisors out of a whole company. Will that do
MR. CANE: Not absent some reason to believe
that they conferred or they received directions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Three supervisors, and
that's all there is in the company. That consists of
the company. Have a nexus then?
MR. CANE: If there were -- if two out of
three, I think there might be an argument that at least
it was a jury question at that stage.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. CANE: But here we're dealing with a
,000-employee company. We have five witnesses who are
principally assailing two persons. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You agree that it
has to be a case-by-case determination? There's no
absolute rule either way?
MR. CANE: I think there -- there should be
a guiding principle. And the guiding principle was that
other-supervisor evidence should be presumptively
irrelevant, and that would be the rule in the normal run
of cases, at least in dealing with entities of this
magnitude.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I assume it would
be addressed as it was here, in a motion in limine, the
plaintiff would say here are the witnesses we intend to
call; the company would say we don't think they're
relevant because, as you say, there's no connection
between them, and then the judge would decide.
MR. CANE: That's normally how --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's on the issue
of relevance.
MR. CANE: That's normally how it would
present itself, and indeed the district court normally
would consider Rule 403 consideration if that's the
case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Excuse me. Did I hear
mishear you? You said it's a 7,000-person?
MR. CANE: 70,000. 7-0-0-0-0. Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: If that's the way to do it,
you didn't do it that way, did you? I mean, as I read
it -- they put in here, on 163a, the motion that you
made to the district court said that you have to be
"similarly situated" -- "Plaintiff has to have been
'similarly situated' with other employees" -- and you
put that in quotes -- "similarly situated." And then
you say "employees may be 'similarly situated' only if
they have the same supervisor." Period. Not -- it
wasn't a period actually, but the rest of the sentence
isn't important. And then you cite Aramburu, which is
where the Tenth Circuit said that.
So I don't see how you can say this wasn't a
1 case. You were saying that weren't similarly
situated, period. And then the district judge virtually
quoted those words.
MR. CANE: The motion was grounded in both
Rule 401 and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, that may be, but the
-- I don't see -- I mean, that may be, but this is the
argument you made, and this was the argument the
district judge adopted. Is that not so or is it so?
MR. CANE: That is so, but what the district
judge adopted was grounded in the offer of proof that
had been made here and the evidence that was proffered
here. The district court was not issuing a blanket
ruling that would have governed any potential --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me --
JUSTICE SOUTER: How do we know?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yeah. How do we know
that's what the district court adopted? I have -- is it
the order on 24a of the appendix to the petition?
MR. CANE: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't mention -- it
doesn't mention which of the two of your arguments the
district court is relying on.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It doesn't mention the
offer of proof.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And didn't the Tenth
Circuit read it to be an absolute prohibition? That it
must be the same supervisor? "'Similarly situated'
requires proof that Paul Reddick was the decisionmaker."
That seems as though that the district court thought
there -- it must be the same supervisor, and I thought
that's how the Tenth Circuit read --
MR. CANE: And I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the district court.
MR. CANE: That would be the rule in the
normal run of cases where there is no showing of
connection.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We're not talking about the
rule. We're trying to find out what it was the district
court did.
Now, the court of appeals assumed the worst.
I mean, assumed what makes the case the hardest for you,
and that is the court of appeals assumed that the
district court relied on 401. Is it customary to assume
the worst?
MR. CANE: No. I think it would be
customary to assume that, particularly on an issue of
evidence, that the district court was presumptively
correct, and that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If there's any basis on
which the district court's decision would have been
correct, the district court's decision is upheld.
MR. CANE: It could be affirmed on that
ground.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's why I don't
understand your answer. I'm confused here. What I
said, and you seemed to agree, is different from what
was just said, which you also seemed to agree.
(Laughter.)
I thought that you said in your brief that
you have to have been -- quote -- "similarly situated."
All right? "Employees must be similarly situated to
Plaintiff." That's true, isn't it? I'm quoting the
brief, from page 163. And then you say, "Employees may
be similarly situated only if they have the same
supervisor."
Then the district court says that plaintiff
may offer evidence who are "similarly situated" to her
and then -- quote -- "similarly situated employees" --
quote -- "for the purpose of this ruling requires proof
that Paul Reddick, his supervisor, was the
decisionmaker." That's why I thought it was fairly
clear, since he used the same words and substituted the
word "Paul Reddick" for the same supervisor, that he was
taking that right from your brief where you made that
general argument and said nothing about the particular
case in those sentences.
MR. CANE: The general rule applies because
there was no showing here of any relationship between
the decision at issue here and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you want to defend
the harder ground, I understand. But what Justice
Breyer has just said is not necessarily so. The
"similarly situated" argument applies under 403 as well.
If they're similarly situated, the -- the time it would
take to let in these other things and rebuttal of them,
plus the prejudicial effect on the jury, would be
outweighed by the fact that they're similarly situated,
and, therefore, that it is stronger proof. I don't see
that one can tell from the district court's order
whether the district court was relying on 401 or 403.
And certainly, you just don't want to defend
3. 	 I think you're digging a hole for yourself.
MR. CANE: No, I absolutely want to defend
3. If there was any minimal probative value here,
Justice Scalia, all the countervailing 403 factors are
present.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, don't we have to
address 403 in any event? Because the Tenth Circuit
ruled, as I understand it, ruled that the evidence could
not be excluded under 403. It would have been an abuse
of discretion --
MR. CANE: That is what --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- for the trial judge to
have excluded it under 403.
MR. CANE: That is correct. Had the "me,
too" evidence been admitted, then we would have had to
respond with what might be called "not you, either"
evidence. And then the plaintiff would have made a
rebuttal to that showing, and we would have had trials
within a trial on whether these couple of persons that
plaintiff identified as potential bad actors were, in
fact, bad actors.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Would that be done
typically at the motion in limine stage? I mean, do you
establish whether or not there was discrimination in the
"me, too" cases at trial or prior to the trial, outside
the jury's --
MR. CANE: I think it can happen both ways.
And really here it happened both ways, too, because
although it was teed up as a motion in limine, as the
trial evolved, the district court actually relaxed her
ruling and expanded it to permit attacks both on
Reddick, who was the direct supervisor, but also
decisions made by Blessing, who was Reddick's boss. And
the district court explained that, as she thought about
it further, that additional bit of latitude should be
given to both sides because there was evidence that
Blessing had consulted with Reddick. And, in other
words --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that didn't present
the other supervisor, which I think is more -- a better
way to comprehend this, because "me, too" could be 10
witnesses working under the same supervisor. But these
two people, as I understand it, were in the direct chain
of supervisory command.
MR. CANE: That's correct. And that to me
is the proper test. If the decisionmaker's supervisor
was demonstrated to be biased, then I think that has
some relevance because it raises a question as to
whether that bias --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's not "other
supervisor." They are both supervisors of this
employee. She's in a unit that includes both superior
officers. I thought that the issue here was simply
other supervisors, witnesses who had worked for other
supervisors, people for whom the -- with whom the
plaintiff had no connection.
MR. CANE: And, more importantly, the other
supervisors were persons that were not shown to have any
connection with the decisionmaker with respect to this
plaintiff.
And so, yes, if you are going to define
"other supervisor" not to include the chain of command,
then that's the reason why I think there is no relevance
and a Rule 403 --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you say -- I thought
you said in your reply brief that other-supervisor
evidence could be relevant.
MR. CANE: It could be relevant if there
were a showing that the bias on the part of the other
supervisors somehow tainted the decision making of the
instant decisionmaker.
And in the cases that Ms. Mendelsohn cites
in her brief, those are all cases in which a directive
was given from a more senior official to the
decisionmaker.
What we have here are decisionmakers in
far-flung areas elsewhere within the company with no
showing whatsoever that there is any relationship
between them.
Each of the five disputed witnesses here
testified in deposition that they had no information
whatsoever to shed about the decisionmakers with respect
to Ms. Mendelsohn.
And so in those circumstances there's no
foundational showing of relationship, no foundational
showing of nexus.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Was there an attempt by
the plaintiff during the discovery phase of the case to
show other evidence of pattern and practice, statistical
evidence; or was it just these five people? Was that
all that the plaintiff presented?
MR. CANE: It was just these five people.
The only statistics in the case were that the number of
persons over 50 in this particular unit, the Business
Development Strategy Group, actually increased; and that
the oldest person at any particular level within the
Business Development Strategy Group was retained and not
laid off.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about the
spreadsheet evidence? I thought there was some effort
to show a connection through the spreadsheet showing the
age of the dismissed employees?
MR. CANE: That spreadsheet was linked to
some supervisor named Kennedy, who bore no relationship
to this department and no relationship to these
decisionmakers.
Let's assume that -- that allegation is
untested, but let's assume that Mr. Kennedy was
correctly identified as a bad actor. Again, that has no
relationship. It might have everything to do with any
layoff decision made by Kennedy or made by someone
Kennedy supervised. But it bears no relationship to
Ms. Mendelsohn's circumstances because there was no
showing that a similar spreadsheet was used by any of
her decisionmakers.
Let's assume that Kennedy is, like the two
others, Stock and Voorhees, perhaps a bad actor. That
just doesn't shed any meaningful light on the
circumstances of the plaintiff here; and even if it did
shed some -- some bit of light --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I am somewhat puzzled.
How many bad actors does there have to be before you can
draw an inference that someone superior to the bad
actors had a motivating part in the whole situation?
MR. CANE: I don't know that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The inference they are
trying to prove is there was somebody upstairs that told
everybody what to do.
MR. CANE: And they had full and fair
discovery to try and demonstrate that. But their own
witnesses testified that they were unaware of any
relationship between themselves and their decisionmaker
and the plaintiff and the plaintiff's decision-maker.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does the record show in
this 70,000-person company how many supervisors there
were? Do we know that?
MR. CANE: No. It doesn't say, Justice
Kennedy.
--
Let me --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask this, though.
Does it show whether the person more senior to the five
supervisors involved here was the same person or a
different person?
MR. CANE: It is a different person. Sure,
if you go far enough up the corporate ladder, eventually
you will end up --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The next step up would be
MR. CANE: Not the next step up, the next
step after that, and not the next step after that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your theory doesn't
depend on where in the hierarchy the other supervisors
are located, I take it, if there's a connection? In
other words, if there's a lower-level supervisor who
discriminates and that is somehow communicated to the
supervisor in question, and whatever -- that you know,
the point is that the other one wasn't disciplined or
something, that would still -- under your theory that
would be admissible, correct?
MR. CANE: If a -- no matter what level, I
would disagree that if a discriminating supervisor is in
the chain of command and supervises the decisionmaker,
then I think there's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I'm talking
about a situation -- let's say it is a lower-level
supervisor outside the chain of command who commits
another "me, too" act, but that is communicated to the
other in a way that suggests, for example, that the
company tolerates it or accepts it.
I take it that that would be potentially
admissible subject to 403 under your theory.
MR. CANE: I think that's right. If there's
a showing the actual decisionmaker could have been
tainted by it, I would agree with that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I see your -- does 404
bear on the case, Rule 404 of the Rules of Evidence?
MR. CANE: Yes, I think it does. I think
that if you're going to have -- what we have here is, in
effect, an assault on the corporate character of the
company and not an assault --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Have we said that 404
applies to corporations? Corporations have a character?
MR. CANE: I don't think the Court has ever
held that. I think the individual has a character, and
there is no character-evidence problem with showing that
a particular decisionmaker engaged in other
discriminatory conduct, because I think that falls
within the exception to 404. But where the
decisionmaker is somebody else, then what you really
have is an assault on the corporate character, and I
think that's impermissible.
Unless the Court has further questions, I'll
reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Cane.
Mr. Garre.
OPENING ARGUMENT BY GREGORY G. GARRE
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES
AS AMICUS CURIAE
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Evidence of discrimination by other
supervisors within the company is sometimes but not
always admissible in a disparate-treatment case to help
prove discrimination by the plaintiff's own supervisor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's under --
under 401, it's not always admissible, or do you need
3 to reach that conclusion?
MR. GARRE: I think you need to look at the
evidence under both rules, the first question being
whether it meets the minimum-evidence threshold in 401.
And that is a very low threshold set by the Federal
rules. The second question being whether it may be
excluded under Rule 403, which would --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But do you think
there are situations where other-supervisor evidence is
not admissible under 401 itself?
MR. GARRE: Yes. We do think that there are
some instances where other-supervisor evidence is not
admissible under 401. For example, if you have a large
company and you have a plaintiff in the Chicago office
claiming that her supervisor had it out for her and she
wants to put on the testimony of an employee in the
Seattle office who two years ago complained that her
supervisor had it out for her, we think that that would
not be relevant under 401.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but here you have a
company of 70,000 people.
MR. GARRE: You have a company of 70,000
people, but you have allegations that supervisors in the
same division, implementing the same company-wide
reduction-in-force plan in the same timeframe and giving
similar explanations under similar circumstances,
engaged in discrimination.
We think that the district dissenting judge
in the court of appeals was right to say that evidence
of that kind is at least marginally relevant, which
would then put the focus on whether this evidence could
be excluded under 403.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is hard to see what
wouldn't be marginally relevant if you think that's
marginally relevant. It has to be a different
supervisor in a different time frame. I mean, sure.
MR. GARRE: Well, I think you've got other
situations as well, Justice Scalia. I think we've got a
situation of a general comment of discriminatory animus.
For example, older people just don't get it, something
like that. I think the -- the -- by a different
supervisor.
I think even if that's within the same
office, the plaintiff is going to be hard-pressed even
to meet the minimum-relevance threshold. But the
relevance threshold, as this Court has recognized in the
Furnco v. Waters case and the Huddlestone case, this is
a broad threshold that allows evidence in. And then we
look at the other parts of Article IV of the Federal
Rules of Evidence to see whether it may be excluded --
JUSTICE ALITO: How do you articulate the
rule that separates these situations?
MR. GARRE: Well, I would point to several
criteria, Justice Scalia, in determining relevance.
First, whether you're dealing with same alleged -- same
kind of alleged discrimination and a common catalyst;
second, whether the proffered witnesses are working in
the same corporate vicinity; third, whether they are
alleging discrimination in the same time frame; four,
whether they are alleging a pattern or practice of
discrimination.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, that's the relevant
factors, but what do you look at the factors to
determine -- what's the test for determining whether
they are sufficient?
MR. GARRE: Well, you would look at the
proffered evidence. For example, in this case you have
evidence that all of the proffered witnesses were
terminated under the same companywide reduction in
force. You've got a common catalyst.
In this case, you've got employees who
worked in the same geographic vicinity, the headquarters
of Sprint, the same office complex or at least the same
vicinity. You've got witnesses who were terminated on
the same day --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that relevant -- the
same vicinity? You're -- you're --
MR. GARRE: I think it is more likely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Opposing counsel has said
they are -- they are three supervisors up. What does
the same vicinity have anything to do with this?
MR. GARRE: Where you have supervisors in
the same division, in the same vicinity, carrying out
the same plan, providing the same distinct explanations
in similar circumstances, a reasonable juror might infer
that plaintiff's own --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Even if those supervisors
RIF'd two thousands employees, and only three made this
complaint?
MR. GARRE: Yes, with respect to the minimum
threshold of relevance. Keep in mind, once --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No matter how many
employees were RIF'd, only three supervisors --
hypothetical case, three supervisors. No many how many
employees were RIF'd, the three is sufficient so that
these witnesses could testify?
MR. GARRE: Well, I think if you're talking
about pattern of practice, maybe doesn't -- certainly as
a matter of law that's not a -- going to prove a pattern
of practice, and the employer can make that argument to
the district judge, to the jury, and that evidence could
be limited or excluded. If you have got, for example, a
-- a proffered witness who's complaining that
supervisors in the same complex used the same
distinctive explanation that my supervisor gave me --
for example, in this case, several of the witnesses were
going to testify that their supervisors told them they
were being -- they were removed because their positions
were being eliminated, and then they later found out
that younger persons assumed their jobs.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So take it in this case,
and in all cases, the plaintiff has the burden of laying
the foundation for this evidence; is that not correct?
MR. GARRE: The plaintiff has --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And you say the foundation
is satisfied if they were the same supervisors in the
same division, I thought.
MR. GARRE: I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You want us to write that
in a case as a rule?
MR. GARRE: The plaintiffs --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Without reference to how
many employees were involved?
MR. GARRE: The plaintiff has the burden of
showing that the evidence is relevant, Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I think you said in your
brief that the plaintiff does not have to lay a
foundation. And that's the difference between you, I
thought -- with respect to Justice Kennedy's question.
Your brief takes the position that it is not necessary
to lay a foundation in order to introduce
other-supervisor evidence.
--
MR. GARRE: That's correct, and that's why
as I said the plaintiff has to show that the evidence is
relevant, that it has some tendency to make a fact or
consequence more likely.
This Court in the Huddlestone
case confronted --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, one -- one would have
some -- some tendency --
MR. GARRE: And Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about one instead of
three? Would that have some tendency? I guess it
would.
MR. GARRE: It might. And that probably
would be a strong candidate for exclusion under 403. In
the Furnco case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why, by the way, do you
think this was excluded under -- under 401 rather than
3?
MR. GARRE: Well, we -- we acknowledge that
the record isn't precisely clear on that. We think that
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then why should it be
assumed it was done properly rather than improperly?
MR. GARRE: Largely because of what was said
in the order, and because of the way it was briefed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was said in the order?
I see nothing in the order that indicates it is under
1.
MR. GARRE: Well, it doesn't say 401, but
the reason why the evidence can't come in is because the
-- the proffered witnesses didn't have the same
supervisor. The order is on page 24.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But --
MR. GARRE: What the court excluded is any
evidence of the pattern --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's very relevant to the
3 determination.
MR. GARRE: It's relevant, but not it's
certainly not determinative, and we think in a case like
this, where this kind of evidence is the critical
evidence for the trial -- in the case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Picky, picky, picky on the
trial court. I must say.
MR. GARRE: Yeah --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me this order
should be -- should be given -- it should be treated as
if, it could be sustained, it should be sustained.
MR. GARRE: With respect, Justice Scalia, in
this case, this proffered evidence was the crux of the
trial, the critical issue. It came up not only in the
context of the motion in limine, it came up in the
context of the motion for a new trial. And if you look
at what the district court said in denying a motion for
a new trial, she said again -- and this is on page 436
of the JA -- she says, "none of the proffered evidence
makes it more likely that the decisionmakers in this
case discriminated against the plaintiff."
That's relevance language, and you're quite
right --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The determination of
the relevance of the "me, too" evidence -- and I assume
also the 403 status -- needs to be made at the motion in
limine stage, or is it a question for the jury?
MR. GARRE: Well, the district court serves
as a gateway. District courts have tremendous
discretion under the Federal rules to determine whether
or not evidence is relevant, and whether or not it
should be excluded under 403. So that determination is
made by the district court.
In some cases, as happened in the
Huddlestone case -- that was a 404(d) case -- the court
acknowledged in some cases the evidence may go in and
then the jury may instruct that that evidence is
allowed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if it's -- if on
--
the "me, too" evidence it's a "he said/she said" type of
case, does that get admitted to the jury? Or is that
excluded at the motion in limine stage?
MR. GARRE: Well, if you're pointing to
other acts of discrimination by other supervisors that
are relevant, then that would be allowed in, and the
employer would come in and present their counter
evidence --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they're only
-- it is only relevant, of course, if it is true; and if
the company denies that the "me, too" episode even took
place, don't you have to have a separate trial on that
before you can determine whether it's even admissible?
MR. GARRE: In our system we put that
evidence before a jury. If it is relevant under the
Federal rules, it is admissible. We put before a jury
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I get back to
my -- the predicate to my question. It's only relevant
if it happened.
MR. GARRE: And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And it seems to me
we've had a lot of discussion whether it is relevant if
it happened, but we don't know how we determine whether
it happened or not.
MR. GARRE: In the Furnco case, the Court
said that -- that the evidence doesn't have to
conclusively demonstrate the fact. It simply has to be
relevant. We put relevant evidence before juries, we
instruct them on the consideration of that evidence,
permit the defendants to put that evidence into context,
and then we ask juries to draw a conclusion --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So an allegation --
an allegation of discrimination in a "me, too" context
is automatically relevant?
MR. GARRE: No. I think you'd look at it
under the relevance threshold, and I think you'd look at
it under 403. 403 is going to exclude a lot of this
evidence. It is going to exclude the barely evidence,
the barely relevant evidence. But it -- we would expect
a trial court in this kind of situation to make some
kind of findings as to why this evidence is excludable,
and we would expect the court of appeals not to
undertake a de novo 403 balancing in its own instance.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Garre, do I
understand correctly that the reason the Tenth Circuit
thought that the district court was ruling under 401,
making a relevance determination, was that the court of
appeals had a precedent in the area of employee
discipline, and the Tenth Circuit said well, the
district court was following that precedent, but that
precedent doesn't apply in this situation. So that's
why the court of appeals, as I understand it, read the
district court as just applying an absolute ban.
MR. GARRE: That's correct, and that's the
way this case was litigated all the way until to the
reply brief in this case. If there are no further
questions?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Garre.
Mr. Egan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DENNIS E. EGAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. EGAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
If we'll turn to 3a in the white book, the
court of appeals properly understood that this was a
blanket order based on only one fact. If you weren't
supervised by Paul Reddick, it was not admissible. At
page 2a, the court said prior to trial, Sprint filed a
motion in limine seeking to exclude among other things
any evidence of Sprint's alleged discriminatory
treatment of other employees. Relying exclusively on
Aramburu, Sprint argued that any reference to alleged
discrimination by any supervisor other than Reddick --
it was irrelevant.
Throughout -- and let me mention here, Your
Honor, that the order of things was not as Mr. Cane got
it. He said the order was grounded on an offer of
proof.
If I may address the chronology, on December
, 2004, Sprint filed its motion saying that if -- it
is not the same supervisor, it doesn't come in. There's
no mention, ever, about the facts of the proffer.
Never. It never came up below. We --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, what if you
have a situation that's been referred to earlier, where
you have four other supervisors that are presented as
"me, too" evidence. They are in the Los Angeles office.
The defendant's supervisor is in the Fresno office. Is
that evidence relevant?
MR. EGAN: It depends what the evidence is
and what it is tied to, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It is just that they
-- they are alleged to have fired people for an
impermissible basis under the age discrimination act as
well.
MR. EGAN: In your hypothetical was it was
during the same common employer initiated action, such
as a reduction in force?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All right, let's
take it and say yes.
MR. EGAN: Okay. What the court of appeals
noted here was that in this case it makes a difference
that we're talking about a common employer-initiated
event. We're not talking about --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but doesn't
that beg the question? We don't know. This isn't a
pattern and practice case. You don't have evidence of a
company-wide policy of discrimination. Take my
hypothetical. There are just four people who are
alleged to harbor age-based bias, and they -- in the Los
Angeles office. No connection to the Fresno supervisor
at all, other than that they work for the same company.
Is that enough for relevance?
MR. EGAN: If there is no connection, it
might not be, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It might not be
relevant.
MR. EGAN: Might not be relevant. Let me
say that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you assert that the
mere fact that it is pursuant to the same reduction in
force is enough of a connection.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor, because the
standard arises out of Article IV, which is entitled
"Relevancy and Its Limits." There are no categorical
bars within Article IV except when -- Congress and the
Court have mentioned, 401 has no categorical bar. The
test is, does a fact have -- if evidence has any
tendency to make a fact of consequence more likely than
without it? So it depends. In rule 401, there is no
categorical bar. In Article IV, if there are areas
where there are problems, we list them. 407, 411 -- no
mention of liability insurance. 410.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: 404.
MR. EGAN: 404(b), Your Honor. And in this
case the lower courts had used 404. We did not address
it. I don't think anybody really did in a brief, other
than the Government mentioned the Huddlestone case. The
Huddlestone case is important because it said that there
is no preliminary determination as to whether or not
something is relevant. What you do is the court looks
at all the evidence. The evidence that Ellen Mendelsohn
wanted to offer has connections to it.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well suppose you're -- if
you're right on 401 and 402, would -- do we not still
have to go on and decide whether it would have been a
abuse of discretion for the trial judge to exclude this
under 403?
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, I believe that --
JUSTICE ALITO: If we find that it would not
have been abuse of discretion, then how could we affirm
the Tenth Circuit?
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, I believe that what
you have to do is look at what the court did, because
what the court did was it ruled on what they presented,
which was not anything having to do with the weight of
the evidence, confusion of issues. There is nothing to
indicate. And the court of appeals quoted its own law
that says we are in no position to speculate. As a
superintending court, they ruled only one thing -- a
categorical bar of evidence that was before it, and they
said that's wrong. You followed the wrong case law.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought they said
that it should be admitted. I thought they went to the
opposite extreme.
MR. EGAN: I'm not sure that they went to
that extreme. Their language is this, Your Honor: They
say, "Based on what we see" -- and they have the proffer
in front of them at that time, and they also have the
full transcript, which hasn't been talked about -- how
Ellen Mendelsohn's case and her theory tied into these
people.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How did they?
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, in several different
ways. Barred evidence of culture. We had evidence of
culture from open remarks, that someone needs to be
"blessed with lots of runway ahead of them" in order to
get a good rating. Bonnie Hoopes said being told she
was too old for the job right after she received that
memo, being told openly and repeatedly, "I'm too old for
the job." If there are too many --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are these episodes
that were necessarily communicated to the supervisor at
issue here?
MR. EGAN: No, Your Honor, but this is on
the question of culture.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You don't make the
-- you don't suggest that he was even aware of these
other anecdotes.
MR. EGAN: We do not suggest, but what we
say is that what was going on in the culture -- you've
got a supervisor like Ted Stock, openly saying, "I can't
wait for RIF's, so that I can get rid of the older
people in my department." That supervisor's conclusion
is that it's okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you're conceding
that we don't even know that that comment was
communicated in any way to the supervisor at issue here.
He may not have been aware of it. The supervisor -- he
may have been in Fresno and that supervisor in Los
Angeles.
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, what way do know is
that they attended the same meetings, the key leadership
meetings, that took place in January 2002 that covered
something very important to our case -- the
establishment of a forced ranking system and also a
discussion of the RIF's that are ongoing and continuing.
They're at the same meeting. It's after this meeting,
where Jack Welch is presented to the group, that they
come out with the philosophy of forced --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I assume there's no
dispute over any direct evidence you have that the
supervisor was being guided by a company policy or
statement or the RIF program that was discriminatory.
The issue here is whether or not you can bring in
testimony that -- which has no demonstrated connection
to the supervisor.
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, the rules of evidence
simply talk in terms of "not demonstrate a connection."
It doesn't exist. If we look at the rules of evidence,
the standard -- and the standard we believe applies here
-- is a two-step methodology. It would be, number one,
what is the party -- the thing the party is trying to
prove, such as culture -- is that a subsidiary fact of
consequence?
Something that's been missed in the
Petitioner's position and even in the district court, is
that Rule 401 says that you have three levels of
evidence. The ultimate issue, and the Petitioner has
always said this doesn't prove that Reddick
discriminated against Mendelsohn. That's the ultimate
issue. We have many intermediary facts to which the
evidence relates. They are facts of consequence, and
the evidence had a tendency to show these facts of
consequence. So that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I ask you to elaborate
on that somewhat?
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I went through to kind of
pin down what the facts of consequence were. I went
through the offer of proof. I don't have my notes in
front of me, but I think my recollection is right on
this. It struck me that the admissible evidence that
was indicated by the offer of proof boils down basically
to this: There were three employees who would testify
that, following their dismissal, some or all of their
work was done by a younger person.
MR. EGAN: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE SOUTER: There was one employee who
would testify that he received -- she saw a spreadsheet
in front of one supervisor that indicated age.
There was one employee who would testify
that her immediate supervisor had made
age-discriminatory remarks.
And another employee would testify that her
supervisor's boss had made age-discriminatory remarks.
Now, basically, out of this company of
,000, that seems to be the sum total of the -- the
kind of circumstantial evidence of culture that you
presented in the offer of proof.
Am I selling your offer of proof short here?
MR. EGAN: No, you are not, Your Honor. The
-- you have hit it precisely. And we believe that with
culture, it's the openness of what's going on. The
openness. The number of events goes to weight. All the
weaknesses and frailties of the evidence go to weight.
And we never got to that portion of determining the
weight of the evidence. The weight --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So what should
we do then? Sorry. Go ahead and conclude. But I want
to ask this after you finish answering Justice Souter.
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, we believe that --
JUSTICE BREYER: And finish your answer to
Justice Souter.
MR. EGAN: Thank you, Your Honor. The --
this ties in, in several different ways, if I can take
them all, to culture, to modus operandi, and this
wouldn't require discriminatory conduct. For instance,
the story line that jobs have been abolished and given
to youngers. That's where that would be modus operandi.
The fact that the office shadow rating system -- they're
under the same rating system that's not supposed to
apply to employees like Ellen Mendelsohn and those who
we are presenting, but it was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if even one of these
three had existed? Only one these three?
MR. EGAN: One of these three what, Your
Honor?
JUSTICE SCALIA: One of these three other
employees who complained about age discrimination.
Would that have the same tendency to show it?
MR. EGAN: It depends what it's offered for
because relevance does --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You think one is enough?
MR. EGAN: If it's culture --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. EGAN: -- and the CEO is saying that we
want to bring the average age down -- which never
happens -- but under --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, I'm not talking about
somebody up at the top. I'm talking about somebody on
the same level as the supervisor that you're concerned
with. One other supervisor in this company of 70,000
has -- is accused of having made age-discriminatory
decisions.
MR. EGAN: Well, if they're just accused,
no, Your Honor. The assumption has to be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, all of these are just
accused. We have -- none of this has been proven.
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, we have not even
addressed at any time the content of the decision -- I
mean the content of the testimony.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Let's assume the testimony
at least shows these points that you and I agreed the
offer of proof offers to prove.
They're going to be met -- I think it's
reasonable to suppose, they're going to be met by
counter-evidence.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: We're going to have
litigation on these points, and they're going to take --
in effect, become subsidiary chapters in this trial.
And what concerns me, I guess, is that, at the end of
the day, it's -- it strikes me as though there is reason
to believe that the proof itself is not going to be
anything close to overwhelming. We will have had a
potentially confusing trial on this subsidiary
third-party evidence. And we seem to be very close, if
we have not gotten over the line, of the subsidiary
evidence, in effect, being substantially misleading or
prejudicial. And -- and basically I'm raising a
question of weight under 403.
What's your response to that?
MR. EGAN: My response, because I'm hearing
you talk about the mini-trial issues, first of all, as
you know, it will not happen here. We had a pretrial
January 29, 2007, after -- before Sprint had filed its
petition for cert, in which we discussed will this be a
longer trial. One and a half, maybe two days. The fact
of mini-trials, Your Honor, it just doesn't happen that
often. You can try joinder cases. I've tried joinder
cases with eight plaintiffs, and you handle that with
instructions. The answer isn't to keep out possibly
probative evidence; the answer is to let --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But what --
MR. EGAN: -- to let Sprint put on
counter-evidence --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What happens in this
case? Let's say there are five "me, too" situations
presented, and the court make a determination in each
one, and the jury finds for the plaintiff. And then
it's appealed, and the argument on appeal is, well, in
three of those five cases there wasn't age
discrimination and here's why. And that evidence is --
well then the court of appeals agrees, yes, those three
cases shouldn't have been admitted.
Is that reversible error?
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, I think that what you
handle that with is limiting instructions. It would be
the evidence of acts or statements of anyone else that
you've heard are relevant only to the intent of Paul
Reddick. Nobody would contend that Bonnie Hoopes was --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, under my
hypothetical, in the three cases, the court of appeals,
let's say, determines that the alleged statements did
not occur. That's the argument. And this was admitted
to the jury in three of the five cases, and those
statements did not occur.
MR. EGAN: At least that's part of our
adversary system, Your Honor, where we have both sides
presenting and countering. The super- --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that reversible
error on appeal?
MR. EGAN: That it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Five gets you cases
when the court of appeals determines that three did not
occur?
MR. EGAN: If it's determined under your
hypothetical --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, that's exactly what's
sort of bothering me. You are the trial lawyer.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And I'm not. And what's
worrying me most about this is I will say something that
will muck up quite a lot of trials. So, therefore, the
sentence that jumps out the page here was where the
court of appeals says that Rule 403's exclusion is an
extraordinary remedy that should be sparingly -- used
sparingly.
Is that a general rule?
Because my impression was -- and this is why
I asked you as a trial lawyer -- is that if you take 401
and 402 and read them literally, we'll have trials that
last a thousand years.
And, really, the way a trial judge keeps the
trial under control is to say: Well, maybe there is
some slight tendency here to make a fact more likely
than not; but, even if that's so, this is a waste of
time.
And I thought that kind of decision is what
trial judges are there to make.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And, therefore, I thought
this court of appeals is trying to second-guess that
trial court judge unless that trial court judge is
making an absolute rule, which he may have been.
But as soon as we get into this case, I
thought we might do quite a lot of harm by trying to let
the court of appeals second-guess trial courts on this
kind of thing.
Now, I would appreciate your response to
that.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor. That requires,
under 403 requires, a balancing. And I think you must
have, contrary to what -- all due respect -- Justice
Scalia suggested, Rule 403 is the only rule that
expressly says "substantially outweighs." We have no
evidence here --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, then, how are we
going to -- I'm not arguing about what it says so much
as I'm arguing about who has the right between the court
of appeals and the trial court to decide?
MR. EGAN: Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: And all I'm worried
about -- and you tell me if that's the law in the Tenth
Circuit or elsewhere. I was an appeals court judge for
a quite a while.  And I think we have never -- not
"never," but hardly ever second-guessed a trial judge on
that kind of question.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, you tell me if the
rules are different in the Tenth Circuit? Do they out
there second-guess trial judges on this kind of question
all the time?
MR. EGAN: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. If they don't
normally, why should they here? If this kind of rule is
-- as you say, this kind of evidence is like any other
evidence, any other evidence at all. It may be
relevant, or it may not be. It depends on the case. A
waste of time or not depends on the case.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor. Is that a
problem, and why is it an evidentiary exclusion before
trial?
JUSTICE BREYER: I got your blanket part. I
got that.
MR. EGAN: And so once you are there, we
have no quarrel if the Tenth Circuit -- and I think the
Tenth Circuit leaves room for sending it back, remand
it, and then the court could still make rulings, as the
Tenth Circuit said, on cumulative nature of evidence,
hearsay objections. These haven't been addressed.
Sprint has been --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, no, not -- I'm
saying -- well, you got my point, but you're just not
answering my question.
MR. EGAN: I am sorry, Your Honor. I'm not
understanding --
JUSTICE BREYER: And I don't want to repeat
it. And I'm not talking about whether it is hearsay or
not. I'm not talking -- I'm talking about whether it
comes in 401, 402, 403. That's the issue.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor. Our -- we
believe that it does. Because the evidence has a
tendency to make more probable than without the evidence
facts of consequence, on culture, on impeachment, on
pattern, on pretext.
That's our standard. We have no indication
here that the judge ever engaged in a balancing -- none.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Egan, what if I think
that, had he engaged in a balancing, it would have been
an abuse of discretion not to exclude it? What if I
think that?
Then what happens with this case?
MR. EGAN: If you believe that it is so
clear, then, of course, that would be -- if you believe
that it is so clear that it is an abuse of discretion
not to exclude it, then that is the prerogative of the
Court to do. But it must be done under this standard,
Your Honor; that is, the judge looks at the evidence and
asks the question like he would for submissibility.
What would a reasonable jury say, and is
there room for disagreement?
If you have Federal judges, for instance,
who disagree on admissibility --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but I am worried about
having five trials -- you know, one trial turning into
six trials. I mean those are the factors that I am
concerned about.
MR. EGAN: I understand, Your Honor. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. EGAN: But let me just say this, if I
might. Discrimination cases are important. In the
McKennon case Justice Kennedy wrote for the unanimous
Court in saying every time a single plaintiff advances
the cause and prevails in a discrimination case, it
serves the national public purpose.
So it's important. And the idea of there
being cases on this, the court house doors should be
open. The decision may be -- may be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if I assume
your rule cuts the other way?
Let's say in this company of 70,000 or
,000, or whatever it is, there are a thousand
supervisors. Four or five are alleged to have
discriminated on the basis of age.
I assume the company can call the other 995
and say: Are there any allegations against you? Did
you fire people? And did you in some cases keep the
oldest one?
And then they have to -- you know, they say
yes. So the, "me, too" evidence works both ways, right?
MR. EGAN: Absolutely. And that is
important, because in your Court, cases and
jurisprudence --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if you are
talking about culture, what is the culture of the
company if 995 supervisors don't supervise -- don't
discriminate in their decisions and 5 do?
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, the culture -- they
have the right to bring on evidence, but the trial court
retains the discretion. And I hope this answers Justice
Breyer's question, also. The court retains the
discretion to keep out marginal evidence.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, maybe, just as an
example, you could take Mr. Borel and Mr. Hoopes and
explain why their testimony should not have been
excluded under 403? As I read Trent, the only thing I
have as to either one of them is that they were replaced
by young women in their position. That's it as far as
admissible evidence for either one.
Now, if you do that, the 403 balancing
there, why doesn't that lead to exclusion?
MR. EGAN: Because John Borel's evidence
goes to pretext, Your Honor. And pretext under the
Reeves case is something that is highly, highly
important,and highly important to the trial lawyer. His
pretext evidence is twofold.
He was going to get a job before he knew
that he was RIF'd. He goes to apply for the job after
the RIF, and he is told: Sorry, you've got a secret
adverse rating.
Now, mind you, the company says: We don't
use these ratings.
Now, in Ellen Mendelsohn's trial without
corroboration, she's isolated. That's John Borel's
important testimony in this case. John Hoopes -- he's
told by a vice president why can't you hire someone
younger? Why would you hire someone age 48, which
indicates that at Sprint, it's something that is
determined to be okay. So that's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if company can
admit evidence to show the opposite of your "me, too"
evidence by other supervisors and you say five shows the
culture of discrimination, how many are they allowed to
admit before -- to show the opposite culture? Certainly
more than five if they say this isn't representative.
You have to look at these 15 others.
MR. EGAN: I can't pick a number, Mr. Chief
Justice. And we're not saying that the five proves the
fact as you said of proving culture. But it is evidence
that is relevant to it. A reasonable juror --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. There are
, 30, or however many is equally relevant.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You said there was going
to be an agreement that this would be a trial or a day,
a day and a half.
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Was that before or after
the premise this testimony would not be admitted.
MR. EGAN: That was after the premise that
the testimony would not be admitted. But, Your Honor,
this was after remand.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You told it can be done in
a day and a half.  Because these five were excluded.
MR. EGAN: No, Your Honor. I'm sorry. What
happened here was the remand or the reversal came down.
We have a pretrial because we're going back to trial.
We have a trial on January 29, 2007. Excuse me. A
pretrial, and at that trial the court asked well, will
this be a long trial, four weeks, five weeks? We say if
you open up discovery, if they want to bring people to
refute -- Sprint said no.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't think that has any
bearing on the ruling that the trial judge made that's
under review in the Court of Appeals for the Tenth
Circuit and that we're looking at here.
MR. EGAN: Well, Your Honor, it goes to
whether or not saying that there's going to be a lengthy
trial it is some evidence as you look at what the actual
experience is -- look at the cases cited by the
defendant. We cited them in our brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They may have just thought
the game isn't worth the candle. Just thought we've
sunk so much money into this case by now and it's just
not worth the risk.
MR. EGAN: That's fine, Your Honor. But
they should be not take out the legs from the plaintiffs
to try to prove their case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's the problem that
concerns me. It is not the question of whether the
trial is going to last for three weeks. It is a
question at the prospect that the trial will last for
three weeks and they will have to go out and find other
people in their organization and depose them and bring
them in to show them it is not the culture. They just
say it is not worth the candle. Just settle the case
and get out. All of these things are relevant to how
you rule on 403 it seems to me.
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, we're simply asking
for balance, because other supervisors --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Doesn't that get to the
point, though, hasn't the last hour of questioning from
the court shown that what we really ought to take place
here is a remand to the trial court for a 403 balance?
MR. EGAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. EGAN: If I might offer some concluding
thoughts because my time is running down. The district
court erred in categorically barring all other
supervisor evidence. It was a categorical bar. When
you get into the chronology of what happened, you will
see no indication otherwise. Neither Rule 401 nor Rule
3 support such a blanket prohibition. As I mentioned
under rule 401 --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think the
court of appeals erred as well in ruling that the
evidence was admissible? Because as I understand your
answer to Justice Souter, it is that there should be a
3 evaluation and the court of appeals didn't allow the
district court to undertake that.
MR. EGAN: Your Honor, I think that what the
-- my reading of the Tenth Circuit, for what it's worth,
is that they were looking at the exclusionary order
based on the wrong legal rule and said, we are going to
reverse that. And that we see nothing that indicates
that the evidence is overly prejudicial, since that's
basically all that they were looking at.
There could be, and we assume there would
be, new motions filed upon remand, in which case we'll
answer anything going to the merits because we've never
been allowed to talk about the content of the testimony
itself. Will it be cumulative? Is it overly
prejudicial? We've got --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And if on the remand
that you conceded is necessary, that will take place in
the context of a motion in limine and not in the context
of a new trial?
MR. EGAN: It should be in the context of
going back and being remanded, for the court maybe to
make determination, but our position is in the context
of a new trial the court can address any new motion that
hasn't been made.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think a new
trial is required for the district court to make the 403
determination?
MR. EGAN: I think that you have to get back
before the district court procedurally.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Has this Court said that
3 determinations must always be made on the record?
MR. EGAN: No, Your Honor, you haven't said
that they should be on the record, but we're not asking
for that. We're asking for some indication of what --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I thought that's
precisely what you are saying, that that there is no
balancing shown, that he didn't do the balance.
MR. EGAN: Well, Your Honor, there should --
we believe, if -- as you write the opinion, there should
be -- the court should show there work. You know, it's
-- as I was taught in grade school, you your work so
that we know what you did rule on. They should follow
the rules as well.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems very strange to me
that we -- there's been -- the case went to the jury
without the evidence you wanted to get in. The jury
found for the company. Now if the -- if the trial court
is going to properly exclude the evidence under 403, we
should then have the very same trial with a new jury?
That doesn't seem proper.
MR. EGAN: No, Your Honor, if may I answer
that question.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. EGAN: The only thing that can't happen
on remand -- I want to make sure this is clear -- is
that the judge can't exclude on the same basis that
caused the problem the first time; that is, well, it is
not Reddick; it's excluded. Not Reddick, it's excluded.
Any other factors would be open.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Egan.
MR. EGAN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Cane, you have
five minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL W. CANE, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. CANE: Let me begin by addressing
Justice Kennedy's question about the Rule 403 issue. I
think there are two reasons why no remand is necessary.
The first, as Justice Scalia said, is that you assume
that the order is correct. You don't assume that it's
incorrect. The second --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the -- how can we
make that assumption when the Tenth Circuit says we know
why this district judge ruled as he or she did? We had
a precedent.  It -- it dealt with employee discipline.
We said, categorically, it's got to be the same
supervisor; otherwise it's not relevant.
The district judge was simply applying that
case to this case.
MR. CANE: Neither --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So it wasn't any 403
question. It was this doesn't some in.
MR. CANE: Neither that case nor this case
involved any attempt to show that foundation, the
linkage between these other persons, these other alleged
bad actors, and the decision here.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's not -- the
point is that the Tenth Circuit said this judge made an
absolute rule: It doesn't come in. We know why he made
an absolute rule; that was our precedent.
MR. CANE: Well, I think the Tenth Circuit
-- it -- it applied the incorrect presumption. It
should have applied the presumption that an evidentiary
ruling is correct rather than incorrect.
JUSTICE BREYER: How could ut have been?
What about the date problem he just mentioned? You said
-- your opponent said that when you filed this motion in
limine on December 15, 2004, by that time, there hadn't
been any fact-specific things at all brought up in the
trial that were relevant to this, and there's certainly
none in the notion that I could see.
MR. CANE: Well, that always will be true in
the case of a motion in limine. But the motion in
limine anticipated the specific evidence that had
emerged in discovery --
JUSTICE BREYER: But where does it say? I
can't find in the motion, although there is something on
disparate impact, anything that says well, you see, I
don't know about the general mine run of cases, but in
this particular case, it's not sufficiently material, it
is a waste -- it's not -- it is a waste of time. Now, I
just can't find that.
MR. CANE: I don't think district judges can
be expected to, you know, write opinions that are -- to
be affirmed to be worthy of publication in F. Supp.2d. I
think the district court considers the evidence thrown
at him or her, and in this case all --
JUSTICE BREYER: Did anyone argue that
before December 15, 2004, that we don't know about the
mine run of cases, but this case, in fact it's a waste
of time? Did anyone argue that before December 15,
04?
MR. CANE: That's the time when --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm asking yes or no; did
they or didn't they?
MR. CANE: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. CANE: Because that's when the court
considered notions in limine. The court was not setting
standards in anticipation of a trial until the trial.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You said there were two
points about 403.
MR. CANE: Yes, the second is I agree with
Justice Alito's observation, or I think it was his
observation, that it would have been abuse -- an of
discretion to admit this evidence anyway; and so that
gets you easily by the 403 issue. I don't think you
need -- there's a lot of court of appeals cases that say
that where 403 factors are obvious, where they're
implicit, there's not any obligation on the court of
appeals' part -- or on the district court's part -- to
-- to set them forth and explicitly engage in
rebalancing.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you not think that
there is an important value that the Tenth Circuit
recognized in making it clear that there is no absolute
bar? If we just assume in favor of the district court,
when we don't know that the district court didn't take
it as an absolute rule, that -- this is a point of law
that should be clarified for the benefit of district
courts. Either there's a categorical bar or there's
not.
MR. CANE: I think that, absent some showing
of relationship of nexus, then the presumptive rule in
the run of cases should be that this evidence should not
be admitted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you don't want that
clarification to be done at the expense your client, I
take it?
(Laughter.)
MR. CANE: Of course not. Of course not.
Let me respond to a couple of the Solicitor
General's points. The Solicitor General in his brief
said three things with which we agree: the plaintiff's
burden to lay foundation; anecdotes don't comprise --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the Government
said it was not necessary to lay a foundation.
Mr. Garre confirmed that point.
MR. CANE: He did say that, Justice
Ginsburg, but that's not what their brief says.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Cane.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the case in the
