IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
CHARLES WILKIE, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 06-219
HARVEY FRANK ROBBINS :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, March 19, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioners.
LAURENCE H. TRIBE, ESQ., Cambridge, Mass.; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
LAURENCE H. TRIBE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of Petitioners 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 06-219, Wilkie versus Robinson.
General Garre.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY G. GARRE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Respondent asks this Court to recognize a
new constitutional tort under Bivens and the Just
Compensation Clause --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Garre, could you crank
up the thing? The sound isn't working, I don't think,
Mr. Garre.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think it needs a
little upcranking.
Good.
MR. GARRE: Hopefully that's better.
-- recognize a new constitutional tort under
Bivens and the Just Compensation Clause that would
subject public officials to personal liability for
conduct that he concedes does not amount to a taking.
Recognizing that constitutional tort would require this
Court to extend Bivens to an entirely new context, it
would disregard limits that have existed for centuries
on Just Compensation Clause claims, and it would skew
the enforcement of important public land use objectives
and thereby threaten public resources and public lands.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General Garre, there's a
record here that the district court said there was
substantial evidence, enough to go to trial, of a
pattern of harassing conduct that included trespasses on
this man's lodge and leaving the place in disarray,
videotaping the guests, selective enforcement of the
grazing laws, a whole pattern of things, even asking the
Bureau of Indian Affairs to impound his cattle? This
man says, this has been done to me by officers of my
government. Is there a remedy?
MR. GARRE: Justice Ginsburg, there are a
number of avenues that he could have sought to prevent
this alleged conduct and that he did invoke. We don't
think that there is a remedy under Bivens or an inferred
action under the Just Compensation Clause.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, what is, what is
there that will really be effective, because if you tell
me challenging each citation for violating the grazing
permit --
MR. GARRE: He can challenge the citations
for challenging the -- canceling the grazing permits --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then the behavior
will continue and he'll get one more and one more and
one more.
MR. GARRE: Well, I don't think that that's
a reasonable inference, Justice Ginsburg.  In fact, the
IBLA considered and rejected each of the alleged
administrative actions on which his claim is now based.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: May I ask a quick
question. I had the same list of alleged acts, and I
think many of them are uncontested, that Justice
Ginsburg mentioned. Just as a matter of policy, can you
inform me, when the Solicitor General's Office takes
this case do you look into whether any of these things
happen and the Justice Department issues a warning,
don't do this any more? If these things are as Justice
Ginsburg explained you don't defend all of those
actions?
MR. GARRE: Well, our position is that he
hasn't established a constitutional tort or an
actionable claim under RICO.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I know that. I know that.
MR. GARRE: To answer your question, the
Government takes these types of allegations seriously.
It's taken seriously at the line level at the Bureau of
Land Management. It's taken seriously within the
Department of Interior and it's taken seriously at the
Department of Justice.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because if this, if this
continues, your argument -- and I understand your
argument that there's no essential free-standing cause
of action for damages -- basically means he has a right
to go broke with attorneys' fees challenging each
individual incursion, each individual wrong.
Well, again that assumes that he wouldn't
get any relief out of the IBLA. That assumes that if he
had gone to the IBLA and said, you canceled my grazing
permits for grounds that weren't valid, that the BLM
would have proceeded to engage in the same conduct. In
fact, the IBLA --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well that's exactly what
he alleged and he said, and it happened for over a
five-year period.
MR. GARRE: But we know from the decisions
of the IBLA that he did challenge that they rejected the
grounds that he --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They may be wrong, too.
They may have been as much a part of the conspiracy as
the officers who conducted it. And there are indeed
those in the West who think that the BLM does, does act
quite arbitrarily and high-handedly and is, is upheld
by, by the, the administrative courts. Now, if that's a
problem, what's the solution to that problem?
MR. GARRE: Well, Justice Scalia, to bring
an APA action to Federal court challenging the final
decisions of the IBLA.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's one by one. Every
time there is another trespass he has to go all the way
through the administrative procedure and then when the,
when the administrative court says, well, it was okay,
then he has to go through the regular Federal courts.
That doesn't seem to me like a realistic remedy, not for
somebody who claims he's being systematically harassed
for five years as, as is the claim here.
MR. GARRE: Again, I think you have to
assume that his claims would not succeed either at the
administrative level or at the APA level, and if he
got --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't assume that at all.
Even if they, even if they succeed, they say, yes,
you're right, they trespassed, good for you. I mean,
what is the remedy if they did trespass? What
administrative remedy does he obtain.
MR. GARRE: Well, if there's a trespass he
can go, he can obtain an action under the Federal Tort
Claims Act. A trespass is an unauthorized taking.
That's the way that this Court has treated it 1952 in
the Hasselly case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- the photographing
of his guests who he brings onto his ranch to hunt and
they pay him for that. And then he claims that the BLM
follows them just to harass them, just taking
photographs. What relief could he get for that?
MR. GARRE: Well, he claimed that they were
trespassing on his lands.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's assume they wasn't
trespassing.
MR. GARRE: Well, he'd raised that objection
before the IBLA and the IBLA concluded, and we think
reasonably, that, given the history of the disputes with
this individual, given his litigious nature, that it was
reasonable for the BLM officials who were out there to
be documenting his trespasses on public lands, and
that's an important dimension of this case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought there was one
aspect of the videotaping his guests, that the
Government was doing it on its own land, on public land.
They had cameras and the cameras were stationed so they
weren't trespassing, they were just making the guests
feel uncomfortable.
MR. GARRE: To document, to document his
trespasses on other lands, and that's -- the citation to
the IBLA decision is at footnote 2 of our reply brief
and it discusses that allegation in depth.
In any event --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I would really like to
have your answer to my opening question, and I said: If
your only answer is each time something, he is charged
by the BLM people, he goes one at a time, engaging a
lawyer, spending a lot of time, but it was, one of the
briefs called it, dying a thousand deaths. He doesn't
want that. He wants to say: Stop, stop this whole
pattern; not one citation; stop this whole pattern. How
does he get that remedy?
MR. GARRE: He does not have a remedy under
the Just Compensation Clause or Bivens, Justice
Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What does, what does he
have?
MR. GARRE: He can challenge, he can
challenge these actions under the administrative process
available to him under the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Piecemeal.
MR. GARRE: -- APA --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Piecemeal.
MR. GARRE: -- like any number of other
contexts.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does he have any action
that is other than piecemeal?
MR. GARRE: He has to challenge each
administrative action --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I take it the answer is
MR. GARRE: -- that he claims is unlawful.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Were any of these
administrative actions found to be unfounded? In other
words, did he win any of the trespass citations?
MR. GARRE: He did not. In fact, the IBLA
found that the BLM had a right of administrative access
to cross his lands to get to public lands which it was
administering. And again, this case would have been
quite different if the IBLA had found that the BLM
officers were acting without legitimate authority.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm surprised you say
piecemeal. I would have thought most agencies in the
government have like an inspector general or someone
that you can complain.
MR. GARRE: And they do.
JUSTICE BREYER: You can write them a letter
and you say, look at what's been going on, they've been
trespassing, they've indicted me on a false charge; I
want you to see the whole list here and I'd like you to
do something about it. And if they don't do anything
about it, you go to your senator. Maybe you can go to
the newspapers. I mean, has any of that happened here?
MR. GARRE: It has, Justice Breyer. It has.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what's been the result
of that?
MR. GARRE: The result of that is it was
determined that these actions by these line officers of
the Bureau of Land Management were perfectly
appropriate, that they were dealing with someone who has
systematically violated the permits and conditions that
are found --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Who made that, who made
that determination, including the selective citations?
MR. STARR: I believe there was an inspector
general investigation, investigation within the
Department of Interior that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the Department
of Interior reached a settlement agreement in which they
told the line people at BLM to stop.
MR. GARRE: There was a settlement
agreement, Justice Ginsburg. But the Department of
Interior stands behind the actions that are issued, at
issue in this case, and I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Nonetheless, they did
enter a settlement which included that this behavior was
going to stop.
MR. GARRE: Well, I'm not sure that that's a
fair characterization. I mean, like any party to
litigation, any party to multiple lawsuits and claims,
there are many reasons why it might be deemed in the
interest of a person to agree to a settlement. And I
don't think it's fair to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would you agree at least
to a minimum that we must accept for purposes of this
proceeding that what the complaint alleged, and what the
district court said on summary judgment, there was
sufficient evidence to go to a trial. That that's true.
So we have to accept his allegations that there were
selective citations for violations of grazing -- grazing
laws, that they broke into his lodge and messed the
place up?
MR. GARRE: This Court has to accept those
factual allegations, to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Okay. So that's --
MR. GARRE: -- to be sure. But the court
of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So that's the case we
have. And you're telling me that the only remedy a
citizen, assuming the truth of those allegations, is to
fight these actions one by one?
MR. GARRE: That's a fulsome remedy, Justice
Ginsburg, when you think of the claims that could be
brought administratively under the Administrative
Procedures Act, under the Federal Tort Claims Act, to
receive damages, to receive injunctions --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What damages would you get
for the trespass of a -- one, one BLM agent on your
land? A lot of money you're going to get for that?
Would it, would it come anywhere close to
reimbursing you for the lawyers' fees that it's taken to
go, to go all the way through the litigation?
MR. GARRE: If the allegation is that these
trespasses have in effect deprived me of my property
which is my business, then conceivably he could make a
request for a large amount of damages.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He doesn't say it deprived
him of his property which is his business.
MR. GARRE: No, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He is saying it's a
trespass; get off my land.
MR. GARRE: He, he has made both claims,
Justice Scalia. And I think -- he has, he has
complained about BLM officials exercising the right of
--
administrative access, which has been confirmed at the
administrative level and which is well settled. And he
has made the more general complaint that these
trespasses have -- and interfered with his businesses
and interfered with his property. He filed a, a bond in
this Court seeking, claiming the damages were in several
million dollars related to the business. So that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can he get injunctive
relief? Can he get injunctive relief? You said
something about, that, you said they may seek to enjoin
conduct that they claim will amount to an uncompensated
taking.
Can he have this litany of things that have
happened and go into a court and say court, enjoin those
MR. GARRE: Certainly he could under the
APA. He could challenge the administrative actions he
complained about, and if court concludes those are
unauthorized or unconstitutional he could obtain an
injunction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: He can bring, he can
bring this, he could bring this not one action at a
time, but he could complain all at once about
everything?
MR. GARRE: Well, the other thing to keep in
mind is that many of these discrete administrative
actions -- for example, take the cancellation of the
permits. That was based on a course of conduct that
included 20 formal trespasses, disregarding trespass
notices by the BLM, 20 violations of his grazing
permits. All of that would be part of a record before
the IBLA and before a Federal court in an APA. It would
have an opportunity to review those allegations and
determine whether or not the alleged Federal action was
unlawful. And if a court believed --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: He could -- he could not
go into a Federal court with a Federal question? He
would have to go to the initial decision maker, then the
I --
MR. GARRE: He would have to exhaust his
administrative remedies, just like any number of other
people who believe that they have been wronged by the
Federal Government.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Part of his claim is -- is
selective enforcement. You know, maybe he did trespass,
maybe some of his cattle did stray on somebody's land.
But they are beating on him because of what they say is
his failure to give a reciprocal easement which the
Government is entitled to.
To what extent was any of the administrative
approval of the BLM agents' actions, to what extent was
that based on the legitimacy of seeking to extract this
reciprocal easement from him? Because I don't see that
it's legitimate at all.
MR. GARRE: Well, the I -- let me answer
that in two ways. First the IBLA found that there was
not an effort to extort or blackmail Mr. -- the
Respondent for exercising his rights.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Was that because the
Government was entitled to the reciprocal easement? Is
that why they said that?
MR. GARRE: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It wasn't extortion because
he should have given the easement.
MR. GARRE: No. I don't think that's what
the IBLA found and we cite the part of the IBLA record
at footnote 2 of our reply brief.
Secondly it's well established that the
Government can seek reciprocal arrangements with respect
to property. The Court in the Leo Sheep case forced the
Government to seek reciprocal arrangements.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not after, not after they
have already given away -- I mean, yes; they could come
to him anew and say I'll tell you what, if you give us
this easement we'll give you yet another one.
MR. GARRE: That's true.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But he had one in, from the
past, which -- which his predecessor had given a
reciprocal easement for, and the Government failed to
record the easement and therefore was is deprived of it.
MR. GARRE: That's true. But I think it's
important to keep in mind the scope of the claim before
the Court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they're mad at him for
not giving back that easement which they failed to
record.
MR. GARRE: The BLM doesn't have to stop
enforcing its laws and regulations once someone refuses
to enter into reciprocal arrangements. There are
thousands of reciprocal arrangements.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It wouldn't be reciprocal.
What was the Government offering to give him in exchange
for his, his reaffirming the prior easement that they
had failed to record? What was the Government giving
him in exchange?
MR. GARRE: A valuable right-of-way, Justice
Scalia, that - that was for 30 years, that covered 14
miles of public road --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's what his
predecessor had.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He had that already.
MR. GARRE: Well, but that did not convey
with the property. It had to be reassigned in order for
Mr. Robbins to take advantage of that right-of-way.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I did not -- I did not
understand that.
MR. GARRE: Absolutely. And it's in the
regulations. The right-of-way has to be reassigned, and
it wasn't going to be reassigned because Respondent
refused to agree to the reciprocal easement and because
he refused to make rental payments.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: As originally negotiated,
with I think Nelson. Was the right-of-way cancellable
at any time? Or how long would the right-of-way last?
MR. GARRE: The right-of-way was for 30
years which was long than the 20-year easement that the
Government got in exchange. And this something that was
negotiated at arm's length by parties that didn't have
the acrimonious relationship that developed between
Respondent and the BLM.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, I -- I
think part of what's happening here is there is
difference between the regulation on the books and how
they are enforced. Just as a hypothetical, let's say
they don't -- the Government doesn't get its reciprocal
easement that it wants, and so it says look, we normally
don't strictly enforce these cattle trespass things, but
we are going to go by the book with this guy until he
gives us the right-of-way. Every time his cattle cross
over the line we are going to hit him with a trespass
citation. They don't do it for anybody else but,
they're going to do it for him because they want to get
the reciprocal right-of-way. Is that appropriate or
inappropriate?
MR. GARRE: Well, first I don't think it
gives him a cause of action under Bivens or the Just
Compensation Clause. Second --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So that he can't --
but you're saying his remedy is to challenge each one.
But actually each one, his cattle did trespass, so he
doesn't have a good case. It's just that out in the
West they don't actually give citations every time a cow
crosses the river.
MR. GARRE: Then I, then I don't think he is
a very sympathetic plaintiff to be complaining that he
is entitled to violate BLM rules or regulations. There
is a certain amount of give and take that we think is
inherent in these reciprocal arrangements and we think
that the Just Compensation Clause tolerates.
These are, the Just Compensation Clause or
property rights here are protected fundamentally by
State law. That's why any unauthorized action by the
Government is a trespass, which is, which is dealt with
under State law. The Just Compensation --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why is it a State law
matter? Why didn't he know about this possibility? Why
didn't he know that his predecessor in title had
granted? Why wasn't there an actual notice, given the
fact that everybody in this area of the country seems as
a matter of course to give mutually beneficial
rights-of-way? I agree it wasn't recorded.
MR. GARRE: I think he was on notice. The
BLM made a determination that because it wasn't
recorded, it wouldn't seek to enforce that against
Respondent. It may be that it was -- it made a legal
error on that; I don't know. But it made that
determination --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's a given in the
record. The record is that he was not on notice. So
whether one says, gee that's unlikely if he wasn't --
MR. GARRE: But in any event, the point is
that the BLM recognized that it had to negotiate a new
reciprocal arrangement with Respondent and it sought to
do so.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And it's trying to cover
for its own sloppiness or carelessness in not
recording --
MR. GARRE: Well, it, it's trying to seek,
establish a new reciprocal arrangement. Regardless of
why it was back in the position of having to do so, it
did so in a way that it did in any number of other
situations that did arise.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can I ask you about the
Bivens theory here before your time runs out? Doesn't
Davis versus Passman help the Respondent here?
MR. GARRE: I, I don't think so, Your Honor.
I think what is distinct about the Bivens claim here is
first Bivens and Just Compensation Clause claims are
fundamentally incompatible. And that in Bivens, its
damages are nothing. Here the constitutional right
actually explicitly provides a remedy, just
compensation. Secondly, just compensation claims are
claims against the Government.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well that's because we
assume it's focused just on his property and that the
property was ultimately the thing that was in issue.
But if you have all these other retaliatory actions, and
wrongful actions taken by the Government tangential to
this dispute, I take it Davis versus Passman, broadly
read, says we can use Bivens if there is no other way to
get a remedy against the Government.
MR. GARRE: Well -- two points. First,
Davis versus Passman was decided in a day in which this
Court was much more likely to infer new causes of action
from the Constitution or from statutes. The Court in
its recent cases, most recently Malesko, has said that
it's sworn off that habit, and it's refused to recognize
any new Bivens action in 25 years since those cases were
decided.
Secondly, the Respondent here has ample
remedies and avenues that he could seek. If he believes
that there has been unauthorized trespass he can seek
damages under the Federal Tort Claims Act.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose we think --
suppose we disagree with you on the latter point. We
think he is really in a bind; there's not really
anything he can do. Doesn't that invoke the Davis
versus Passman rationale?
MR. GARRE: I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: To expand -- it would be
an expansion of Bivens.
MR. GARRE: It would be closer to it but the
Court would still have to confront the question of
whether it would be appropriate to infer a
constitutional tort under the Just Compensation Clause.
And we would urge the Court not to do so.
There is an overarching question here of
qualified immunity. Whatever is true with respect to
whether this new constitutional tort should be created
towards other claims before the Court, the Petitioners
on this case were not on clear notice that their actions
in responding to someone who had systematically violated
the rules and regulations, which -- on the books for
some time -- would subject them to personal damages
actions and in fact treble damages under the RICO
statute. For that, for that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If a -- including, you
know, busting into his lodge and disrupting the
furniture and all of that, they thought that that was
probably --
MR. GARRE: Well, if that's true --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- probably allowed?
MR. GARRE: If that's -- they would be on
notice, that that conduct if true could subject them to
a tort action under the Federal Tort Claims Act. There
is no decision that the court of appeals or
Respondent has pointed to that would put the Petitioners
here on notice in the specific situation they
confronted, that their actions could subject them to a
constitutional tort which had never been recognized by
any court, whether their actions could subject them to
treble damages under RICO.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that a test for -- for
-- for qualified immunity? You have to know -- not
only --
MR. GARRE: You have to have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not enough to know
that your action was wrongful? You have to know the
particular statute or constitutional provision under
which a remedy would be sought?
MR. GARRE: Yes. The first question is
whether he has established a violation of the right.
And the rights that are alleged in this case that are
before this Court, or a right under the compensation
clause of the Fifth Amendment to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you're suggesting
they would not be immune from a State law trespass
action?
MR. GARRE: No. The -- the -- the Congress
has waived the sovereign immunity from those types of
claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The people who had done
this --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the Federal Tort
Claims Act is against the United States. It's not
against the --
MR. GARRE: It's against the United States
if they are acting within the scope of their conduct.
If it's unauthorized actions outside the scope of the
conduct, then they can go directly against the
individuals. That's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then it wouldn't be a
Federal Tort Claims Act.
MR. GARRE: Well, then it would be
additional suits in State court. They could also --
there are also State, Federal and criminal laws that
they could seek to invoke or have invoked. But --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But respect to the RICO
claim, assuming the RICO claim is upheld, what do you
say to your brother's argument that there is no history
of qualified immunity for RICO claims? That the
qualified immunity doctrine addresses the, the kind of
development of squishier law under -- under 1983. So
that you simply have not qualified immunity.
MR. GARRE: Two things, Justice Souter.
First the argument was not raised below; we don't think
it's properly before the Court.
Second, the question under qualified
immunity, and this Court made this clear in the Wyatt
case and again in the Knight case, it doesn't look to
the particular offense. It looks to the nature of the
responsibility that the Government officials are
performing. And here the nature of the responsibilities
are enforcing grazing permits, enforcing access to
public lands, activities that BLM officials have
discretion and have had discretion for more than a
century to enforce. And we think that falls squarely
within the rubric of qualified immunity.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well that may be a very --
it seems to me that those may be good arguments, or at
least relevant arguments against the applicability of
RICO in the first place. But if RICO is found to have
been violated, I take it it would be an extension of
qualified immunity jurisprudence --
MR. GARRE: I don't --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- to, to apply it to a
RICO defendant.
MR. GARRE: With respect, I don't think it
would be. First, the large portion of the courts of
appeals that have addressed this have concluded that
qualified immunity principles do extend to RICO. And
second, again, the focus of the inquiry is on the nature
of the responsibilities. It's not on the particular
offense alleged. It's not on whether there's a
violation of that offense. It's the nature of the
responsibilities, and here these responsibilities,
enforcing permits enforcing access and use of public
land, and protecting against abuse of those lands, are
things that BLM officials and other government officers
have exercised their discretion to do for more than --
JUSTICE BREYER: If this case were
identical, everything's the same, except that the
officials involved are state officials, would there be a
83 action?
MR. GARRE: Well, no, because we don't think
that there's a violation of the Just Compensation Clause
when someone doesn't take property, when someone doesn't
act through allegedly --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's a different --
that's a different reason. That's a merits defense. I
just wondered if --
MR. GARRE: Oh, are you -- the question with
respect to qualified immunity?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah. You're saying there
is no Bivens action, period.
MR. GARRE: Well, we think that qualified
immunity now --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I'm not even thinking
of it. I just wonder if 1983 would apply and it would
be clear that there is an action. If you win, there
would be no problem.
MR. GARRE: No, because there has been no
violation of the substantive Fifth Amendment right and
there has been no violation of Bivens.
It's important to recognize the overarching
context of how the Federal Government manages the public
lands. There are -- there are numerous reciprocal
arrangements that could be affected by this. Any time a
landowner refuses to enter into a reciprocal
arrangement, he can then turn around in any government
action that is taken against that landowner, all he has
to do is add on an element of wrongful subjective
intent, and he can bring a constitutional tort claim, or
even a RICO claim like the respondent here, and subject
officers to the threat of personal liability. And we
think that this would have a significant skewing effect
on legitimate government decision making.
If I could reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Tribe.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LAURENCE H. TRIBE
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. TRIBE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
There is a dramatic contrast between the
--
instantaneous judgments a school principal might have to
make in the face of complicated decisions like Tinker,
and a deliberate decision over a course of almost a
dozen years made by officials of the Bureau of Land
Management that the greater retaliate against someone
for refusing to relinquish his property to the
government without any compensation. You don't have to
have taken a special course in constitutional law to
know that that is clearly forbidden.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Tribe, can I get
something straight? Is it indeed correct that what the
government was seeking here was an exchange of
easements, that the government was going to give one and
your client would give the other?
MR. TRIBE: No, Justice Scalia, that's not
correct. That was what they did with Nelson, his
predecessor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: With the predecessor in
interest of your client.
MR. TRIBE: That's right. And what happened
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did what the government
gave to your predecessor of interest, did that easement
continue? The government has just said that it expired.
MR. TRIBE: The government is wrong. It
continued.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's how I understood it.
MR. TRIBE: It ran with the land, it was
part of what he brought. If it had expired --
JUSTICE SOUTER: This is the easement over
the roadway.
MR. TRIBE: The right-of-way over the
government's roads.
JUSTICE SOUTER: As opposed to the grazing
easement.
MR. TRIBE: As -- that's right. The
right-of-way over the road of access, which they not
only canceled in July of 1985 but refused to maintain
themselves, so that he couldn't really access the ranch.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If they finally
canceled it, how did it -- I mean, if it runs with the
land, they don't have the authority to cancel.
MR. TRIBE: They didn't have the authority
to cancel it simply because of the transfer of the land.
They allege that he had made various technical
violations on account of which they canceled it. But
the key point is, that was supposed to be the quid pro
quo, that is, they have maintained all along that this
case is about that right-of-way and what an ingrate the
respondent is that he wants to continue enjoying it and
not give the easement. Well, he didn't enjoy it after
July of 1995 when it was canceled. They wouldn't have
had to cancel it for alleged violations.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't care whether it was
canceled, but I must say, if they were just seeking a
fair exchange of reciprocal easements, which landowners
do all the time --
MR. TRIBE: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the system of lands out
there can't work without it.
MR. TRIBE: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I wouldn't see anything
terribly wrong about the BLM people say okay, he wants
to play hardball, he wants to play by the book, we'll
play by the book. What would be wrong with --
MR. TRIBE: They didn't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: See, I wouldn't feel bad
about that if they said --
MR. TRIBE: I wouldn't either.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- by God, every time his
cows trespass, we're going to get him. Every time his
hunting expeditions go on public land, we're going to
get him. That would seem reasonable to me. So it
really is crucial to my view of the case that the
government was not seeking a new exchange, it was
seeking --
MR. TRIBE: That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- for him to cough up --
MR. TRIBE: To cough up that easement. And
in fact when he said, he offered to negotiate, and the
immediate response from Mr. Vessels, who is since
diseased, was, the United States does not negotiate.
That wasn't just kind of starting of a bargaining
position. They dug in and for a series of years the
district court found, fully substantiated on the
petition appellate via -- appendix to the petition at
page 37a, not only playing hardball and being
selectively tough on him, but a number of clearly
illegal acts, breaking into his lodge. One of them
particularly striking to me at joint appendix 49 to 57,
inciting a neighbor to ram a truck into the respondent
while he was on horseback. Firemen --
JUSTICE BREYER: Who would have thought --
wait. When you say that, I mean, there's a lot of these
acts, it seems, they are plainly illegal.
MR. TRIBE: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if they are plainly
illegal, then there are remedies in the courts.
MR. TRIBE: There are remedies one by one
for each of these acts.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. But what is
actually worrying you, which probably you can address at
some point, is this: There are remedies one by one.
That's true. And each has one. And maybe you can even
get injunctions against harassing.
MR. TRIBE: Well, the remedies were
acquittal. He was acquitted, for example.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, maybe he didn't do
MR. TRIBE: He spent hundreds of thousands
of dollars.
JUSTICE BREYER: And so it may be, they
thought he did do it and --
MR. TRIBE: No, no. They didn't think he
did do it.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MR. TRIBE: He alleged --
JUSTICE BREYER: Did you bring a suit for
malicious prosecution?
MR. TRIBE: That's part of -- this is a
suite like Hartman v. Moore. One of the acts that is
clearly actionable under Bivens, if one has to dissect
the various predicate acts, is the fact that without
probable cause, at page 71 of the joint appendix, they
deliberately fabricated a felony charge.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now --
MR. TRIBE: And when he was acquitted of
that by a jury that took 20 minutes, and said that they
were outraged by the BLM, they found other things to do.
They found other things --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But he also lost the
malicious prosecution suit, didn't he? Didn't he bring
a malicious prosecution suit?
MR. TRIBE: He tried to do that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And he lost.
MR. TRIBE: He won some, he lost some, but
the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe he should have won.
What's worrying me throughout, if you want to know --
MR. TRIBE: I sure do.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: What is worrying me
throughout is, put this case to the side. If the Court
recognizes what I take it has not happened in the past,
that there is an action for private people to bring
against the government, Bivens, under the Fifth
Amendment, all of a sudden vast numbers of regulations,
the coal pillars in Holmes case, everything south of
that will be suddenly in Federal court as people claim
that what's going on with this regulation is there are
individuals in the government who have gone too far, and
they are just trying to get my property and the use of
it, without paying a fair price. Now by the way,
sometimes people in government do go too far, so many of
those claims might have some justification. But
suddenly I see the possibility of this kind of action
becoming a major roadblock, an obstacle sometimes used
unjustifiably, and not necessarily, not necessary, this
kind of thing, to impose a roadblock to totally
legitimate government regulatory action.
MR. TRIBE: Justice Breyer, that -- that
floodgates concern was addressed by this Court not long
enough in Hartman v. Moore when the remedy in that case
for a prosecution that was brought to retaliate against
someone for the exercise of her First Amendment right
was a Bivens action against the postal inspectors who
made this all up. Now the Court there addressed the
possibility that this would unleash a flood of lawsuits,
and it said that over the past quarter century, there
had been only 12 Bivens or 1983 actions against this
kind of retaliation. I suppose that is because not that
many postal inspectors or BLM guys think they can get
away with deliberately retaliating against people for
exercising their rights.
JUSTICE BREYER: You see, part of what's
worrying me is that once you get into the Fifth
Amendment, which is -- prevents the government from
taking property for a public use without just
compensation, the possibility of the legal imagination
becomes endless. Because every time a person walks
across the doorstep, every time a person wants to
install a pipe in the basement, read the meter -- I
mean, I can see possibilities of actions of this kind
arising, and particularly when the government wants to
buy it and is pointing out all the reasons why it should
be sold. Is there a threat lurking in that
conversation? You see what I'm worried about here,
which wasn't present in the other case?
MR. TRIBE: I see, but it was present in
Davis, Davis v. Passman, to which Justice Kennedy
referred, already recognized a Bivens action for
violating something even more capacious, due process,
equal protection. When this Court said in Village of
Willowbrook against Oleck that there is a cause of
action even for the naked assertion that you're treating
me differently, did that open huge floodgates? Have we
been flooded? It seems to me that the Court has
developed its own filters against the floodgate of
retaliation claims. It's been --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm not sure, Professor
Tribe, that the cases you cite at page 22, 23 of your
brief really support your position. The question is
whether there should be a freestanding cause of action
for damages.
MR. TRIBE: That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And in the brief you say
that the government says that this is limited First
Amendment, and then you say, "These remarkable claims
are unsurprisingly false." I thought that was a rather
severe charge against the government, that it's
misrepresenting its cases.
MR. TRIBE: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then in page 22 and 23,
you go ahead and you talk about Wisconsin versus Yoder,
Lefkowitz versus Turley, Bordenkircher, which I think
was vindictive prosecution or adding on charges. All of
those are in the -- every one of these cases are in the
context of a criminal proceeding. Griffin, a murder
case. It's just alleging a constitutional --
MR. TRIBE: But many of them are not,
Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- alleging a
constitutional claim. Well, which one?
MR. TRIBE: Well, for example, Shapiro v.
Thompson. The Court has said that the right to travel
cannot be penalized. The broad point that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, no. That was, there
was an existing case or controversy there. That wasn't
a freestanding cause of action.  None of these cases are
freestanding. Davis versus Passman, different.
MR. TRIBE: And Hartman v. Moore, different.
What we were answering there was not the point about a
freestanding cause of action.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it seems to me that
those cases do not support your position, and I don't
think it's correct to say that this is unsurprising,
that the government makes a false representation about
cases.
MR. TRIBE: Well, Justice Kennedy, that was
a response to their claim, that only with respect to the
Fifth Amendment is there a right. This was not the
Bivens question. Only with respect to the Fifth --
First Amendment is there a right not to be retaliated
against for the exercise of your rights.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think it was in the
context of a freestanding right, but let's leave that
aside.
MR. TRIBE: We can look at it.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's right. It does
seem to me that you are asking us to extend Bivens, this
is an extension. Would you accept that?
MR. TRIBE: In the sense that there has
never been a case just like it under Hope v. Pelzer,
there doesn't have to have been one like it. But we do
think that there is a compelling case, because there's
no other way to enforce the just compensation right
against a group of government agents who are determined
to pile punishment upon punishment until someone caves
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you say -- you
call it punishment, but in fact the government's
position on each of these particulars has generally been
vindicated. When your client has appealed, they've
upheld the trespass citations. When you've sued for
malicious prosecution, the suit's been rejected. Which
of the government actions do you not have an existing
remedy for, apart from the Racketeer and Corrupt -- RICO
Act or the, this new Bivens claim?
MR. TRIBE: Mr. Chief Justice, it is the
retaliatory pattern that there is no remedy for. When
going --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can you point to any
one governmental action for which you do not have an
existing remedy?
MR. TRIBE: Well, the action of falsely
prosecuting him in retaliation --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have a malicious
prosecution claim for that. You brought that, you lost.
MR. TRIBE: No, we did not bring a malicious
prosecution claim for that felony charge.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You could have
brought one.
MR. TRIBE: It would have been against
Federal officials and that would have been then
transformed unless we brought it under Bivens, which is
what we are trying to do, transformed into an action
against the United States by the Westfall Act. That is
all of these attempts --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And then if you would have
succeeded, you would have been compensated.
MR. TRIBE: For that one event from the
United States, but the BLM agents would not have been
deterred.
In any event, Carlson v. Green --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but the theory of the
Tort Claims Act is that if the government is paying out
of the treasury, it's going to see to it that its
employees don't continue to commit the tort. So I don't
think -- I don't think you can make the argument that it
would have had no effect on the improper behavior.
MR. TRIBE: I think the most important point
that I'm trying to make, Justice Souter and Mr. Chief
Justice, that when someone says, I do not want to give
you my property, you have to take it from me and give me
just compensation, the position of the Government here
is that there is no constitutional limit on the kind of
retaliation they can engage in.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if the
position of the Government were more fairly represented
they would say, we don't want everyone to be able to
claim that everything we're doing under color of law is
retaliation, because then we'll hear that against IRS
agents, we'll hear it against OSHA agents. So long as
you -- and their position is you have a remedy for
everything you're complaining about, and you invoked
some of them and you lost, you didn't invoke others and
so you didn't prevail. But don't create a whole new
remedy just because you're dissatisfied with having to
pursue each one individually.
MR. TRIBE: Well, Bivens as a constitutional
tort is not a new remedy. The question really is
whether there is any conceivable basis when they trash
his lodge, when they do all of the other things, for
treating this differently from another kind of
constitutional violation. I mean, they argue that it's
very important, even though we could have lots of people
bringing unjustified suits, to have a Bivens remedy for
retaliation against free speech. The reason that they
give is that free speech is easily chilled. But with
property rights the Just Compensation Clause is kind of
its own antifreeze.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. The reason would be
probably that the, if you can make a comparison. The
number of Government actions that affect criminal
charges and so forth are tiny compared to the number of
governmental actions that affect people's property.
Virtually, I mean the number of Government actions
affecting how people use their property, it's the whole
series of law books. It fills the room. And suddenly
to open up a new remedy in that kind of thing is what's
frightening me, which is what I said already. So you
don't have to answer.
MR. TRIBE: But Justice Breyer, the Court
has established in the area of retaliation against
people for the exercise of their rights, Title VII
rights in Burlington, First Amendment rights --
JUSTICE BREYER: Retaliation, what is
retaliation? Isn't retaliation statutory?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's statutory.
MR. TRIBE: Hartman is not statutory. Some
of the -- Hartman is the First Amendment, and it's the
Bivens case. The point I was trying to make about that
is that the Court has a body of law trying to filter out
through requiring proof of causation, requiring proof of
substantial injury, filter out these trivial cases where
someone is simply making a nuisance.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Tribe, could I ask a
question about the RICO claims?
MR. TRIBE: Certainly.
JUSTICE ALITO: Until I read this case, I
had never come across the concept that a Government
employee can be guilty of extortion by demanding money
for the Government and your brief didn't cite very much
authority for this anywhere in the history of extortion.
MR. TRIBE: In the common law history,
Justice Alito, we cited two cases from New York, the
Whaley case in 1827 and Willett in 1915. And it was
that body of New York law from which the Hobbs Act
largely drew. Those were cases in which the courts said
that the fact that the government agent is extorting
property for his own employer the government doesn't
make any difference; it is still extortion.
JUSTICE ALITO: That's not a lot of, that's
not a lot of authority, considering the long history of
extortion, just two old New York cases.
MR. TRIBE: There are plenty of cases,
Justice Alito, that involve extortion for one's employer
where the employer might be a union or a corporation or
a charitable body.  But it's true the Hobbs Act has not
been applied, in my research anyway I have not seen it
applied, to this kind of extortion. But the language
clearly covers it and the language of RICO clearly
covers it.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose you have a librarian
in a courthouse and the librarian is charging lawyers 25
cents a page for photocopies, but there's some library
rule that says the fee is supposed to be 10 cents a
page. Now is that, is that a RICO?
MR. TRIBE: If the librarian thinks that,
the legislature is not giving us enough money, so I'm
going to deliberately use my authority to get an extra
five cents from everybody, I suppose if you could prove
willfulness, which is an important element of Hobbs, and
if there were several librarians and there was a pattern
and you could establish the other prerequisites of RICO,
it could be a RICO violation.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the two cases you
cite, the first one is the person who was charged with
extortion is a judge --
--
MR. TRIBE: That's right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And he was extorted on the
ground that he told the plaintiff to pay the defendant,
so the money wasn't given to the government. So I don't
see that that's a difference. And then the second case
MR. TRIBE: The second case --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it may have been, but
you say "See Also," which is a sign to me there's
something wrong with that case.
(Laughter.)
MR. TRIBE: I don't, I don't think there is,
Justice Breyer, and it's very short.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm surprised that you
didn't put it first if there wasn't.
MR. TRIBE: Well, Willett versus Devoy, it
involved a clerk demanding more money than the law
allowed, and the court said: "No distinction is made on
the ground that the official keeps the fee or turns it
over to the government. Such a judge-made restriction
on the general statute requiring that the money be kept
by the individual might itself bring about uncertainty,
confuse and possibly great injustice."
JUSTICE BREYER: Why did you say "See Also"?
MR. TRIBE: I don't remember.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You say this clearly
establishes. Are the BLM folks supposed to have known
about Willett versus Devoy?
MR. TRIBE: No.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- as clearly
establishing their liability for what you call
extortion? I'm sure what they would call trying to save
the taxpayers money and getting the type of reciprocal
agreement with this landowner that they have got with
thousands of others.
MR. TRIBE: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, first
of all, when you keep calling it a reciprocal agreement
it does trouble me. They weren't giving him anything
for this easement which they had already extracted from
his predecessor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You agree if the
case were otherwise -- and I gather we have a factual
dispute on that -- that it would have been all right? I
mean, if he didn't have this other easement already, but
they were trying to negotiate it, that this type of
playing hardball, I guess is one way to put it, would be
all right?
MR. TRIBE: It makes all the difference in
the world. They were trying to get the easement for
nothing. I mean, it's very much --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's what
I'm trying to get, to see if you agree with that. In
other words, everything about this case would otherwise
be, I'm sure not breaking the laws, but otherwise it
would be all right if they were trying to get a
reciprocal easement?
MR. TRIBE: Well, most of what they did
would not have been an okay method of getting a
reciprocal easement, anyway. But the attempt to get it
would be fine. It's not that they are not entitled to a
reciprocal easement. That might have been a problem
under Nollan and Dolan to figure out whether there was
enough connection, but I think there would have been
enough.
The problem was that they were using the
right-of-way, which was long gone, as an excuse to get
an invaluable piece of property that they had no right
to get. They were then trying to -- they were basically
saying, and they made it explicit, give us this easement
for nothing or we'll bury you.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Tribe, I'll tell what
you troubles me about this case. There are overzealous
government agents. There always have been and I am sure
that, assuming all of the misbehavior described here is
correct, I'm sure it is not the first time this has
happened. Government agents sometimes get overzealous.
But why should there be this extraordinary remedy when
the overzealousness happens to be attached to a desire
to get a piece of land, whereas if they had just picked
on this guy because they didn't like the way he combed
his hair or for any other reason and had done the same
things you wouldn't have your Bivens action, right?
MR. TRIBE: Nor would Nollan have come out
the same way if they weren't trying to get an easement
in return for something which wasn't -- which you called
extortion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no. If they were
trying to get some other property for it or, or, or
money for it, it didn't turn --
MR. TRIBE: I guess the straightforward
answer that I would give to your question I think is
that the Constitution does guarantee that the Government
cannot take your property for public use without just
compensation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The whole spectrum of
possible Government misbehavior, selective enforcement,
the whole spectrum, the only, the only times we're going
to allow a cause of action under Bivens or under, under
not 1983 -- yes -- the only times we're going to do that
is when there is a demand for property?
MR. TRIBE: You've certainly done it with
respect to the Eighth Amendment. You've done it with
respect to speech. You've done it with respect to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But Professor Tribe, all
these cases are cases in which there is -- Nollan, you
have a cause of action to challenge the permit and this
is just a, this is just a constitutional defense.
That's different from a freestanding cause of action.
And I share Justice Scalia's concern. It seems to me in
thinking about this case there is -- there could be
something very wrong here, going after a person because
of what he's done. Suppose the Government wants
somebody to be a witness in a trial and he won't do it,
and they go around hurting his business, they go around
invading his property and so forth. That to me is
outrageous and you might have an argument that there
should be a Bivens cause of action for that.
And Justice Scalia's question -- I had the
same question -- is why do we think it to the property?
The essence here, the essence of what's going on, is
that they're being vindictive against this person. Now
again, the cases you're citing, include Hartman, which
is a free speech case which is different, really don't
support you. I think this is an extension of Bivens.
MR. TRIBE: Justice Kennedy, if it's an
extension, it's I think implicit in Bivens' logic.
Bivens deals with the cases --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Fair enough, but it's an
extension of Bivens.
MR. TRIBE: The Fifth Amendment is different
from the First, but is it different in a relevant way?
The Just Compensation Clause does give the government an
incentive, if they can avoid having to use eminent
domain and tax the public, gives them an incentive to
try to squeeze property out of somebody. If it has any
incentive effect, it's one that points to the need for a
Bivens remedy. Why is a Bivens remedy --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But are they
disabled from negotiating? If they go up to somebody
and say, you know, we'd really like a right-of-way
because we have some interest in lands that we need to
maintain on the other side, and the person says, no and,
you know, get off my property, do they have to shrug
their shoulders and say all right? Or can they say,
well, you know, we're neighbors, we have a lot of
interests in common and we should work together? Is
that all of a sudden extortion?
MR. TRIBE: No, Mr. Chief Justice. Working
together is what this guy tried to do at the beginning.
--
He said, I'm happy to negotiate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So how many trespass
MR. TRIBE: They said: We don't negotiate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- citations for his
cattle does it take before it's all of a sudden
extortion?
MR. TRIBE: The record in the case shows
that on those very instances where he was cited with
trespass others who were doing the identical thing were
not. And the IBLA has said --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And he challenged
the citations and they were rejected.
MR. TRIBE: The IBLA rejected them because
it said it has no jurisdiction. This was at -- in its
decision at 170 IBLA in 2006. No jurisdiction to
consider whether the motive was retaliatory, whether it
was unconstitutional, whether it was part of a pattern.
And this Court has said that one can't use the APA in
that way either. Nor could an injunction be used to get
a pattern like this because of Rule 65D and
International Longshoremen, try to frame an injunction
saying: Don't keep trashing this guy and ruining his
business and harassing and surveilling his guests and
whatever else you can come up with in order to squeeze
his property out of him. No other remedy will work.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So are you saying that
there was therefore no way short of Bivens even to
challenge or even to vindicate his claim of selective
prosecution.
MR. TRIBE: He could have taken that one
item and under a decision like Hartman vindicated it.
But as is clear from the way he tried to challenge these
individual things and then concluded, as we explained in
our brief, that it was taking years and costing hundreds
of thousands of dollars more than was involved in each
individual one, that was hopeless.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I appreciate that, but I
thought you made the further claim -- maybe I
misunderstood it -- that if he had gone from the
administrative tribunal, or attempted to, to get into
the district court, he could not have gotten into
district court under the act.
MR. TRIBE: Well, he wouldn't have had --
because he would have had no record. That is, the
review under the APA by the district court would have
been based on the evidentiary record he made. And the
IBLA specifically ruled that it would not entertain
evidence about the reasons that the BLM officials had
for going after him. There would be no evidence to
support his claim.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Could he have gone into the
district court and said, I tried to make a record but
they wouldn't let me; let me make a record now? Could
he have done that?
MR. TRIBE: I believe the district court's
jurisdiction in reviewing a final agency action is
limited to the agency record.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no. You can go to an
agency and say, agency I want to do such and such, dah
dah dah, here are my reasons. Agency says no. I want
review.
MR. TRIBE: So a challenge to the IBLA's
assertion --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know. You might
have written to the Secretary of the Interior:
Secretary, I want to you do such and such, please. No.
Okay, review.
MR. TRIBE: Well, he did write to the
Secretary of the Interior.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what happened?
MR. TRIBE: He was not given an answer. So
what can one say?
The district court decided -- lest you
assume that because he wasn't given an answer he doesn't
have a case, the district court said, as hard as it is
to prove these things, he has substantial evidence that
they were picking on him solely to get the property, not
because they didn't like him, not for some other reason;
they were trying to get property for which they were
unwilling to pay.
It's doubtful that they could have taken
it by eminent domain because the laws limiting the
ability of the BLM require proving necessity and there
is nothing in the record suggesting that they needed
this easement. There is plenty in the record suggesting
that he couldn't access his own property as long as the
roadway wasn't maintained in a passable condition, and
one of the ways they retaliated against him was to
refuse to maintain the roadway.
The record is also clear that his
business suffered greatly. So that if the result is
that someone who is trying to insist that if you want my
property, you have to take it by eminent domain and give
me just compensation, can't get help in those other
ways, this is crucial.
What would have happened in Kaiser
Aetna, if when the Government said we think we have an
easement to the Laguna pond, instead of going to court,
which they did and they lost, if they had said well we
are going to ram our motor boats or invite people to ram
their motor boats into your sailboat? We are going to
ruin your business in the Kuapa pond until you give the
public an easement. Only a Bivens cause of action which
the Court has recognized in other areas, in other
constitutional claims -- due process, free speech,
Eighth Amendment -- only a Bivens cause of action is
directly responsive to that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. A, an action
against the Government for ramming your sailboat is
directly responsive to that. You get -- you get full
recovery.
MR. TRIBE: The Westfall Act makes an
exception when you are making a constitutional claim.
That is, in 1988 when the Court passed the Westfall Act,
there were two exceptions 2679B(2)(a) and (b) were
constitutional claims and statutory claims.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You don't need the
Constitution to the sue the Government for ramming your
sailboat. Basic state tort law.
MR. TRIBE: Mr. Chief Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You can answer.
(A little laughter.)
MR. TRIBE: It seems to me that state tort
law does not get at the harm that he has suffered. It
gets at each individual piece. But the main harm he
suffered is that they are circumventing the Just
Compensation Clause as the one way that the Fifth
Amendment was designed to permit the Government to get
property for public use. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
MR. TRIBE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Garre, you have
four minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY C. GARRE,
FOR PETITIONERS
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
First I want to clarify, the question of the
assignment. And our position, it's always been our
position that a new right-of-way had to be issued after
the property was sold. And I'll point the Court to JA
, which is where the BLM officials made clear at the
outset that an assignment was required. Point the Court
to JA 100 which is the right-of-way --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They might have been lying
about that --
MR. GARRE: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- just as they lied about
a lot of other stuff, according to --
MR. GARRE: Pointing to JA 100 which is the
right-of-way, which says that in accordance with Federal
regulations, and I point the Court to 43 CFR 2803, which
discusses assignments and makes clear that assignments
have to be approved.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought there was
something about Nelson having assigned his, the
right-of-way that he had to the Government.
MR. GARRE: Justice Ginsburg, assignments
have to be approved by the BLM. That's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. But it wasn't that
it was a new assignment; it was the former owner
assigned it and the BLA -- BLM approved.
MR. GARRE: It was never approved. And
that's clear, there was never any valid assignment.
That's why the reciprocal arrangement had to be
negotiated anew and again, I point to 43 --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then why did
you revoke it later, if it wasn't valid?
MR. GARRE: It -- it was revoked as part of
the decision not to assign it. And that's clear from
the decision canceling the right-of-way. There was no
assignment that could be approved, and rents had not
been paid on it. So it was combined with the
assignment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why wouldn't there be an
assignment? Why, why would the prior owner have any --
any interest in not assigning it?
MR. GARRE: In order for the right-of-way,
because these are rights-of-way to public lands. They
have to approved by new -- once new property owners seek
to assert them. And again the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The prior owner did
assign it. The stopper was the BLM.
MR. GARRE: But, but again it's clear -- and
it was not approved, and one of the reasons it wasn't
approved was because rents weren't paid and he wasn't
agreeing by the terms and conditions of the regulations
which are part of the right-of-way. And that's at JA
0.
The next point I wanted to make, Justice
Kennedy, is we agreed this would be a dramatic new
extension of Bivens, and we agree with Justice Breyer,
the problems or types of litigations that this new
constitutional tort would create are really just -- the
-- capable of the imagination.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Davis versus Passman is a
different context. But in theory is it consistent with
what the Respondent asks?
MR. GARRE: No, it's not. Because the
Respondent here has more statutory and administrative
remedies available to him than the plaintiff in Passman
did, including claims under the Federal Tort Claims Act
for trespasses, for any of the other alleged wrongs that
you've heard about here today. These were -- these were
wrongs that were addressed by the IBLA and the APA.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But their argument
is broader. It says you can't look at each little
piece. You've got to look at the overall structure, and
overall they are doing it to extort a property right
they don't want to pay for, and they are not doing --
other people's cattle cross over and they don't
prosecute them.
Now, let's assume that's correct on the
facts. Are you saying that they have no remedy for that
type of extortionate activity?
MR. GARRE: They don't have a Bivens remedy
and they don't have a RICO remedy. I'd point the Court
to Lujan versus National Wildlife Federation, where the
Court said that in that situation what a plaintiff must
do is challenge each administrative action individually,
and the types of programmatic pattern challenges are for
Congress, they're for executive branches; they are for
inspector generals.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But what do you -- what do
you say to the argument that -- that you simply cannot
follow that logic ultimately, because when you get to
the point of the sort of the, you know, the death by a
thousand cuts, which is what they are claiming here, you
can stitch up every cut, but by the time you get to a
thousand, you're dead. I mean, they're making an
argument that this is quantitatively so different that
it is qualitatively different.
MR. GARRE: I think the law and this Court
reasonably assumes that where individuals have remedies
available to them through challenging individual --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why is that a reasonable
assumption in response to their argument?
MR. GARRE: It's reasonable to assume that
if there are actions against United States under the
Federal Tort Claims Act, or actions finding Government
conduct unauthorized under the APA, that the Government
will take action to prevent that.
Here every action that was challenged was
found to be appropriate and lawful under the existing
regime. We would urge the Court to reverse.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the case in the
