IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
RICHARD IRIZARRY, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 06-7517
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 15, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:11 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ARTHUR J. MADDEN, III, ESQ., Mobile, Ala.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
MATTHEW D. ROBERTS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf of the Respondent.
PETER B. RUTLEDGE, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for amicus
curiae, support of the judgement below; Appointed by
this Court.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ARTHUR J. MADDEN, III, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
MATTHEW D. ROBERTS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 17
PETER B. RUTLEDGE, ESQ.
As amicus curiae, support of the
judgement below 37
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ARTHUR J. MADDEN, III, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:11 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument next
in Case 06-7517, Irizarry versus United States.
Mr. Madden.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ARTHUR J. MADDEN, III
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. MADDEN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This is a sentencing process case. The
first step of the sentencing process described by the
Court in Rita, as noticed, broke down in this case. The
Petitioner first learned that the district court
contemplated a non-Guideline sentence when it was
pronounced. The grounds for that statutory maximum
sentence were not noticed and the issues were,
therefore, not litigated.
The government here agrees that the lack of
notice was error and advocates notices for all sentences
outside the Guidelines. This is the correct result.
Because it's only through notice can the sentencing
court subject a defendant's sentence to the thorough
adversarial testing contemplated by Federal sentencing
procedure.
That quote comes from Rita and relies upon
rules 32(f), (h), (i), and a decision of this Court in
United States versus Burns. That law controls the
decision in this case.
The position of the Amicus --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You may not have had
notice of the issue of whether or not an alternative
procedure and medication audit would help, but you
certainly knew that future dangerousness was going to be
on the table. And if you had a response to that, which
is, well, if he took his medication, it wouldn't be a
problem, I assume you would have prepared for that.
MR. MADDEN: The -- the -- the notice that
suggested -- the Guidelines departure which is suggested
in the last paragraph of the pre-sentence report, is
very specific. It is directed toward the 4A1.3
departure. The concerns raised by that are completely
different than the grounds on which the court departed.
So, no, that wasn't adequate notice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, yeah, I -- but
in terms of what issues might suggest themselves to a
judge sentencing this particularly defendant, I would
have thought future dangerousness. I mean, you have an
individual who has leveled particular threats with some
degree of certainty that he intends to pursue them, I
would have thought that would have been one of the first
things a sentencing judge would look at.
MR. MADDEN: Well, it was looked at in the
context of the sixth level enhancement for intent to
carry out the threat, and it did come up in the context
of acceptance of responsibility. But both look at
different issues than the ground that the sentence was
ultimately -- the -- the upward non-Guideline sentence
was ultimately imposed on.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you know this -- this
provision 32(h), really doesn't -- does simply not work
with post-Booker guidelines. You either have to say it
was designed for a different regime, and therefore, has
no effect now after Booker, or else you have to expand
it beyond what it says, because may depart from the
applicable sentencing range on a ground not identified,
under the mandatory guidelines, they were identified
grounds for departure.
And you had some -- the court could look at
those and say, gee, am I going to pick one of these, if
so I'll let him know. But you can depart now simply on
the ground that you don't agree with the -- with what
the Guidelines say as -- is that what you would call a
ground of departure?
It's simply a ground of disagreement, I
would suppose. Why shouldn't we hold 32(h) simply.
Simply has no -- no application under the new system?
Or at least hold that all it applies to are departures
within the meaning of the old mandatory guidelines
system? Which is a much narrower category of
departures.
MR. MADDEN: Yes, sir. I think first it
would seem to make -- it would not make sense to demand
notice for a finite range of factors, but no notice for
a potentially broader one.  That seems
counter-intuitive. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think it is
counter-intuitive to provide -- to -- to require notice
when the number of grounds is finite. But if the number
of grounds is infinite, I'm much less inclined to read
it as even applicable to the situation.
MR. MADDEN: But the -- the decision of --
in Burns, I think, answers the question because unless
there's -- if a party is not focused -- and generally
the parties' papers and the PSR will focus the issues.
But in the few cases where -- where an extraneous
sentencing consideration that's important enough to
drive the sentence up or down is raised, in order to
have adversarial testing of that important issue, there
has to be some kind of notice. And it's not -- variance
is not what we're calling a variance, a non-Guidelines
sentence is not a pure exercise in policy even in
Kimbrough.
That was a policy disagreement but it was
driven by facts, and the defendant in that case, the
appellant, gave notice that they were going to be
challenging it, and -- and there was a factual
presentation. So the record was in the right shape to
make the policy determination.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Post-Booker the guidelines
are advisory, and the district judge has discretion as
to the sentence.
Now, in the bad old days, when the statute
said 20 to 40, and the judge decided to give you 40, he
didn't have to give you notice of why he was giving you
the highest sentence.
And now that we've returned to a system that
is closer to that, why should we interpret 32(h) as
imposing a very difficult to comply with requirement
that didn't exist under the -- under the pre-pre-Booker
system?
MR. MADDEN: I remember that system.
I think the -- the answer is that -- that
it -- it's important -- the requirement is essential for
purposes of advocacy on the issues. Burns -- Burns
reflects the Court's understanding again of what
Congress intended in the Sentencing Reform Act. They
said Congress intended notice and litigation.
Now, this Court had to make some excisions
on Sixth Amendment grounds in what Congress -- what
Congress could do, but their intent hasn't changed.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose the district court
in this case had said I'm considering an
above-Guidelines sentence based on facts that are in the
record in the pre-sentence report to protect the public
from further crimes of the defendant.
It's close.
Would that be adequate notice?
MR. MADDEN: No. Not on the grounds here.
It's closer.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would have been?
MR. MADDEN: I think -- I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And how much time -- this
is two questions; time question and the content
question.
What would she have had to say to comply
with the rule as you read it?
MR. MADDEN: Yes, Your Honor. Reading it
backward from what the comment -- the explanation of the
sentence at the end backwards to what the grounds were
and the notice should have been, her finding was that --
that he would continue to be a threat regardless of the
supervision we are under. That was the key.
To say if there is nothing other than
maximum incapacitation which will prevent him from being
a danger in the future, if that was the issue, if the
question is: Is there any lesser sentence than maximum
extra incapacitation, then everyone could have
litigated, that would have been the issue that was on
the table.
JUSTICE ALITO: You seem to be requiring a
very specific kind of notice, almost as if the district
court has to say this is the sentence that I'm
considering, and these are the exact reasons that I'm
considering; now what do you have to say about that.
MR. MADDEN: Yes. And I think that goes
with the Justice's second question.
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that what you're asking?
MR. MADDEN: -- content -- it needs to be
specific -- it needs to be specific enough so that the
facts that get litigated are the ones that are
ultimately recited by the court for the reason for the
non-Guidelines sentence.
JUSTICE ALITO: But why would the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's a complex answer.
And I -- this seems to me to be a clear case of what was
in the judge's mind. She said I have a record here of
repeated e-mails to this woman, threatening to kill her,
threatening to kill her new husband, threatening to kill
her mother. He did it again and again and again.
I have seen this person, he appeared before
me. It is my educated prediction that he will do it
again. So I'm going to put him away for as long as I
can.
That's -- her reasoning process is not at
all mysterious.
What notice is the defendant lacking?
MR. MADDEN: I think if -- if she would have
said something to the effect that -- and this sometimes
happens during the course of a sentencing, that's a
different issue -- but here's what's on my mind. I'm
concerned that only extra prison time, incapacitation
for as long as I can give him, will do the job of
protecting society. What do you have to say about that?
If that was the -- now isn't the written,
formal, this is during the context of the sentencing --
the way it comes out, then the response would be
something like, "Judge, there's -- there is psychiatric
evidence or psychological evidence that's developed that
I'd like to put on bearing on that issue in light of the
report from Buttner, the new report that just came into
the record right before the sentencing, that goes
directly to the issue of amenability to treatment; and
you're concerned that only maximum incapacitation will
address the issue.
I think that's how that -- that's how it
should have played out.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why -- why isn't that an
equally response to what Justice Ginsburg just gave as a
recitation of what the what the judge had said.
MR. MADDEN: The --
JUSTICE SOUTER: She quoted and summarized
the judge saying he's going to do it again.
MR. MADDEN: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Anybody knows that what the
judge is getting at is I'm going to put him away as long
as I can put him away. Isn't that just as much notice
or just as much a -- a stimulus to the response that you
want to give, as your reformulation of the -- of the
issue?
MR. MADDEN: Yes, and that goes to the
timing question. When she said that, the next -- in the
same paragraph, was -- and, and therefore, it's a
60-month sentence.
That -- that discussion didn't occur -- the
notice didn't --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So it's not the question of
notice; it's the question of time to respond.
MR. MADDEN: At that point it was
explanation, it explanation of what she was doing, not
notice of what she was going to do at a time when
it would have made a difference.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is she supposed to do?
Usually there -- there's just one sentencing hearing,
right?
JUSTICE SCALIA: And there's --
MR. MADDEN: Usually.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- a pre-sentence report
which both parties have. And sometimes there are
witnesses who come in. Sometimes the injured parties or
the relatives of the deceased party come in; and -- and
usually the sentence is imposed at the end of that
proceeding.
Now when is -- when is the judge supposed to
be so precise as to what particular matters induce her
to -- to raise this sentence here?
MR. MADDEN: I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are you going to have a
recess? Or maybe reschedule the sentencing for -- for a
week later so that the judge can decide in detail what
particular factors motivate her?
MR. MADDEN: I think in -- in the vast
majority of cases, and the government concedes this in
the brief or acknowledges it, that while there are
infinite number of variables that lurk in every case,
practically, there are not that many that are actually
there. Those are usually identified in the pre-sentence
report which you have way in advance or in advance.
There are -- the parties have a duty to
identify the issues that are going to be litigated; and
that's done.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now if it is in the
pre-sentence report, is that enough notice?
MR. MADDEN: Yes. And that's typically --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So long as it is in the
pre-sentence notice the judge doesn't have to say I plan
to rely on this aspect of the pre-sentence report?
MR. MADDEN: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. MADDEN: No, because in the vast
majority of cases that's what occurs. And then the
parties have a duty to interject issues that they think
ought to drive the Guidelines or non-guidelines either
way.
And the bar is actually getting better at
that than when this occurred in picking up on 3553(a)
factors, and I think the problem is actually going to
become lesser over time.
So only in the extraordinary cases -- and
Burns was an extraordinary case -- where an issue that
is important to the judge isn't flagged in the papers --
does the duty arise to let -- let the parties know what
considerations they should focus their attention on, so
that they can be litigated.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does the defendant
have an obligation to give notice, both to the
government and I suppose to the judge, saying at the --
at the sentencing hearing, we're going to say this? So
the judge can get ready for it? Or the government can
get ready for it?
MR. MADDEN: Usually, the interests, of
course, are different.
The -- the interests of the defendant in --
in a lower sentence, I think, is different than
defending against a higher -- a higher sentence; but
yes, I think it is appropriate.
And the rule says -- rule 32(h) only speaks
to the judge. But I think the parties in their
positions are required by the local rule in the Southern
District of Alabama and the Federal rule generally to
put their -- their positions in writing in advance of
the hearing. I think our rule, I believe, is seven
days.
So that when the judge, before getting ready
to sentence, looks at the issues, the people with the
heightened interest in them have already identified what
they are.
So the only -- it's only the residual issues
that are picked up by rule 32. It occurs very
infrequently in practice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about the point
made by Chief Judge Boudin in his recent opinion, is
that now that we look more carefully at the 3553
factors, counsel has to come in prepared to address all
of those?
MR. MADDEN: It is -- you know, as a
practical matter, it is extremely wasteful. It does not
promote focused advocacy. The sentences that are going
to come out of that kind of system won't be on a
developed record. The sentences in the aggregate will
be less reliable for purpose of evolution of the
guidelines.
There's -- there are -- the reasons for
notice I think are in -- notice is important not only
for the individual defendant but there's institutional
interests as well.
It's a -- it's a fairly rarely occurring
phenomenon where rule 32(h) comes into play. The rule
as written doesn't demand any changes. It is a matter
of interpretation. And the Sentencing Commission itself
defines a departure as any non-Guidelines sentence.
That fits within the literal language of
rule 32(h). This Court doesn't have to decide this
case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not what it meant when
32(h) was promulgated.
MR. MADDEN: Well, the Court in Rita, which
was after Booker, discussed in fact, the sentencing
court, applying the Guidelines in individual cases, may
depart either pursuant to the Guidelines or since Booker
by imposing a non-Guidelines sentence. The word
departure --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You could apply departure
to post-Booker; but at the time this rule was adopted,
departure did not consist of that; it consisted of
something much more narrow.
MR. MADDEN: It -- it had a narrower meaning
but -- but the rule 32(h) was to implement the structure
of rule 32, that's what Burns said. And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why should we put into
rule 32(h), as Justice Scalia suggests, the 3553(a)
factors, when we know that the rule makers did make a
change in 2007? That is they put 3553(a) into
32(d)(2)(F); so they made a change there and they said
the judge could ask to have these things included in the
pre-sentence report; but they left (H) looking like it's
dealing just with the guidelines. Why couldn't the
Court say well, we didn't put 3553 in (h), and so it's
not there?
MR. MADDEN: Well, I don't think that that
answers the question, because under the prior structure
of the rule, the pre-sentencing was supposed to set out
all of the factors and (h) was just -- just a stopgap.
The provision that came in in December of
'07 that says that the court can request other factors,
I think is just that an authorization to the probation
officer to look at -- to look at other factors and to
think more broadly.
But I don't think that should be read as
limiting the scope of 32(h) simply to what would be
traditional guideline departures.
If I could, I'd reserve the balance of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Roberts.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MATTHEW D. ROBERTS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. ROBERTS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Rule 32 requires the district court to
provide notice before any departure from the Guidelines
range based on a ground not previously identified by the
PSR of the parties, including a departure based on the
factors in section 3553(a). Non-Guideline sentences
under section 3553(a) fall squarely within the term
departure, both as defined in the dictionary and as
defined in the Guidelines.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why shouldn't this
rule be dealt with by further rulemaking? It is very
clear that when 32(h) was adopted, departure had a
specific meaning under the Guidelines. And what we're
talking about now was not contemplated at all by the
rulemakers at that time.
Now, applying 3553(a) in this situation
raises different problems, and there are issues
regarding the specificity of the notice that's required
and the timing of the notice. Why shouldn't this be
dealt with by further rulemaking when those -- where
those things can be handled in a comprehensive way
rather than by the haphazard development of case law by
the courts of appeals if we agree with your position.
MR. ROBERTS: First of all, as enacted rule
32(h) requires notice of all deviations from the
Guidelines range, and by its plain terms it continues to
do that. But --
JUSTICE ALITO: Are you saying --
MR. ROBERTS: Either way --
JUSTICE ALITO: Are you saying that if they
had in mind at the time that Booker might be coming down
the road.
MR. ROBERTS: No.
JUSTICE ALITO: There would be
non-Guidelines variances from the Sentencing Guidelines.
MR. ROBERTS: No. They were focused on
Guidelines authorized departures because those were the
only ones that were legally authorized at the time. But
the fact is that they required notice of all -- that --
that -- that they were requiring notice of all
deviations that were available. Now they should require
notice -- at a minimum, rule 32(h) is still there and it
continues to apply to traditional departures.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The rules advisory
committee is currently considering whether or not to
change this, right?
MR. ROBERTS: Yes. It --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Nobody in that
process has suggested, well, it's too bad you've already
decided this in 32(h)?
MR. ROBERTS: Well, yes. One of the -- they
have, Your Honor.
One of the things that the advisory
committee stated that it was going to consider was --
was lower court decisions on the question -- on the
question of whether notice -- the current text of rule
32(h) requires notice to be given.
So that might have been one of the reasons
that some people in the conference were reluctant to
adopt an amendment. Another reason was that they knew
that the courts were considering the question, and many
people expressed concern that an amendment was
premature, that the -- that the conference should await
further guidance from the courts and from this Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: A lot of judges
objected to the idea they would adopt the position
you're urging here.
MR. ROBERTS: That's true. Some judges did
object to that. But others -- as I said, there were
other -- some judges expressed support for that
interpretation, and there were varying reasons that were
motivating different people in the conference to take
the position that the conference should wait.
The fact is -- and so the Court shouldn't
construe from the failure to enact an amendment just
like the Court is reluctant to construe from the failure
to amend a statute that the current provision doesn't
require notice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not inferring
from the failure to act. It is just a recognition that
these things are looked at very carefully by the rules
committees and they look at it in a broad way and take
in all the information. We know they're doing that now.
And we would be kind of jumping the gun and short
circuiting that process.
MR. ROBERTS: I don't think so, because
they've -- they've referred it back to the subcommittee
and said they want to wait and see what -- what this
Court does and what the courts to.
So, they're waiting for you. Doesn't seem
like in that circumstance it makes sense for you to wait
for them.
But however you interpret the current
rule -- and the question before you is what the current
rule requires. However you interpret that it doesn't
circumvent the rulemaking process --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: May I ask you this
question about the rule: It says before the court may
depart from the applicable sentencing range on a ground
not identified for departure. Can a pre-sentence report
say possible grounds for departure are as follows, and
then list them? Or does this, in your view, mean that
"identified for departure" means as recommended by the
pre-sentencing report?
MR. ROBERTS: No. I think that the
pre-sentence report doesn't actually have to recommend
it. The pre-sentence report -- and they generally have
a section that does this although, although often they
don't identify --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, could the
pre-sentencing report just list a series of -- a whole
series of factors saying these are possible grounds for
departure? Would that comply with the rule?
MR. ROBERTS: I mean, at a certain point it
wouldn't, but if it listed more than one as a possible
ones and they were identified with sufficient
specificity to enable --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would future
dangerousness -- future dangerousness be something that
could be put in the report and that would cover these --
MR. ROBERTS: Yes. It -- it -- it certainly
could, Your Honor. And the PSR here includes --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's the latest thing
we're talking about very much.
MR. ROBERTS: That's required.
No. But what -- what it does show is that
this is a possibility that an out of Guidelines sentence
is a possibility and this is the ground on which it is a
possibility.
JUSTICE SCALIA? What if the ground is I
just simply believe that the Guidelines' recommendation
for arson when there are people in the building is
simply too low? Okay? You give notice of that. What
good is giving notice of that going to do? Is too low.
Isn't too low. Is too low. Isn't too low. I mean --
MR. ROBERTS: The parties can --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's almost, you know, a
determination of the judge's gut feeling of what is
condign punishment for a particular --
MR. ROBERTS: The parties -- the parties
would be able to focus on that and try to inform the
judge's decision on that. But that's not the only kind
of -- that's not the only kind of ground on which a
court might vary, and that may not be one for which
advance notice would be particularly helpful, but there
are many on which it is.
If I can give an example of a case we
recently confronted, for example? We had a case in
which a judge imposed probation on a defendant who was
convicted of soliciting child pornography because the
judge was under the belief that prison couldn't provide
the necessary treatment.
We hadn't presented any evidence on
available treatment programs, but we certainly would
have done that if we had had notice that the court was
contemplating varying on that ground. And because we
didn't do that, there was no adversary presentation of
that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Couldn't you have asked
at the hearing, couldn't you ask the judge: Judge,
please have a continuance here because you have taken us
by surprise and we'd like to offer some evidence that
you -- that might influence you?
MR. ROBERTS: You could -- we could
certainly do that. But that's an after the -- you know,
that would be an after-the-fact situation. What -- what
rule 32 is trying to do is set up a procedure so that in
every case, in every case you get the adversarial
presentation on the grounds --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When? I asked Mr. Madden
and didn't get a precise answer: When does this notice
have to be given? We're told that the court itself did
not get the full sentencing packet until seven days
before the hearing.
So when must this notice be given and how
much does it have to say?
MR. ROBERTS: Well, it's -- it's a
context-specific question. The question is, is the
notice reasonable, which means it has to give the
parties enough time to present the adversarial process
on the question.
Now, in the vast majority, all but the most
unusual cases notice a day or two in advance would be
specific. And in many cases, notice that the hearing
itself would be sufficient.
I think in this case, for example, notice
that the hearing itself would certainly have been
sufficient; but -- but the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How can that be?
They're talking about an expert and all that. He's not
going to be hanging around the courthouse.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, several reasons; for all
the reasons, Your Honor, that we said that the -- that
it's failure to give notice of a variance here was
harmless. First of all, the PSR had already identified
a possible departure on a very similar ground.
Second of all, the Petitioner's future
dangerousness was central to the victim impact testimony
of his wife who had notice was going to testify. He
knew from the PSR what she was going to say.
In addition, it was central to dispute --
potential adjustment to the Guidelines' range. So, his
future dangerousness was --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that all goes
-- that all goes to the harmless error question. Is
that the only time in which notice at the sentencing
hearing is going to be adequate?
MR. ROBERTS: No, Your Honor. But I think
in this circumstance, for example, there would be --
another example would be often if the victim impact
testimony -- there hadn't been identified as a potential
ground for departure on it, but the judge heard victim
impact testimony, but the defendant knew the victim was
going to testify, had the general sense it and the judge
when it heard -- when she heard it decided, wow, you
know, this really makes me think I should take it out of
the sentence, I think that because the -- because the
defendant knew that the testimony was going to be there,
knew the gist of it and was prepared to respond to it,
would probably be sufficient to give notice at that time
then.
For instance, if the judge relied on remorse
in allocution -- lack of remorse in allocution that's
another example where I think, you know, notice at the
hearing would pretty much --
JUSTICE SCALIA: In a lot of cases, though,
it will be impossible for judges to make their
determination the night before, take home the
pre-sentence report, and, you know, stuff from the trial
and focus on the next morning's sentencing hearing.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, judges --
JUDGE SCALIA: -- decide it a week in
advance. Do judges do that, decide a week in advance?
I doubt it.
MR. ROBERTS: The judges are reviewing the
material. I don't think they are doing it a week in
advance. They're getting the material a week in
advance. They are reviewing it before the sentencing
hearings. And the notice requirement has not been
unduly burdensome for traditional departures --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you're really
asking them to sentence first and hearing afterward.
MR. ROBERTS: No, they don't --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe the whole
purpose of the hearing is to find out what factors are
pertinent and all that. You're asking the judge to come
to that determination before the hearing.
MR. ROBERTS: That -- it is true that they
go into the hearing with an open mind, but it's also
true that before the hearing, they're going to have some
sense based on the written materials that they've
reviewed and based on the parties' identifications of
what they think the appropriate sentence is. As
Petitioner's counsel explained, in the vast majority of
cases, the PSR, the parties are already going to
identify the potential grounds for a variance, and so
it's very few cases that there's going to be a ground
that's going to come out --
JUSTICE ALITO: How specific does the notice
have to be? I take it it's not enough just to recite
one of the 3553(a) factors.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, at a minimum, the court
would have to identify the relevant 3553(a) factor. I
think then what more is required depends a little bit on
the particular factor, the record in the case. Again,
the test is to ensure that they focus adversarial
presentation. If it's a really an open-ended factor,
like the nature and circumstances of the offense and the
defendant's characteristics, obviously more is going to
be required.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what was required
here?
MR. ROBERTS: Here I think it would have
been sufficient for the judge to say. I'm contemplating
a variance under section 3553(a)(2)(C), based on the
fact that Petitioner's conduct indicates that he is
likely to commit future crimes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you disagree with
the Petitioner on the specificity of notice required?
MR. ROBERTS: Yes. We don't think that
notice of the specific fact on which the court is going
to rely is required. That would start to make the
notice requirement unworkable, but I don't think that's
how it's been interpreted, to require the very specific
facts in the departure context.
The same situation, the parallel thing
applies here. As I was going to say before on the
burdensomeness, it hasn't been burdensome, unduly
burdensome, to require notice for traditional, and there
really isn't any reason to think that it would be
different for here.
And to get back to something earlier as well
that we're were talking about, the key fact is rule
(h) does indisputably require notice for traditional
departures. And a notice requirement for variances is
essential to prevent evisceration of that notice
requirement because a court can always impose the
same -- use a variance to impose the same sentence that
it could have imposed as a Guidelines departure.
So that notice requirement, which is still
in the rule, is going to basically become meaningless
unless the word "departure" is given it full scope and
construed to include variances.
And notices of variances is also necessary
for the focused adversarial testing that rule 32
requires for the reason the Court said in Burns. If the
parties don't know what the potential grounds for a
non-Guidelines sentence are, then what they're likely to
do is either address the possibility of an
above-Guidelines sentence in a random and wasteful way
by trying to conceive of every possible grounds or
they're just not going to address it at all, like in the
example that I gave before when we just didn't address
the potential variance based on prison not providing --
being able to provide the appropriate treatment.
And it's still important, even after Booker,
to have adversarial testing of that issue.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Could we go back to the
example for just a minute? I want to be sure I fully
understand it. Why couldn't that issue have been
adequately discussed at a hearing in which there was no
particular notice, but at the end of the hearing the
judge said, this is what I'm planning to do because I'm
worried that they won't get treatment in prison and so
forth? Well, wouldn't the government have had an
opportunity to then say, Judge, you overlooked this
fact? And wouldn't all involved in the hearing?
MR. ROBERTS: Well, what we would have liked
to do is bring in people to explain to the judge these
are the programs that are available. This is --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Couldn't the lawyer have
done that?
MR. ROBERTS: That's how it works. Well, I
think the lawyer probably could have said we have -- we
have treatments and they work. But then the judge said
--
JUSTICE STEVENS: But wouldn't --
MR. ROBERTS: -- well, based on this --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, that solves the
problem because the judge apparently was operating under
a misunderstanding of facts.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, I think that what the
judge thought was that there were no available
treatments that would work. And it --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And the lawyer could say
you're wrong.
MR. ROBERTS: That -- you know, it might
have dissuaded the judge there, but it didn't give us
the opportunity to bring in somebody who --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I understand.
MR. ROBERTS: -- who knows how it -- you
know, who knows what the programs are, to explain it.
Whatever the judge said, yes, I know you have these
programs, but the programs that you can do in prison --
you know, I just don't think that those are effective.
And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if you think
you have a particularly good case that they are, again
you make that point to the judge.
MR. ROBERTS: But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you can see what
the last report about these programs was like, you
wouldn't think that. And I think a reasonably competent
judge is not going to say, I don't want to see it. Or
maybe he will based on his own experience in dealing
with those types of --
MR. ROBERTS: The judge is -- you know,
counsel can make the argument. But in certain cases,
the ability to present actual evidence on it is going to
be an important -- is going to be an important factor.
There's, you know, other examples: For instance, if the
judge varies on grounds that there's no treatment
available for other things or that people have been
permanently psychologically scarred, and the other side
wants to bring forward counter-evidence and -testimony.
There are numerous ones. That's the -- that's the
essence of what the requirement --
JUSTICE STEVENS: In your --
MR. ROBERTS: -- and the rules get at.
JUSTICE STEVENS: In your experience, do
judges often bring in experts on this kind of stuff?
MR. ROBERTS: Judges -- do judges bring in
experts?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, not judges -- do
judges say, "Oh, this is very interesting; I'm going to
have a new hearing"? I mean, how long do these hearings
go on?
MR. ROBERTS: We would have -- if -- I think
that we would -- could bring in someone and testify
about -- to present evidence on that for sure, if the
judge was thinking of imposing probation because there
was no treatment program. It wouldn't have to go on for
very long, but we could have someone come in for a few
minutes and -- and do that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you're saying that,
routinely in sentencing matters, you have expert who
come in and advise the judge of programs and so forth?
MR. ROBERTS: Not routinely, but, you know,
generally that's not an issue. That's why we didn't do
it in this -- in this particular sentencing hearing.
The point is that, you know, we're not going to do that.
And so a judge that's operating under that and it's
going to vary on that ground isn't going to get that
information because we're -- as you say -- we're not
going to just want to delay all the hearings for that
reason.
And so that -- it's really the reason that
the requirement in the existing rule is there, and the
reasons behind that apply with equal force in the
variance context.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you think that this
case is a poor example because you're urging us to apply
the harmless error rule and say this case would have
come out the same way --
MR. ROBERTS: Yes -- I mean, it's not the
best -- it's not the best example to illustrate to the
Court why notice is required because here we do think
that the error was harmless for various reasons.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If we -- if we grant the
review so we can resolve the question, does the judge
have to give notice or not? And if she has to give
notice, what time? What content?
But now you're urging us to say -- to do
something that ordinarily this Court doesn't do, that
--
trial judges do, to deal with harmless error, which
would be spending our time on this very particular case
setting no law for any other case?
MR. ROBERTS: Well, we think the Court
should, you know, first obviously address the rule 32
question on which it granted certain certiorari, but
after doing that, we think the Court should address the
harmless error question because that will provide useful
guidance to the lower courts. There are likely to be a
lot of harmless error cases because half of the circuits
have erroneously concluded that the rule doesn't require
notice, and they could benefit from an illustration of
how to apply it in this particular context --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I suppose we'll have
MR. ROBERTS: -- involving variance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I suppose we'll have
a lot of appeals about the adequacy of the notice. You
and the Petitioner disagree on that, and appellate
courts will have to address that as well.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, I think this is an easy
case for an appellate court to address because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes. This may be --
MR. ROBERTS: -- regarding whether the
notice would be adequate --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. This may
be an easy case, but you can imagine others that aren't
going to be.
MR. ROBERTS: Yes, but the questions about
adequacy of notice are really no different in kind than
the same questions that come up for the traditional
departure rule. It's still going to be there, however
this Court resolves the case for the notice of
Guidelines departures.
So I don't think that you're opening a --
whole new questions about adequacy, just as like you're
not opening up a whole set of new questions about
timing. Those questions are there, and the courts are
going to have to confront them.
But in discussing the harmlessness issue
here, you could shed some light on those questions that
can provide some guidance for the lower courts that will
be useful to them in the future. And we would urge you
to do that.
Turning to the harmlessness, in addition to
the fact that the PSR gave notice -- do you want me to
continue?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Continue. Finish.
MR. ROBERTS: Sure. In addition to the fact
that future dangerousness was central to sentencing,
it's also true that the evidence that Petitioner now
says he wouldn't have presented wouldn't have made a
difference because his counsel essentially made the same
argument to the district court, and he could have used
the expert testimony to support that argument, but he
chose not to.
The District Court had already rejected the
defense of expert diagnosis the Petitioner was
delusional and could be treated with anti-psychotic
drugs and adopted the government expert's diagnosis that
Petitioner had a personality disorder that was
longstanding and unlikely to change.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Rutledge.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER B. RUTLEDGE
FOR AMICUS CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF THE JUDGMENT BELOW
MR. RUTLEDGE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Court has before it today two
alternative grounds to affirm the judgment below. The
first is suggested by Justice Ginsburg and Chief Justice
Roberts that paragraph 78 of the presentence report put
the parties on adequate notice that they could engage in
a full adversarial testing outweighing the defendant's
future dangerousness against his amenability to
alternative methods of treatment.
The alternative ground for affirming the
judgment below is that suggested by Justice Scalia and
Justice Alito, namely: That Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 32(h) was drafted for a different era, an era
of mandatory guidelines. And there is no reason,
particularly in light of the right rulemaking process,
to extend rule 32 to an advisory guideline era.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then it would be easy
for a district judge to escape any obligation to give
32(h) notice because he could simply say: Oh, yeah,
before I would have ranked this as a Sentencing
Guidelines matter, but now I'm treating it as a 3553(a)
factor, so I don't have to bother with 32(h) anymore.
MR. RUTLEDGE: Justice Ginsburg, I
understand your concern about the possibility that
district judges might, I guess in theory, attempt to do
an end run around rule 32(h) by recasting a departure
decision as a variance decision.
And, admittedly, there are certain
circumstances in which the ground for a departure on
rule 32(h) has some overlap with the ground for a
variance under 3553(a), but I would offer several
responses. My first response is that I feel the Court
crossed that bridge a little bit in the Booker remedial
opinion when it created an advisory guidelines system.
The whole premise of the advisory guidelines system was
to enhance the discretion of the district judge.
My second answer would be that district
judges still have a reason to engage in the departure
calculation. As this Court made clear in Rita, district
judges must begin by consulting the guidelines. And the
Second, Third, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Tenth Courts of
Appeal all have interpreted that obligation to consult
the Guidelines to include consideration of possible
grounds for departure.
Of course, this Court's decision in
Kimbrough made clear that even if those two grounds
don't provide the judge adequate incentive to engage in
a departure calculation, that there is yet another
reason; and that is because it may affect the
scrutiny-of-reasonableness review.
As the Court explained in Kimbrough, when a
district judge departs from the Guidelines, the district
judge's determination may be entitled to greater respect
when the judge makes the determination that a case
takes -- that a circumstance takes the case outside of
the heartland.
JUSTICE ALITO: But didn't the decision that
the Guidelines are not mandatory make what used to be
known as Guidelines departures completely irrelevant? A
case that would qualify for a Guidelines departure
would, by definition, be a case in which the 3553(a)
factors justified a sentence other than a Guidelines
sentence? So I don't understand why there's any need to
go through the departure analysis any longer at all.
MR. RUTLEDGE: Justice Alito, I don't
believe that this Court's Booker and post-Booker
jurisprudence has made the departure determination
irrelevant.
Indeed, just this last Friday, the
Sentencing Commission posted on its website additional
proposed amendments to the Sentencing Guidelines that
would inject new grounds for departures including fraud
for emergency assistance and violations of Federal food
and drug laws that entail a risk of serious bodily
injury.
Departures remain relevant to the guidelines
because they are the basis upon which the Commission can
continue to fulfill its mandate to provide for the type
of uniform sentencing that still is possible.
JUSTICE ALITO: I just don't understand
that. You're not -- a court -- a sentencing court,
after concluding that there is no ground for a departure
under Booker and the later cases, then has to consider
the 3553(a) question.
So the decision about the departures is
irrelevant. It is not dispositive; and, if the court
finds that the case qualified for a Guidelines
departure, as I said before, by definition, that is
going to be a case where the 3553(a) factors warranted a
non-Guidelines sentence anyway. So it seems like a
useless appendage at this point.
MR. RUTLEDGE: Well, it may well be the
case, Justice Alito, that as this Court's Booker
jurisprudence unfolds, that the concept of a departure
declines in importance, in addition with respect to the
32(h) obligation for notice.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why is the 32(h)
obligation relevant? That is, looking through the
history of it, I see that in 32(i)(C) it says that the
government has to allow the parties' attorneys to
comment on the determination of the probation officer
and other matters relating to an appropriate sentence.
Then, in a case called Burns v. United
States, this Court says that that right to comment
includes a right to notice.
And so all that 32(h) did was to take what
was already the law and make specific that it includes a
right to notice. I take it that was what they were up
to.
But even if you didn't have 32(h), you would
have precisely the same right once you got 32(i)(C)
together with the case of Burns.
So I don't know where that leaves me, except
thinking it doesn't matter, because the defendant has
precisely the same right either way. And I guess it's
easier just to say "departure" means generally all kinds
of departures including not applying it.
That's not a stretch of the language. It is
quite right it is not consistent with what they thought
they were up to, but not -- it is -- maybe before -- if
they had passed this before Hawaii became a State, you
could say: Well, they didn't think it would apply in
Hawaii.
So what? I mean would you decrease that,
General?
MR. RUTLEDGE: Certainly, Justice Breyer.
If we were to put 32(h) to one side and consider the
effect of rule 32(i)(1)(C), then the Court confronts the
question whether the basic ideas that animated its
decision in Burns should be extended in an
advisory-guidelines era. And Burns, at bottom, rested
on two distinct strands of reasoning.
One was the question of unfair surprise.
And we think, with that respect, that the post-Booker
era is different from the pre-Booker era. And the
reason why, Justice Breyer, is because pre-Booker the
parties came to the sentencing hearing with an
expectation of a within-Guidelines sentence.
And post-Booker, particularly in light of
this Court's decision in Rita, the parties cannot come
to the sentencing hearing with that expectation because
the district judge may not presume the reasonableness of
the within-Guidelines sentence.
And so to the extent that Burns rested on
concerns of unfair surprise, the rationale has dropped
out after Booker.
Now, there is a second strand of reasoning
to Burns which Justice Ginsburg alluded to, which is
this question of full adversarial testing. And I agree
with you, Chief Justice Roberts, that Chief Judge
Boudin's decision in the Vega-Santiago case provides the
pathway here.
Judges engage in this kind of discretionary
act all the time. Parties come to the hearing with a
theory, a theory of how the judge should exercise her
sentencing discretion within a known range, and knowing
the applicable legal criteria, and have an opportunity
to be heard.
And we believe that, particularly in light
of the recent amendment to section 32(d)(2)(F), that's
going to include the possibility of the 3553 factors --
53, a factor in the presentence report, that the
parties are going to have the opportunity to come to the
hearing with the ability to engage in full adversarial
testing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you accept Chief
Judge Boudean's safety valve as well? In other words,
if the basis for the variance is going to be a matter of
surprise, then notice is required?
MR. RUTLEDGE: I accept the first part of
that premise, Chief Justice Roberts: That they are may
be rare cases of truly unfair surprise.
What I don't necessarily accept is that
notice has to be the straitjacketed remedy for District
Judges in all of those instances.
There may be other mechanisms such as if
the -- if the fact is, if you will, sprung on the
parties in the midst of the hearing, a motion for a
continuance, as the government indicates on page 44 of
its brief, may be a mechanism to control against those
cases of truly unfair surprise. And then a court of
appeals under this Court's decision in Pickett,
reviewing the appropriateness of granting or denying the
continuance, can base its appellate review on whether or
not unfair surprise --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That is an abuse of
discretion standardized?
MR. RUTLEDGE: That is an abuse of
discretion --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Unworkable or is there
just as many impracticalities as the rule.
MR. RUTLEDGE: I -- I don't think that it
presents a concern of impracticability, Justice Kennedy,
for one simple reason; and that is by relying on a
mechanism such as the continuance, the parties are given
the opportunity to identify for the court whether or not
there's a concern of unfair surprise; and if there is,
the district judge is in the position to decide whether
or not she believes that the continuance is necessary.
If the notice claim only arises at the time
that the sentence is entered, there's relatively little
opportunity at that point for the district judge to go
back and reconsider the record on the basis of unfair
surprise. And that sort of takes me to the basic point
that Justices Souter, Alito and Justice Ginsburg all
talk, about which is the fundamental unworkability of
the notice rule and advisory guidelines system.
As the judges -- the district judges
explained to us in the recent rulemaking proceeding
contemplating a amendment to rule 32(h), they're
concerned that extending this rule to variances will
make it quite difficult.
We know that district judges often receive
these packets of sentencing information only seven days
before the sentencing hearing. Several courts of
appeals have held that giving notice at the sentencing
hearing is not timely. And even if the timeliness
concern can be overcome, there are serious problems in
workability as to the adequacy of the notice.
The best that the Petitioner and the
government the instruct this Court on, in terms of how
the adequacy standard is going to work, is that it has
to be context-specific; and if we put ourselves in the
shoes of a district judge that now has to engage in a
discretionary act to decide whether or not the notice
that I've given is adequate turns on the context,
doesn't provide a great deal of guidance to the district
judge.
We know, for example --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why isn't it just
whatever is the reason that the judge is considering is
going outside the advisory Guidelines, whatever that
reason is, just say it. So the judge says -- could say
here, "I'm contemplating going outside because I don't
think that this man is going to stop these threats."
Period. That's all.
MR. RUTLEDGE: I -- certainly,
Justice Ginsburg. And I've wrestled with that own
question in -- in my mind. If this judge were to have
said I'm thinking of sentencing outside the Guidelines
because I'm dealing with an individual who has a
demonstrated ability to stalk and threaten his ex-wife,
would that have been adequate? And interestingly, I
think pages 23 and 126 of the Petitioner's reply brief
illustrate that either the answer to that question is
going to be "not necessarily," or otherwise appellate
judges are going to be strung up having to unpack
whether or not notice is adequate, because it is
Petitioner's petition in this case that even if the
defendant had been put on notice as to the future
dangerousness, that that did not, quote, "put the
defendant on notice" that the district judge supposed
the futility of treatment might justify an
outside-the-Guidelines sentencing.
Here's the essential workability problem.
We know from this court's decision in Rita that the
basic vision in the post-Booker world is to encourage
judges to provide reasoned sentencing decisions, where a
degree of reasoning may depend a little bit upon whether
the judge is engaging an inside-the-advisory-Guidelines
sentence, or an outside-the-advisory-Guidelines
sentence.
In the event that a district judge engaging
in an outside-the-Guidelines sentence, she is now
walking into a trap. Because if she imposes it based on
a determination about the defendant's future
dangerousness, and then in an attempt to provide a full
explication of her reasoning makes a statement about the
amenability or non-amenability of the defendant to
alternative forms of treatment, the aggrieved party will
seize on that extra statement and bring it back to the
pre-sentencing report and the parties' pleadings and
said we may have had notice as to ground one to the
variance but we didn't have notice as to ground two. Or
we may have had notice as to ground one and two, but we
didn't have any as to ground three.
This is the essentially workability concern
that we believe that the district judges raised when
they expressed their discomfort with the proposed
amendments to rule 32(h); and precisely why we think the
more prudent course is to affirm the judgment below,
either on the narrow ground that I started start with,
the Chief Justice's question suggested, or alternatively
on the broader grounds suggested by Justice Scalia's
questions, that the resume that emerged at the time of
mandatory Guidelines should not be extended to the time
of advisory Guidelines.
And if I could make one last observation,
and then I'll complete my argument unless the Court has
further questions.
In December of 2007, the Advisory Committee
on Criminal Rules formed a subcommittee to study this
problem. If the Court consults the minutes of that
meeting, they didn't form that subcommittee because they
were awaiting this Court's decision in Irizarry. They
formed that -- cert hadn't been granted in Irizarry.
They formed that subcommittee for two
reasons. The first reason was whether in light of this
Court's decisions in Gall and Kimbrough a notice
requirement was still necessary; and second was the
consideration that in light of the breadth of the
53(a) factors a notice requirement should be removed
altogether. The more prudent course either for the
narrow grounds suggested by Chief Justice Roberts or the
broader grounds suggested by Justice Scalia is to affirm
the judgment below.
If the Court has no further questions I
would be happy to yield back the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Madden, you have two minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ARTHUR J. MADDEN, III
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. MADDEN: Thank you.
I think Justice Breyer is correct that rule
32(e) is -- requires that the parties have an
opportunity to comment on matters appropriate to the
sentencing. That opportunity extends to not only
Guidelines departures but also what has been called
variances. There are two reasons why it's important
that that -- that right comes with a notice requirement.
The first is that fairness for the individual defendant,
the ability to litigate the issues that are going to
make a difference in his sentencing.
The other is that it permits as an
institutional issue effective appellate review, if
there's a developed record and evolution of the
Guidelines by looking at the aggregate of cases. If the
Court's decision is that we're going to exempt from
notice requirement the cases that are going -- the
sentences that are going to be driven towards the
margin, high or low, the goal of uniformity that
Congress sought in the Sentencing Reform Act would be
lost.
And I submit that that's an independent
reason why the Court ought to require notice is because
otherwise, it's inviting the sentencing disparities
which the architecture of the Sentencing Reform Act is
designed to eliminate.
As far as workability, it is extremely rare
that the issues aren't flagged in the papers. It is not
going to come up frequently. Rule 32(h) issues don't
come up terribly frequently, at least in my practice in
the appellate cases.
Five circuits below have -- saw no
workability problem with extending the notice
requirement of rule 32(h) to variances as well.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
MR. MADDEN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Rutledge, you
briefed and argued the case as amicus curiae in support
of the judgment below upon appointment by this Court,
and we thank you for undertaking and discharging that
assignment.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the case in the
