IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JOSE ERNESTO MEDELLIN, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 06-984
TEXAS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 10, 2007
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DONALD F. DONOVAN, ESQ., New York, N.Y.; on
behalf of the Petitioner.
GEN. PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Petitioner.
R. TED CRUZ, ESQ., Solicitor General, Austin, Tex.; on
behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DONALD F. DONOVAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
GEN. PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting Petitioner 22
R. TED CRUZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 39
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD F. DONOVAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 79
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
this morning in Case 06-984, Medellin v. Texas.
Mr. Donovan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD F. DONOVAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. DONOVAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The President and the Senate entered into
three treaties, the Optional Protocol, the UN Charter,
and the ICJ Statute, by which the United States agreed
that it would comply with the ICJ's decision in any case
to which it was a party. We now have such a decision,
and the President of the United States has determined
that the United States should comply.
Texas, however, tells this Court that it
should tell the world that the framers left us a
Constitution in which neither this Court nor the
President nor maybe even Congress could ensure that the
United States kept the promise that its elected
representatives made to its treaty partners. Texas's
position is directly contrary to the constitutional
design.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not such an
outrageous proposition. You'd certainly acknowledge
that the President and the Senate could not enter into a
treaty that required the States to do something that was
unconstitutional.
MR. DONOVAN: Yes. The Constitution --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So there would be the
situation that presents the shocking situation you've
just described. There is a treaty, but nonetheless it
cannot be enforced domestically.
MR. DONOVAN: There would be constitutional
-- there might be affirmative constitutional constraints
on the enforcement of a treaty, but there are none here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Who would enforce
those constraints? The thing that concerns me about
your position is that it seems to leave no role for this
Court in interpreting treaties as a matter of Federal
law.
Suppose, for example, that the International
Court of Justice determined in this case its judgment
was the same, but they added: As a matter of
deterrence, we think the officers who failed to give
consular warning should each be sentenced to 5 years in
jail. That's the ICJ determination. Would this Court
have a role in reviewing that judgment?
MR. DONOVAN: This Court would have a role
--
in reviewing that judgment, and here's -- here's the
question. This Court has an obligation, has the
authority, to say what the law is. In this case the
obligation is, in fact, to comply with the judgment,
itself.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if we determine
MR. DONOVAN: And if that obligation --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if we
determine, even if we determine that that judgment is
based on a legal error?
MR. DONOVAN: The question -- that's the
basis of submitting a dispute to a third-party
dispute-resolution mechanism, yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if the ICJ
determined that the officers should each go to jail for
years, we would have no basis for reviewing that
judgment?
MR. DONOVAN: Wel, that would be -- well,
that would be a -- raise a separate obstacle. If I may
answer the questions in turn, first --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Does the ICJ ever issue a
judgment of that character? It issues a judgment
between two nations, two or more nations, and it is
instructs the United States to do something. I'm not
--
aware of any -- any decision of the ICJ that says what a
sentence should be for a particular individual.
MR. DONOVAN: That is correct. The ICJ
decides disputes between nations, but those disputes may
involve the nations' obligation as to specific
individuals. In this case --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm still interested
in the answer to the Chief Justice's hypothetical.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, as I say, there are two
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the court acts
beyond, clearly beyond, its jurisdiction?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it's -- with respect,
there's no suggestion here that the court has acted
beyond its jurisdiction. Indeed, the President has
determined otherwise.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could you answer the
hypothetical, please.
MR. DONOVAN: But if the court, itself -- if
the ICJ, itself, made a determination as to a dispute
that is within its jurisdiction and that imposes an
obligation that is within this Court's provenance to
enforce, that is, that it determines the rights
attributable -- enforceable within a court of justice,
this Court would be enforcing the obligation to comply.
It wouldn't -- the fact that it diverged
from the court's own interpretation, for example, here
in Sanchez-Llamas, is not relevant to the treaty
obligation that this Court is exercising --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I'm
still looking for an answer to the hypothetical. What
would be the basis for this Court's reviewing the ICJ's
determination that officers should go to jail for 5
years?
MR. DONOVAN: Because in that situation that
may be beyond the Court's -- the executive power of the
Court. What the Court would be doing is determining
the rights attributable to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The Court doesn't
have executive power. It has judicial power. It's
already exercised that judicial power in Sanchez-Llamas
in determing the meaning of this treaty.
And I understood your position to be that we
have no authority to construe the treaty in this case
because a judgment was issued by the International Court
of Justice.
MR. DONOVAN: The -- the question here is
that the --the Court would be exercising its judicial
authority to construe the United States's obligation to
comply with the judgment. The nature of that
obligation, itself, could be one that would be
enforceable, in this Court's words, "in a court of
justice;" and that's the nature of this obligation. Mr.
Medellin gets a review and reconsideration.
In the Chief Justice's hypothetical, that
may well be an obligation that would be enforceable by
other actors that would -- which would not be directly
enforceable in a court as here.
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought --
MR. DONOVAN: It depends on the nature of --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought the question --
and I apologize if I'm not paraphrasing it because I
have my own. This has arisen frequently. Brussels has
a treaty, and that treaty binds all the member nations,
and supreme courts of various nations have come up
against this problem:
What would happen if the Brussels court or
the EU court insists under the treaty that we do
something that violates our own Constitution? I think
this is an example of that. And the answer typically
has been: Well, we'd follow our own Constitution, at
least if it was a violation, what the EU said, of
fundamental human rights or destroyed some basic
structural part of our Constitution.
And the question that I would have is,
doesn't that kind of approach -- not exactly but that
kind of approach -- satisfy whatever problem there is in
this respect here?
MR. DONOVAN: If there were -- if an ICJ --
JUSTICE BREYER: If the ICJ were to do
something which it had never done, like, say, put
everybody in jail for 50 years -- I don't know that
there is such a thing -- but suppose they did, if they
did, I guess that might violate something basic in our
Constitution, in which case we wouldn't enforce it.
MR. DONOVAN: That's right and --
JUSTICE BREYER: If we took that approach --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now --
MR. DONOVAN: If there --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just to get back,
you're conceding, I take it, whether the ICJ has done
something like this before or not -- and we can debate
whether what they've done in this case is precisely that
-- there is a role for this Court in determining whether
or not a judgment of the ICJ should be enforced.
MR. DONOVAN: There is surely because it's
this Court that would be enforcing the obligation to
comply. And just as a treaty cannot contravene an --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just enforcing the
obligation to comply or, as we have in this case,
determining the legal basis for the ICJ determination?
MR. DONOVAN: There are -- there are two
different obligations here: There is an obligation
under the Vienna Convention itself, and this Court has
determined the dispositive effect of that obligation of
a matter of U.S. law.  But there's a different
obligation. The President and the Senate agree to go to
a third party, to go to the International Court of
Justice, to resolve disputes. The very premise of that
obligation is that we might disagree with the
determination -- with the interpretation of the treaty,
and we agreed in that circumstance to comply with the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose in this case the
President did the opposite -- the same facts only the
President said to Texas, do not comply with this
judgment.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it -- that would -- it
would be inconsistent with this Court's duty and
obligation to comply, to enforce a treaty that the --
that the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So then the President's --
MR. DONOVAN: If the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- determination is not
conclusive.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the President's
determination -- what the President has determined here
is to enforce the treaty. He --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: My hypothetical is he's
coming out the other way. He says don't follow this
judgment. And you say he can't do that.
MR. DONOVAN: If --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I -- I think that
that's not -- not consistent with your earlier position.
MR. DONOVAN: Oh, if the President here --
the -- if there's an obligation here to comply and, in
the words this Court, it's "an obligation of a nature to
be enforced in a court of justice," and here the
obligation imposed by the ICJ and the Avena judgment is
an -- is an obligation --
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't the obligation --
MR. DONOVAN: -- which essentially --
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't the obligation that
the United States undertook when it signed the UN
Charter the obligation to undertake to comply with ICJ
judgments in accordance with its own constitutional
processes, not necessarily that any ICJ decision would
be regarded by any court in this country as binding
Federal law?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it would be -- that --
that's exactly right. What the -- what the ICJ -- what
U.S. did is undertake to comply. So the question is,
what is the nature of the obligation imposed?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If you had a --
MR. DONOVAN: It might have obligations --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If you had a treaty on
the recognition and enforcement of judgments, mutual
recognition and enforcement, then we would enforce the
judgment that we agreed to enforce by treaty. We
wouldn't look behind it to see if we agreed with it on
the merits.
Are you saying that this undertaking, this
agreement to submit to the compulsory jurisdiction of
the ICJ gives the judgment in the particular case,
although not precedential effect, the counterpart to
full faith and credit?
MR. DONOVAN: That's exactly the effect of
the judgment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's self-enforcing. I
thought you --
MR. DONOVAN: It's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you -- you think
this treaty is self-enforcing. You don't really need
the President's order here.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, if the -- whether or not
the treaty obligation is self-executing or
--
self-enforcing goes to the nature of the obligation. If
the ICJ said -- if a treaty or an ICJ judgment said, go
pass a statute, that's obviously directed to Congress.
If it said cease hostilities, that's directed to the
President. But as this Court has said, when a treaty
or, by extension, a treaty obligation to comply with a
judgment is --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I --
MR. DONOVAN: -- of a nature to be enforced
JUSTICE STEVENS: May ask this question? I
don't think you've answered the Chief Justice's original
hypothetical. It's easy, of course; they cannot compel
us to violate our Constitution by a judgment of their
kind. But what about the hypothetical that they said
the sentence for this man should be 5 years, not just
there be an investigation to see if he's been
prejudiced. Would we have to follow that judgment?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, in that situation, if it
was a judgment rendered in a case to which we had --
JUSTICE STEVENS: In this very case.
MR. DONOVAN: That would be --
JUSTICE STEVENS: This very case. Supposing
they had said the judgment is that Medellin should spend
years in jail and no more. Would we have to honor
that judgment?
MR. DONOVAN: In the first instance, yes,
the Court would honor that judgment as an obligation to
comply. But remember that there are --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then it becomes --
MR. DONOVAN: -- some constraints that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then it becomes a penal
judgment, and I thought the rule was that no country
forces -- enforces another country's penal judgment.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that would depend on the
-- if -- how you construed the obligation to comply.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if we say --
MR. DONOVAN: In this case, we have --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- this man goes to jail
for 5 years, it seems to me that's a penal judgment.
MR. DONOVAN: If that was the nature of the
dispute that the United -- that is, of course, not the
nature of the dispute that the United States --
JUSTICE ALITO: What if they say --
MR. DONOVAN: But if he --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- he goes to jail for no
time at all? They say that the remedy for these
violations, in order to deter future violations, should
be that the charges should be dismissed and any future
prosecution should be barred. Would that be
automatically binding?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the question is, is it
binding in the first instance because the -- there's an
obligation to comply? That doesn't say anything about,
for example, Congress's ability to repudiate that
obligation to comply, just like it has the obligation --
the authority as a last-in-time rule, pursuant to the
last-in-time rule, to repudiate any treaty obligation.
But the framers wanted treaties to be enforced in the
first instance when they were susceptible of judicial
enforcement, and if the ICJ renders a judgment pursuant
to our treaty obligation to submit disputes, that is of
a nature to be judicially enforced, then the Court --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is the answer to --
MR. DONOVAN: -- would be exercising --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is the answer to
either my or Justice Stevens's hypothetical then, yes,
we do have to enforce an ICJ judgment of that sort?
MR. DONOVAN: You would enforce an ICJ
judgment that did in fact -- that was of a nature to be
enforced in -- in a judicial proceeding.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is not of a nature to
be enforced in a judicial proceeding in Texas. Texas
has procedural rules that disable the Texas court from
complying with the ICJ judgment here. Are you telling
me that the ICJ judgment empowers either Federal or
State courts to do things which -- which their laws do
not permit them to do?
MR. DONOVAN: If the -- both the President's
determination and the Article 94 obligation which result
in the Avena judgment are Federal law. The President's
determination pursuant to his State court authority and
Article II authority and the -- and the Avena judgment
pursuant to the treaty --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And -- and do you know of
any other Federal law that -- that interferes in the --
in the procedures of State criminal courts, directs them
as to what -- what procedures they have to have?
MR. DONOVAN: The Court has -- when there's
a Federal procedural rule that preempts a State
procedural rule, the Court allows that to preempt as a
Federal rule all the time.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Really?
MR. DONOVAN: That's a function of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where? I don't know what
you're talking about unless you're talking about
constitutional requirements. Of course, those are
binding on the States. But you're saying that the
Federal Government can prescribe State court procedures
and authorize State courts to do things which -- which
the State government does not authorize them to do?
MR. DONOVAN: The Federal Government can
prescribe rules of decision that preempt Federal rules
and require the cases that other -- that would not
otherwise be heard to be heard. That's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, you're -- you're --
as I understand it, in order for you to prevail on that
point, the only -- the only conclusion that has to be
drawn, as I understand it, is that the Texas courts have
subject matter jurisdiction of this kind of -- of order,
and that the bar that Texas is asserting is simply, in
effect, a procedural bar; and, therefore, in order for
this Federal rule to preempt the State bar is not to
give the State courts jurisdiction they don't have, but
to remove a bar to the exercise of their jurisdiction
that State law, absent preemption, would impose; is that
correct?
MR. DONOVAN: That's correct. That's right.
It removes a bar by preempting that bar.
JUSTICE ALITO: You just --
MR. DONOVAN: If I may --
JUSTICE ALITO: You just said that the Avena
decision is Federal law. How is the -- how is the Avena
decision itself a Federal law?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, the Avena decision --
JUSTICE ALITO: It's not a statute. It's
not the Constitution. It's not a statute. It's not
itself a treaty.
MR. DONOVAN: The Avena decision has the
force of Federal law, either by virture of the treaty
obligation to comply with it under Article 94-1, or the
President's determination under his Article II authority
to require -- to determine that the United States should
comply. And by either one of those vehicles, in effect
the judgment becomes the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You didn't mention the --
MR. DONOVAN: -- the instrument by which it
must be complied with.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You didn't mention the
Optional Protocol which is -- is where the United States
gave its promise. It voluntarily accepted this
jurisdiction. It didn't have to.
MR. DONOVAN: Well, that's right. It's the
combined force of the Optional Protocol and the UN
Charter and ICJ statute.
And if I may reserve the rest of my --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why don't --
why don't you take 5 extra minutes? And we'll give you
your rebuttal time.
If the Avena judgment is binding as Federal
law, is it your position, though, that the -- this Court
has no authority to review the content of that Federal
law -- the judgment? Our choice is simply enforce it?
MR. DONOVAN: The relevant Federal law here
is the Federal law that says that the United States will
comply pursuant to its voluntary choice to submit
these -- this --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So we have no --
MR. DONOVAN: I'm sorry -- to the ICJ.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We have no authority
to review the judgment itself, even though the judgment
will have the effect as Federal law of preempting the
State law in this instance?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, you are in effect
applying Federal law in the form of the obligation to
comply. That's different than applying the Vienna
Convention --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Excuse me, but your
position is not that we are applying the obligation to
comply, because we interpreted that in Sanchez-Llamas
and came to the exact same conclusion as the ICG here.
What you're saying is it's different here because the
operative law is the judgment.
MR. DONOVAN: The operative -- it's
different because on the one hand, in Sanchez-Llamoas,
this Court was interpreting the underlying obligation
under the treaty. That is, the immediately applicable
instrument. But, as with respect to any judgment, a
court's -- and this Court has affirmed with respect to
international adjudications, that it will enforce an
international adjudication.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can this court interpret
the meaning of the Avena judgment if it's ambiguous?
For instance, it said that a number of Mexico nationals
have not received a hearing. It didn't say all of them.
And I have a problem, incidentally, because I think
Medellin did receive all the hearing that he's entitled
to under the judgment anyway.
Can we interpret the judgment in that
respect if it's ambiguous, not clear?
MR. DONOVAN: Wel, in this case, the court
would be -- a court applying the Avena judgment either
by virtue of the Optional Protocol in 94-1 and the
President's determination would be in effect applying
Federal law. We think the judgments --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can we interpret the
judgment?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, to the extent necessary
to apply Federal law in the form of a judgment --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And can the President
displace our authority to do that?
MR. DONOVAN: The President would not
displace the Court's authority to interpret a judgment,
no. What the President has said is that the judgment
shall be enforced. That's an independent source of
Federal law under his Article II --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if he determines
that the judgment should not be enforced and this Court
determines, based on our construction of the treaty and
the judgment that it should be enforced, which
determination controls?
MR. DONOVAN: This Court -- to the extent
that this is Federal law, this Court has the ultimate
authority to determine whether or not it should be
complied with. And this Court -- the framers have made
treaties supreme Federal law specification so they could
be judicially enforceable.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if we have the
authority to determine whether the treaty should be
complied with in the face of a presidential
determination, why don't we have the independent
authority to determine whether or not it should be
complied with at a matter of Federal law without regard
to the President's determination?
MR. DONOVAN: You have two separate and
independent sources of authority here. Without the
President's determination, this Court pursuant to the
mandate in the Supremacy Clause would apply the treaty
obligation to comply with the judgment because the
nature of the judgment is such to be enforced in a court
of justice. In this instance, you have an entirely
independent source of authority because the President in
the exercise of his Article II authority has determined
that it's in the paramount interest of the United States
to comply. That becomes a second object.
Of course, it would be a judicial function
to interpret the -- interpret those obligations,
interpret what the President meant. But in this case
it's crystal clear. The Avena judgment is mandatory and
prospective. The President is determined that it be
enforced, and that would be the result even had the
President not acted pursuant to the mandate of the
Supremacy Clause, which makes treatise enforceable
Federal law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Donovan. We'll give you 5 minutes for your
rebuttal.
General Clement.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GEN. PAUL D. CLEMENT.
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES AS
AMICUS CURIAE SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
GENERAL CLEMENT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't agree with the
last statement.
GENERAL CLEMENT: I don't think I do agree
with that and there's a couple of the issues here where
we take a slightly different take. Obviously we feel
the President's determination here that we will comply
with the Avena judgment is a critical element in why
there's an enforceable obligation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We would have no --
according to you, we would have no obligation to enforce
this judgment but for the President's action?
GENERAL CLEMENT: That's correct, Justice
Scalia. Now, obviously, Mr. Donovan and his clients
could get here and ask you to enforce the judgment of it
own force without the President's determination and that
would ultimately be a question for this Court. We of
course --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We could decide to go back,
too. But would we have any authority to do it?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I hope that you wouldn't
and we would be up here saying don't, because if you
look at Article 94 of the UN Charter as a whole, it has
two components and I think it makes clear why the
President's intervening role here is important. 94-1
says that we undertake to comply with our obligations,
with our obligations to comply with the judgment. But
-2 says what happens when a country doesn't do that.
It's a matter for the Security Council. And that, of
course, I think necessarily implies that countries do
retain the option to put themselves out of compliance
with an International Court of Justice judgment.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that would take an
action by somebody in the country.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Exactly, Justice Ginsburg,
and I think that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Here that hasn't -- that
hasn't happened. 94 would never be triggered because we
haven't said we're breaking our promise, we're not going
to comply.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Absolutely, and that's why
we're supporting Mr. Donovan.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait a minute. In order to
get it to the Security Council, you have to take some
affirmative action not to comply? It's just not enough
simply not to comply?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Whether it's an omission
--
or a commission I don't think is the point, Justice
Scalia. My point --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought that was tte
point of Justice Ginsburg's comment, that there had been
no decision not to comply. Don't you need an
affirmative decision to comply?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I didn't take that to mean
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If you don't -- if you
don't comply, you don't comply. But we -- certainly not
-- in that situation here, the President said the United
States agreed that it would submit to the binding
jurisdiction for one case only, and we are bound by that
judgment and I'm going to enforce it.
GENERAL CLEMENT: I agree, i think the
omission-commission --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I know you agree, but it
depends on whether it's up to the President to make that
call. Usually when we have treaties that are not self-
enforcing the judgment of whether that international law
obligation shall be made domestic law is a judgment for
the Congress.
Congress passes a law to enforce the treaty,
and you're telling us that, well, we don't need the
Congress; the President can make a domestic law by
writing a memo to his attorney general.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Scalia, let
me take that in turn. Let me just first close the
discussion of what happened here by saying the reason I
think the commission-omission distinction doesn't have
much purchase here is because the President did make a
determination that we would comply. And I think if you
ask the question who makes the determination as to
whether we're going to default on our international law
obligations or comply, especially vis-a-vis the UN, the
answer to that question is quite clear: It's the
President, and Congress has acquiesced in that with the
UN Participation act at 22 U.S.C. 287.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if the
President had said, we're going to comply with this
judgment, but in a different way than the ICJ
determined. We're going to comply by examining in each
case whether there's already been a determination of
prejudice, and if there has then there's no further
review, but if there hasn't then there'll be further
review. Would that be binding as a matter of Federal
law?
GENERAL CLEMENT: It depends exactly what
form that would take. I think part of the problem --
I'm stumbling with that question --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's the same as a
memorandum just like -- it's a memorandum just like the
one we have here.
GENERAL CLEMENT: And what does it suggest
that is supposed to be done with tne end product of that
determination?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It says that if there
has already been -- the State courts are to determine if
there's already been a determination of prejudice in the
case, and if there has there's to be no further review.
But if they determine there hasn't, there is to be
further review. That's different than the ICJ's
judgment, which suggests there should be a new
determination in every case.
Is that -- does that have the same status as
the memorandum here?
GENERAL CLEMENT: I would say that it
wouldn't -- I would say that it wouldn't, as you
suggest, not fully comply and not fully discharge with
our obligation.
But the extent to which we did and purported
to be doing that under compliance with the judgment, it
would have the same force as providing the rule of
decision, which, to get back to Justice Scalia's
question, especially in a context like this, is not so
unprecedented. It is not materially different from when
the President supplies the rule of decision in the
pre-FSIA practice by making a determination, binding on
the courts State and Federal, that somebody has
sovereign immunity.
JUSTICE ALITO: If we agree with you, would
the effect be that the President can take any treaty
that is ratified on the understanding that it's not
self-executing and execute the treaty and give it force
under domestic law?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, Justice Alito, I don't
think the theory would sweep that broadly, and I think
that --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why would it not?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, first of all,
there's obviously a limiting principle in our theory,
which is to say that the President can't take any action
pursuant to this which is inconsistent with other
constitutional obligations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But he can -- he can
take action that's inconsistent with the determination
of Federal law by this Court?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No, Mr. Chief Justice, I
don't think that's true.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought we
determined in Sanchez-Llamas that the treaty did not
mean what the ICJ said it means in this case.
GENERAL CLEMENT: That's exactly right as to
the Vienna Convention. But this case raises a question,
not about the proper interpretation of the Vienna
Convention, because as you remember we were four-square
with this Court on its interpretation of the Vienna
Convention in Sanchez-Llamas. The relevant treaties
here the Optional Protocol and the UN Charter, and the
question here is not the force of -- of the Avena
judgment as precedent --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you doubt that
the judgment here is based on a determination of the
Vienna Convention that's exactly the opposite of what we
determined last year?
GENERAL CLEMENT: No doubt at all, Mr. Chief
Justice. And we think with respect to anyone but the 51
individuals that are covered by the judgment that of
course this Court has the final word on the
interpretation of the Vienna Convention.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They were not
parties to it. What do you mean, "covered by the
judgment?" Is this some -- some new kind of new kind of
jurisdiction? If you're named in a suit by somebody
else, you somehow acquire rights under that suit? I
don't know of any such principle.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: These people were not
parties to the -- the countries were parties to the
judgment.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Of course the countries
were parties, but these 51 individuals' claims were
specifically adjudicated. Why were they specifically
adjudicate? Because they were effectively -- the claims
were espoused by the Mexican Government. That system --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General, can we just
clarify something which I think is important? Justice
Scalia suggested that this wasn't self-executing. The
State Department with respect to the Vienna Convention
itself told Congress very clearly: You don't have to do
anything; this is self-executing. And then the protocol
says: We the United States agree to accept the
jurisdiction of the ICJ in a certain class of cases.
And Congress ratified that, too. So I don't think that
self-executing has anything to do with this case.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
think that reflects that self-executing is one of those
words that people use to cover a lot of different
meanings; and I think in its most correct sense, you're
right to say that the Vienna Convention is
self-executing.
So there didn't have to be legislation
before Texas and its local officials were obligated to
provide notice in this case; and of course, it's their
default on that treat obligation by the State and local
officials that has us in this predicament in the first
place.
Now, there's another meaning of
"self-executing", or maybe it's a misuse of the term, to
say whether it gives rise to individually enforceable
rights in court without more. And we do take the
position that if the President had done nothing, and
certainly if the President had said we're not going to
comply, we're going to respond to this ICJ judgment the
way we did with the Nicaragua judgment, we don't think
that this judgment would be enforceable as of its own
terms.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But in Nicaragua the
United States took the position from day 1 that the ICJ
had no jurisdiction over the case. So the absence of
jurisdiction is always an exception to the obligation,
even within the United States, to give full faith and
credit. If the court had no jurisdiction, another State
doesn't have to give full faith and credit. But if it
does have jurisdiction, then the obligation kicks in.
GENERAL CLEMENT: That's absolutely right,
and that gets back to the basic principle of reviewing
foreign judgments; and it's not that this Court is
disabled from its judicial role. It's just the judicial
role here is not a straight-up question of the
interpretation of the Vienna Convention. It's a
question of what effect to give the judgment that's been
effectively validated by the executive branch. And
there's two things --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You're arguing it's just
the normal choice of law problem, that even though the
judgment's clearly wrong on the matter of international
law, if the court had judgment -- had jurisdiction to
enter the judgment, we must treat it as binding?
GENERAL CLEMENT: That's -- that's right,
Justice Stevens. As Justice Ginsburg put it --
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's provided that we
regard these individuals as though they're tantamount to
the parties to the judgment itself.
GENERAL CLEMENT: I think that's right, and
certainly our obligation under that judgment as the
executive branch sees it is to these 51 individuals as
their claims have been espoused by --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the President had
reached the contrary conclusion, a hypothetical we put
--
earlier. Supposed the President had told Texas, do not
follow this judgment?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Then I'd be on that side
of the podium, Your Honor. I mean, we would take the
position that the President's authority here is, in his
view of this, is a necessary step; and that seems to be
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I agree that we should
give that determination great weight, but that's
something quite different from saying that he can
displace the authority of this Court on that issue of
law.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Oh, but the -- the
President can't displace the role of this Court. It's
just that the role of this Court in a situation where
there's been a judgment and the executive branch has
viewed that judgment as something we should comply with,
then the role of this Court is limited to deciding
whether there was jurisdiction to issue that judgment in
the first place; and then the secondary role of this
Court would to be to say, does the rule of law embodied
by that judgment violate the Constitution. And that's
why the answer to the Chief Justice's original
hypothetical, about a sentence to 5 years for guards
that had no notice -- that's a different case.
But here there's no colorable argument that
the -- that the judgment here and what's embodied in it
lies outside the power of the Federal Government as a
whole to adjudicate and to put as an obligation on the
States.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Chief Justice, may I
ask a further - may I ask a further question?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Let me try one other
variation to make sure that I understand your argument.
What if the President of the United States had said this
judgment, the Avena judgment, will not be enforced, and
this Court interpreted the Avena judgment as binding, as
providing a rule of decision and a rule of decision
which was entitled to respect by Texas?
Would this Court's authority to make that
declaration and issue a judgment to that effect be
displaced by the President's determination that it would
not be that the Avena judgment would not be enforced?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Of course not, Justice
Souter. That would just be like cases that
unfortunately happen, where we would take a position
that the judgment on its own is not binding and you
would reject that position and that would be the law of
the land.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
GENERAL CLEMENT: We don't suggest that we
wouldn't comply with a judgment of this Court, accepting
Mr. Donovan's first theory that the President's role
here is unimportant.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So --
GENERAL CLEMENT: -- but we do think, we
stick to our view that the President's role here makes
this an easier case and is in our view dispositive.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But it does follow then
from what you've said that if we take exactly the
position that I outlined in my hypo, we could avoid the
entire question of presidential authority.
GENERAL CLEMENT: You could. I think
another route, of course, that would be available to you
is to simply say: Here we have a judgment and we have
the President effectively espousing the judgment, and in
those cases we don't have to worry about what would
happen if we didn't have one or the other.
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's in effect a judicial
version of one of the variants in Justice Jackson's hypo
in the Steel case --
GENERAL CLEMENT: Exactly.
JUSTICE SOUTER: He's talking about the
President and Congress; we're talking about the
President and the Court.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The President espousing the
judgment -- Texas takes the position that this
memorandum has -- has no legal effect; it's a memorandum
from the President to the -- to his attorney general.
It's not a directive to the States. In fact, it even
refers to pursuant to the principles of comity, which
suggests, you know, do it if you want to be cooperative,
don't do it if you don't want to be cooperative.
What is your response to that? And would it
be enough if the President simply wrote a memorandum to
himself saying that, I think this is the way that the --
that the judgment of the ICJ should be enforced? He
doesn't have to tell Texas. He can just tell his
attorney general?
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, Justice Scalia, I
think there's two questions there. I'd like to try to
answer them both. One is, what degree of formality is
required? And we would say that if you look to
historical practice, this is not something where you a
need a high degree of formality. So look to the
executive agreement that this case -- this Court gave
its positive effect to in Belmont and Pink. It was an
exchange of diplomatic letters, nothing more. Look to
the executive determination that this Court give
dispositive effect to, dismissed the lawsuit completely
in Ex Parte Peru. It was a letter from the
undersecretary of state to the attorney general.
Going back to the very beginnings of the
nation, look at the extradition of Thomas Nash. What
was the form of the President's determination we would
extradite him? A letter from the secretary of state to
Judge Bee in South Carolina.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In none of those
cases were we talking about a determination contrary to
a legal determination by this Court concerning the scope
of powers under the treaty.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, with respect --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And in Nash he was being
held under Federal custody. So Nash is just
inapplicable here.
GENERAL CLEMENT: Well, I don't think Nash
is inapplicable, Justice Kennedy; I think it is on all
fours.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Of course, Nash is just a
wonderful speech by Marshall anyway; it's not an
opinion.
GENERAL CLEMENT: But it is a wonderful
speech, and I really do think you should take a look at
that speech. If you want to find it, it's actually
appended to volume 18 of the U.S. Reports. And I think
you should look at that speech before rejecting our
position here, because it really is on all fours in that
there you had a treaty obligation duly approved by the
Senate, and there was a question: Do we need an act of
Congress before the executive can extradite somebody?
And Marshall I think put the law exactly right in that
case when he said: Sure, Congress can make a
determination and if it does, that's the end of matter;
but absent the congressional determination, the
President has the authority to extradite Nash.
Now, that's a situation where somebody's
personal liberty was at stake. So I would say that in
some respects it's a fortiori that in this case what's
at issue is simply recognizing that there's binding
Federal law here, that I think if the Texas court had
recognized that it was binding Federal law, it would
have applied under their own State procedural default
law.
Now, just to finish up, and then I will sit
down, there's a second part of your question, Justice
Scalia, which was addressed to what does the reference
to comity mean. Obviously, from the very beginning in
this case we have taken the position in this Court that
the President's memorandum directs the State courts, in
its words, to give effect to the Avena judgment -- not
decide whether you want to give it effect based on your
State law of comity, but give effect to the judgment.
I think if you actually look at the law of
comity, one of the things that it talks about is comity
is really what the courts should do in the absence of a
controlling view from one of the political branches.
Here the President has made clear, it's clear to me what
the answer is applying comity, which would be to give
effect to the judgment.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
Mr. Cruz, by my count we'll give you an
extra 10 minutes.
ORAL ARGUMENT of R. TED CRUZ,
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. CRUZ: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The entirety of the United States's argument
is predicated on the idea that the President's
two-paragraph memorandum is in and of itself binding
Federal law.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, that's the -- that's
the argument, but your brother the Solicitor General has
conceded that if we take the position in this case that
there is a -- a rule of decision that should be
respected in this Court and, hence, the subject of a
judgment to Texas that, among other things, would
suspend Texas's procedural bar law -- that that would
obviate the question of presidential power.
MR. CRUZ: There's no doubt, if the Court
decided it on the ground that Avena was a binding
judgment, the President's order would be unnecessary.
I would note the United States strenuously
disagrees with that proposition. And, indeed, the
United States explicitly disclaims these treaties as the
source of his authority; in fact, expressly agrees with
this Court's decision in Sanchez-Llamas.
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe you could spend a
minute explaining that, because, as I read the
Constitution, it says all treaties made, or which shall
be made, under the authority of the United States shall
be the supreme law of the land, and the judges in every
State -- I guess it means including Texas --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: -- shall be bound thereby,
anything in the constitution or laws of any State to the
contrary notwithstanding.
Now, as I understand it, the United States
entered into a treaty. That treaty said we will follow
the interpretations and the judgments of the
International Court of Justice in respect to the Vienna
Convention.
And that Court did make a judgment in that
respect, in respect to this client, and it said: Our
judgment is that Texas, or someone in the United States,
must redo the procedural hearing simply to see whether,
in deciding whether there's prejudice or whether there's
a procedural default, full account is taken of the
importance of the Vienna rights. That's what we're
talking about.
It's a judgment of the court. The United
States has promised to follow that judgment of the
court. The Constitution says, since it promised by
treaty, that is the law; and the law binds the States.
That may be simple-minded, but I'd like to
hear what the answer to that, rather, chain of logic is
-- chain of law.
MR. CRUZ: Certainly, Justice Breyer.
Texas, of course, does not dispute that the
Constitution, laws, and treaties are the supreme law of
the land. And Texas statutes must give way to any of
these three.
The President's memorandum is none of those
three.
JUSTICE BREYER: I was not talking --
MR. CRUZ: And, with respect --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- about the President's
memorandum at the moment. And to be -- to disclose
fully what I'm thinking, I'm thinking that maybe if a
president disagreed in such a thing, some kind of a
question -- I'm not sure what -- would be presented.
But whatever "what," I don't worry about
that "what" here, because the President, too, agrees.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Breyer, the -- the answer
to your question is the Avena decision is not a judgment
in the sense we recognize judgment in U.S. courts for
six separate reasons.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, forget whether we
recognize it this way as a judgment. I'm saying we
promised in the treaty to follow that thing. Call it
whatever name you want. We promised to follow that
thing, which I have in front of me -- excerpts of which
-- called an Avena something. And we know what that
says. I'm just looking to see what they call it. They
call it -- well, you tell me what they call it. They
call it -- it is not called the word "judgment." It's
called: "The appropriate reparation in this case
consists of the obligation of the United States to" --
and then they listed it.
So I take it we have promised to carry out
that obligation by treaty.
MR. CRUZ: Except that when the Senate
ratified the Optional Protocol, it made clear that the
Optional Protocol was not self-executing. Indeed, a
point Mr. Donovan made in his argument --
JUSTICE BREYER: What are the words that the
Senate said? Because, when you say "self-executing,"
the easiest way for me to understand that is the
Constitution means what it says.
But there happened to be a few instances
where the nature of the obligation or the intent of the
party makes it very difficult to enforce it as a binding
judgment of a court. That is not this case.
MR. CRUZ: This -- this Court has made clear
for 200 years the Senate can ratify a treaty and yet
leave it not self-executing in the sense that it is not
enforceable in U.S. domestic courts.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, and so if they did
that, now, will you quote the words or give me the
reference where the Senate said: Although we entered
into this and although we ratify it, we're not going to
do it --
MR. CRUZ: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- unless you --
MR. CRUZ: The text of the treaty, itself,
is the first place to look. The text of Article 94 of
the UN Charter provides that the remedy is that the
party may have recourse to the Security Council.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's after there's a
breach, but we -- let's stick to the protocol, the
Optional Protocol -- optional. The protocol says:
We accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the
ICJ. "Jurisdiction" means power. We agree that in
cases of this character, Vienna Convention violation
cases, we submit to the jurisdiction of X tribunal, the
ICJ.
What is there that needs execution about
that? Congress said yes, the United States, the
Executive Branch of the United States decides that it's
a good idea to submit to the -- to the jurisdiction of
the ICJ. We ratify that.
And I don't see anything left for Congress
to do. It said the United States can submit to the
jurisdiction of the ICJ.
MR. CRUZ: "Jurisdiction" in that sense is
not "jurisdiction" in the sense of a U.S. court.
Rather, it is an international obligation that is to be
resolved through political and diplomatic avenues. And
the best example of that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It just means we agree that
the case can go before the court.
MR. CRUZ: Exactly.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And we will be a party
before the court. Isn't there some doubt whether the --
the Senate and the President, together, can -- can take
away from this Court the power and responsibility to
decide what the treaty obligations of the United States
are?
MR. CRUZ: Justice Scalia, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't there some problem
there?
MR. CRUZ: I would go further than some
doubt, and I would say that if the treaty purported to
give the authority to make binding adujudications of
Federal law to any tribunal other than this Court, that
it would violate Article III of the Constitution.
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. Then, are you
saying there are -- there are 112, I believe, treaties
in which we've entered into promises that we're going to
follow what an international tribunal said. Somebody
looked up, I saw on the Internet, that at this moment
there are approximately 116 regulatory entities in the
world where we've entered, or others have entered into,
regimes, where there are various adjudicatory tribunals
of different kinds, mostly commercial, that bind us.
And is your view: All of these thousands,
perhaps, or hundreds, anyway, of treaties are unlawful,
and that our promises are not enforceable, because
there's a constitutional question?
MR. CRUZ: There are hundreds of treaty
obligations that this nation is committed to that are
not self-executing, that don't immediately have force --
JUSTICE BREYER: No. No. I'm thinking that
are self- executing. I'm thinking that there are --
like WTO, NAFTA. We can go down a long list of
instances where the United States has promised to follow
the decisions of tribunals that are not Article III
courts and to put them into effect at once.
MR. CRUZ: If -- if --
JUSTICE BREYER: And I wonder, without
further ado, now, are you saying that all those are
unconstitutional?
MR. CRUZ: In -- in those instances --
JUSTICE BREYER: "Yes" or "no"? I'd
appreciate a "yes" or "no" answer.
MR. CRUZ: No. No, we are not saying that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. CRUZ: In those instances, the bodies in
question are not making definitive interpretations of
what Federal law is. The best illustration of this is
the example Mr. Donovan used in his opening argument
where he said, if the ICJ said to the United States
cease hostilities, that would be directed to the
President.
Now, under Mr. Donovan's argument, that's a
clear directive. The United States is bound by treaty,
and apparently the Federal courts could order the
President to cease hostilities if that was the
instruction of the ICJ.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm sorry. What I don't
understand about this is that I thought that the ICJ in
this case interpreted the treaty. That's not Federal
law. That's the treaty. And it said that the treaty --
MR. CRUZ: The treaty is Federal law,
Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, then I don't understand
you because the WTO interprets a treaty. It interprets
a treaty that binds the United States, just like the ICJ
is interpreting a treaty that binds the United States.
So what's the difference?
MR. CRUZ: The nature of this treaty,
every -- every position -- the United States State
Department at the time it was introduced, the Senate,
and every member of the Senate who discussed it,
understood that the decisions of the ICJ would not have
binding effect in U.S. courts. And that is identical to
the understanding of every single nation --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And what you are saying --
and this has been the law --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask a question,
please?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Go ahead.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's critical to me to
understand the effect of the judgment, and you said
there are six reasons why it's not an ordinary judgment.
I really would like to hear what those reasons are
without interruption from all of my colleagues.
(Laughter.)
MR. CRUZ: I would be happy to provide
those, Justice Stevens. The first reason is because the
Optional Protocol is not self-executing, so it does not
have force in United States courts.
The second reason is, if it was a binding
judgment, that would violate Article III. It would give
to a tribunal other than this Court the authority to
determine Federal law.
The third reason is in Sanchez-Llamas a
majority of this Court rejected this argument and
provided explicitly, quote, "nothing in the structure or
purpose of the ICJ suggests that its interpretations
were intended to be conclusive on our courts.
The fourth reason is the parties in Avena
were the United States and Mexico. Neither is a party
to this proceeding. The argument as to why it is
binding in this case is that Texas is vicariously part
of the United States. That was equally true of Oregon
in Sanchez-Llamas. In both cases, there's one State who
is in some sense one of the parties.
The fifth reason is the Breard case was in
many senses equally a judgment, in that you had the ICJ
issuing an order to this Court concerning Breard,
concerning his specific case, to stop his execution, and
this Court concluded that that could not trump U.S. law.
And the sixth and final reason that it is
not a judgment is to treat it as a binding judgment
would be to cut out the President's authority not to
comply. Everyone agrees, for example in the Nicaragua
case, that the President retains the authority to say
no, we're not going to comply.
Which is why the entire purpose of this
adjudication is not to resolve something finally in a
court of law, but it is rather a diplomatic measure,
much as -- much like when the United States sued Iran
during the hostage crisis. We didn't believe the
Ayatollah was going to listen to the ICJ and suddenly
let the hostages go. We didn't -- we didn't expect that
Iranian courts would give force to it, but it was
helpful diplomatically to bring it to that tribunal to
then put international pressure. That --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then this is consistent
with what you've been explaining to Justice Breyer in
your answer, that for 200 years we have had some
treaties that are very important, but they're not
self-executing; their violation may put us in violation
of international law; but it is for us to determine how
we are going to comply with the international
obligation; and there is no obligation on the part of
the State to comply with that law because it's not
self-executing.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Kennedy, that is exactly
correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: At some point I think in
the course of your argument, we may get back to whether
the Vienna Convention itself is or is not
self-executing. I think the Solicitor General was
correct in saying that that's a difficult word. I think
it is self-executing in that the State has to comply
with it.
I'm not sure that it is self-executing in
that the State has to accept whatever procedural
framework the foreign national demands.
MR. CRUZ: I would agree with the
characterization you suggest, which is that the Vienna
Convention was self-executing in the sense that it
didn't require legislation to go into effect, but it was
not self-executing in the sense that it provided
judicially cognizable rights.
But let me add a caveat to that, which is in
both Breard and Sanchez-Llamas, this Court assumed the
Vienna Convention created individual rights, and
although Texas maintains that it did not create
individual rights and the United States maintains that
it did not create individual rights, we don't have to
win on that proposition to prevail in this case. Even
assuming it created individual rights in this case,
Medellin defaulted on that claim and this Court held
with Sanchez-Llamas that procedural default is
consistent with the treaty.
And the real question here in this case,
particularly with respect to the President's order, is
whether the Optional Protocol is self-executing, the
decision of the Avena court, or, as a subsequent matter,
whether the President has some sort of independent
authority to make Federal law.
And in this respect --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, I still -- I would
like to get back to that Optional Protocol. It -- was
it submission to jurisdiction? My understanding is that
any two parties that can agree, can have a formed
selection clause, can agree that we accept the authority
of this tribunal, and then it follows from that that if
you accept their authority to adjudicate, you are bound
to follow its decisions. And that that seems to be
understood in the world community because, is it not so
that even though there are cases like Nicaragua and
Iran, most ICJ judgments are indeed complied with by the
nations that agree to submit to the jurisdiction of that
tribunal?
MR. CRUZ: Justice Ginsburg, that is correct
as a political and diplomatic matter, but in my judgment
it speaks volumes that of the 166 nations that signed on
to the Vienna Convention and of the 50 nations that
signed on to the Optional Protocol, zero -- not a single
nation -- treats ICJ judgments as binding in their
domestic courts.
What Petitioners are arguing here is for an
interpretation of this treaty that no other nation
gives. And in fact, if I found myself in the nation of
Mexico and arrested without consular notification, I
could not raise this claim in Mexico. The Mexican
courts would not treat it as a defense to my criminal
prosecution.
And so --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you have a case that
says that? A Mexican case that says that?
MR. CRUZ: I do not have a case that says
that, but neither Petitioner nor their many amici have
been able to point to a single instance.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Maybe it hasn't come up.
MR. CRUZ: Given that these treaties are
four decades old, that that speaks volumes that no -- no
nation has accorded binding force to ICJ --
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe these other nations
have an inquisitorial system where an investigating
judge collects a dossier and the fact is noted in the
dossier and the investigating judge and the prosecution
give it such weight as it's entitled to.
MR. CRUZ: Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: You know that doesn't
happen?
MR. CRUZ: Justice Breyer, I -- I think you
could well be right, but I think that also speaks to the
peculiar nature of this. Procedural default only --
JUSTICE BREYER: In an --
MR. CRUZ: -- matters in system like the
United States' where habeas allows a second bite at the
apple. Most other countries don't allow criminal
defendants to relitigate criminal matters, in which case
procedural default matters. The other countries simply
deny it altogether.
JUSTICE BREYER: Of course it matters. But
the -- of course it matters. That's why when I read the
-- the ICJ opinion, I read it as saying that they're not
telling you to set aside a procedural default rule.
What they've asked you to do is to provide, by means of
the United States' own choosing, review and
reconsideration of the convictions and sentences by
taking account of the violation of rights.
And throughout they ask -- when you decided
whether the person was really prejudiced, when you
decided whether there had been forfeiture of the rights,
at that time, did you ask yourself that the reason he
might not have raised them was because he knew nothing
about them and his lawyer knew nothing about them,
because nobody ever told either about them? In which
case there might be a causal connection.
As I read it, the ICJ left all that up to
you but just asked you, please, look at it again having
read our opinion and keeping this in mind.
MR. CRUZ: But the ICJ's decision -- I think
your question goes back to Justice Ginsburg's question
about the effect of an ICJ decision.
The legal -- legal adviser to the State
Department told the Senate, when it was ratifying the UN
Charter, that decisions of the ICJ are "a moral
obligation" and there is "no provision" for the
enforcement of such decisions. And one fascinating
example of this is the entire debate over the Connally
Amendment. One can look in the entire course of
legislative history, and it's an argument back and forth
about whether it is wise to require the United States to
cast a veto in the Security Council over an attempt to
enforce an ICJ. And not a single senator of the entire
U.S. Senate suggested the proposition that ICJ decisions
might be independently enforceable. Nobody discussing
that understood it that way.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Once again, there is a
constitutional problem, is there not, if they are
automatically enforceable?
MR. CRUZ: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That is conferring upon the
ICJ the responsibility to decide the meaning of a United
States treaty which is United States law.
MR. CRUZ: And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm rather jealous of that
power.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think it belongs in this
Court. And when you have a non-self-executing treaty,
there is no problem.
It becomes U.S. law when the Senate and the
House pass a law which the president -- it doesn't
become U.S. law because the President writes a
memorandum to his Attorney General, but it does become
U.S. law when a law is enacted.
MR. CRUZ: And that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That solves the
constitutional problem, but in the situation we're
talking about here, I don't know on what basis we can
allow some international court to decide what is the
responsibility of this Court, which is the meaning of
the United States law.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Scalia, that's absolutely
correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: And how does the WTO
differ?
MR. CRUZ: The imperative --
JUSTICE BREYER: How does the WTO and NAFTA
and all our trade agreements differ?
MR. CRUZ: The WTO and NAFTA -- I mean NAFTA
is not a treaty. It's a congressional agreement, but it
is also adjudicating specific factual questions that
deal with the application of facts to a particular
circumstance. It's not interpreting the treaty and
purporting to bind the United States on this is what the
underlying Federal law means.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And the United States
apparently accepts the verdict of those --
MR. CRUZ: Right. Right. And it could
choose not to.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You have three different
things that you have to tell us about today: That the
President's authority, the effect of the ICJ, and -- and
the Avena judgment, and ultimately, the force of the
Vienna Convention itself.
And the only question I have that I need
your help with is as to the last, and I hope that it
doesn't interrupt the train of your argument.
I think the ICJ -- pardon me, the Vienna
Convention is self-executing, in that it requires the
States to conform to the consular notification
provision.
MR. CRUZ: And we don't disagree with that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose you have a judge
who has control over a defendant who's being held in
custody pending trial, and the defendant says I want to
see my -- my foreign counsel. The judge says no. Can
you mandate that -- assuming State procedures allow him
in, couldn't you mandate that judge to require him to
allow the notification to take place?
MR. CRUZ: The consequence of the argument
that it doesn't create individual rights would mean that
that individual defendant could not raise it in that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You see where I'm going?
MR. CRUZ: Yes.
And so in that circumstance, it would mean,
if a judge declined to comply with that obligation, the
individual defendant would not have an appealable legal
error.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If I thought he did, would
I still have to rule against you?
MR. CRUZ: No, not at all. In fact, just as
this Court did in Breard and Sanchez-Llamas, it assumes
that the Vienna Convention created individual rights.
And so we don't need to prevail on that to reach the
identical outcome. Because even assuming we are
incorrect concerning individual rights, the
Sanchez-Llamas holding is that procedural default
respects those rights just as fully as it respects
constitutional rights.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could I make a distinction
between failing to let him see the counsel at all in my
hypothetical and a demand that the procedural framework
be altered? Isn't there a distinction between those two
cases, do you think?
MR. CRUZ: I think that's right. I think
also in your hypothetical, your hypothetical assumes a -
a deliberate violation of the law which no one suggests
here rather than inadvertence. And inadvertence
complied with, as you suggested earlier, no prejudice
whatever so. And there has -- both the Federal and
State courts that looked at this concluded that there
was no even arguable prejudice from the violation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Cruz --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Cruz, could I go back
to your discussion of whether this is a judgment or not?
It seems to me some of your reasons actually go to
whether the -- whether it was a correct interpretation
of the treaty. And if it were a judgment, would you
agree that this Court would have to accept it, even if
this Court disagreed with its legal analysis?
--
MR. CRUZ: Justice Stevens, I would not,
because I do not believe consistent with Article III
this Court's authority can be given away by treaty.
JUSTICE STEVENS: How is it given away to a
treaty if it just says one State court must honor a
judgment of a sister State even if it thinks it's dead
wrong? Is it giving away its judicial authority by
obeying the Full Faith and Credit Clause?
MR. CRUZ: That is provided by the
Constitution. And in this instance, giving any other
entity, the authority to make a conclusive determination
of Federal law, that goes to the heart of the Article
III power.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you saying that even
JUSTICE STEVENS: Even if it was agreed by
treaty to give it conclusive effect?
MR. CRUZ: If the Senate agreed that this
was self-executing, then you would have the height of
the Presidency and Congress working together. But even
in that situation, I would submit as a matter of
separation of powers, they could not give this Court's
essential role, under Marbury, to say what the law is to
another body.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then we couldn't have a
treaty with another country on the mutual recognition
and enforcement of judgment, because the other country
might get it wrong, we might disagree with its
interpretation of the law, and, therefore, unlike the
rest of the world, the United States can't get the
advantage of a reciprocal guarantee that our judgments
will be respected, and in turn we will respect your
judgment.
MR. CRUZ: In enforcing foreign judgments,
the foreign court is not purporting to make a definitive
determination of U.S. law.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It may be that if the
case turns on a question of U.S. law, and we may think,
as many think about the ICJ, that they got that question
wrong. Still, it's always been if you don't look behind
the judgment. You say in the next case I'm certainly
not going to apply that wrong interpretation. But here
I'm bound by a judgment.
And that's why I questioned your use -- your
heavy use of Sanchez-Llamas. I agreed with the court in
that case because it was a question of interpretation.
We don't have to agree with the ICJ. We were not faced
with a decision, a binding adjudication, which we accept
for that case only. So there's a difference between
Sanchez-Llamas and this case that you appear not to
recognize in your brief.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Ginsburg, it has been the
consistent position of the United States for over four
decades from the day this treaty was ratified that the
Optional Protocol was not self-executing, was not
enforceable in U.S. courts. So it is not a judgment
that has -- were this Court to treat it as -- as a
judgment, it would be making that treaty self-executing.
And the power to transform a non- --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought you said
that -- oh, you said that this is a matter of goodwill
or that most ICJ judgments -- ICJ judgments, they're not
binding but people comply -- nations comply with them as
a matter of goodwill?
MR. CRUZ: Justice Ginsburg, that's exactly
correct. And the President had a number of
constitutional means at his disposal to comply, had he
chosen. The -- but --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What could -- other
than -- I mean, the most logical place to have this go
on is the court that rendered the judgment. It's always
better for the court that rendered the judgment than
some foreign court or another State court.
So what else could the President do? The
ICJ did say U.S., as a matter of your own choosing. And
the President chose the most logical forum, but what
else could he have done?
MR. CRUZ: There are three avenues that the
President could have chosen that would have been
constitutional. The first of which he could have gone
to Congress and proposed a statute amending the AEDPA to
allow Federal habeas review.
The second is he could have negotiated a
treaty, submitted it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Let's start with the
first one. Why should this case be in Federal court?
It's a state judgment that's in question.
MR. CRUZ: This Court has made clear that
the Federal Government cannot expand the jurisdiction of
the State courts. There is a State --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you can have the
Federal court overseeing the State court and telling the
State what to do? That seems to me practically much
more of an encroachment on State authority than to say,
State courts, you do it.
MR. CRUZ: Well, and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- or to say Federal
courts, you do it.
MR. CRUZ: A corollary --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A lot of people think
that's exactly right, that really we expanded Federal
habeas jurisdiction quite improperly. But it happens
every day, doesn't it?
MR. CRUZ: It does. And a corollary to this
is if Congress could pass a statute creating a Federal
right to review, and that Federal right to review under
the principles of Testa versus Katt would have to be
respected in the State court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Who would be doing the
review?
MR. CRUZ: Well, if it were a Federal right
to review, under Testa versus Katt, both the State and
Federal courts would give review. Interestingly enough,
if it were a new Federal right, it would clear the
jurisdictional bar because the Texas jurisdictional bar
allows an exception for a new law. So if Congress
passed a new law that would be jurisdiction to raise --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: A law passed by Congress
saying Texas dispense with your procedural bar rules?
MR. CRUZ: A law passed by Congress saying
in order to give effect to the Avena judgments the 51
Mexican nationals at issue shall be entitled to review
and reconsideration of whether there was prejudice from
the denial of the Vienna Convention. That law would be
respected equally.
I would suggest that Testa versus Katt,
which Petitioner uses, is a case which powerfully
supports Texas, because the principle of Testa versus
Katt was there is one Federal law that must be applied
equally in Federal courts and State courts. And the
State courts are not at liberty to ignore Federal law.
This is a very curious assertion of
presidential power. Because the presidential power is
not directed at the Federal courts. It is directed at
the State courts,and the State courts alone. And I
would submit is the only instance I'm aware of, of a
Federal mandate that falls only on the states, singles
out the states, and commandeers those judges.
In over 200 years of our nation's history
I'm not aware of any other directive from the President
directly to the State courts and State judges.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So what's absent in your
view is Congress. You say that all of this could have
been done --
MR. CRUZ: Absolutely --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- and Texas could have
been ordered, but the President doesn't have the
authority to do it just on the basis of the ICJ,
MR. CRUZ: And Justice Ginsburg, I think a
powerful parallel is the decision of this Court last
near in Hamdan. In Hamdan the President was at the
height of his war powers authority. And nonetheless,
this Court concluded that he could not act contrary to
the will of Congress.
Here his interests are far less than
prosecuting war, and yet he is asserting the authority
to go it alone, despite a consistent stream of
congressional disapproval, both in ratifying these
treaties and saying they're not self-executing and also
in passing the AEDPA.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The not self-executing in
the position of the State Department, wasn't there -- in
the parallel proceedings in Oklahoma, wasn't there a
letter from the current -- the then current legal
adviser telling Oklahoma that this is a judgment that's
binding on all courts in the United States, State and
Federal, and that the President has directed Oklahoma to
comply? I think that was sent both to the governor and
the other officials.
MR. CRUZ: This letter was sent out to all
affected States, but it is -- the United States is quite
candid in what they are doing. The department to its
credit describes it as "unprecedented," and it goes
further, if I may read a portion of page 5 of the memo,
or memo page 6, rather: The President's memorandum is
sufficient to create a binding legal rule.
The department is not hiding what they're
arguing. They're not arguing the treaties require it.
They're not arguing any statutes requiring it. They're
saying a two-paragraph memorandum from the President to
a member of the cabinet is binding Federal law.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Which -- which letter are
you quoting? Are you quoting --
MR. CRUZ: I'm quoting the United States'
brief in this proceeding, page 6 of the brief. On page
it also describes the President's power as
"establishing binding rules of decisions that preempt
contrary State law."
If that is correct, there is no reason why
the President could not have directed his memorandum to
the Federal district courts or even to this Court, and
that is an extraordinarily broad power to be asserted on
behalf of the executive.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Cruz, you have
frequently emphasized the non-self-executing character
of the optional protocol.
Is there any rule, any positive rule in
existence today either of international law or domestic
law that precludes this Court from being the
implementing authority as opposed to the executive or
the executive and the Senate?
MR. CRUZ: This Court has the final
authority to determine what Federal law is, and so if
this Court determines that that's what the treaty
requires, then that be federal law. Now I would suggest
that would require overruling --
JUSTICE SOUTER: These treaties including
the optional protocol.
MR. CRUZ: In my judgment, if the Court
reached that conclusion it would be error. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you misunderstood.
I thought he was asking whether if it is -- assuming it
is not self-executing, this Court can execute it.
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's right. Yeah.
MR. CRUZ: In my judgment it would be wholly
illegitimate for the Court to do so.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why?
MR. CRUZ: Because --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What's the rule -- what is
the positive rule of international and domestic law that
precludes it?
MR. CRUZ: The rule is a constitutional
rule, that the President makes treaties the Senate
advises and consents. And the limitation --
JUSTICE SOUTER: They've made the treaty.
We have got the optional protocol. Whatever the
optional protocol means is Federal law.
MR. CRUZ: The limitations the Senate put on
are it as much a part of the treaty as the treaty
itself, and the consequences --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you're -- my point is,
my -- I'm accepting as premise of the question the
limitation which you assert, i.e., non-self-executing;
and my question is, may the execution, if you will, be
made by this Court? Is there an independent rule that
precludes this Court from that role?
MR. CRUZ: If this Court did so, in my
judgment it would be usurping the role of Congress. All
right? Because the essence of the decision --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't mean to be
disrespectful of your judgment but what do you base it
on -- tradition?
MR. CRUZ: The essence of the decision by
the Senate to say something is non-self-executing is to
say if something in this treaty is going to change U.S.
domestic law, you have to come back to us.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You're saying by -- by
non-self-executing, they mean you have to come back to
us? The terms --
MR. CRUZ: That's exactly what it means. If
you want to change U.S. law, come to Congress.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They mean it does not
automatically become part of United States law.
MR. CRUZ: Indeed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it follows from that,
that you have to change United States law?
MR. CRUZ: Exactly.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it is not the function
of this Court to change United States law.
MR. CRUZ: That's precisely correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: If you assume it is
self-executing, just for one second, I'd like to find
out -- you said that the President was unreasonable in a
sense of saying Texas do that over again --
I assume the reason he asked Texas to have
the hearing is because the ICJ knew -- and I guess maybe
he knew -- that the only hearing they'd had on this
subject -- as far as I can see; I looked at it, there
didn't seem to be any evidence in respect to their
finding that there was no prejudice. They said well, he
had a lawyer, but that lawyer later got into quite a lot
of trouble, I think.
MR. CRUZ: He had two lawyers.
JUSTICE BREYER: He had two lawyers. One
got into trouble, and the other didn't?
MR. CRUZ: And they vigorously defended him.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, they vigorously
defended him.
MR. CRUZ: The only argument --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. Fine. My point is
there's no evidence of that.
MR. CRUZ: With respect, Justice Breyer,
there actually is.
JUSTICE BREYER: There is? In the first
habeas hearing?
MR. CRUZ: The evidence there is --
JUSTICE BREYER: I read the whole thing.
MR. CRUZ: In our appendix there is an
affidavit from the Mexican Consulate. Once the Mexican
Consulate started assisting Medellin, they prepared an
affidavit, and the affidavit said if we had been
contacted, we would have told you not to confess; and we
would have told you to get a lawyer. The problem with
that is Medellin confessed within about three hours of
being arrested, and even the ICJ in Avena said that
notification had to occur within 72 hours.
JUSTICE BREYER: What I'm thinking of is the
evidence at the first habeas hearing that led the
district judge to reach his conclusion that there was no
prejudice and that the procedural default was not
excused -- it's in that hearing that I didn't see what
that finding was based on; and I suppose the reason that
the President wanted Texas to do it is it would be
easiest for Texas to go back to that.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Breyer -- it was part of
the State court record, and it was the basis for saying
there was no prejudice.
JUSTICE BREYER: It was in the first
hearing.
MR. CRUZ: I believe it was. And it's
included in our appendix four.
JUSTICE BREYER: So you think there was no
reason for the ICJ to ask the President --
MR. CRUZ: It is difficult to explain.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Was the basis for
the determination of no prejudice the fact that the
Petitioner in this case had received full Miranda
warnings, which went beyond what the consulate was going
to tell him?
MR. CRUZ: That is completely correct, and
he waived those in writing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And he had lived in this
country for how long?
MR. CRUZ: Practically his entire life.
Wrote and read English and was educated in American
public schools.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what did happen to the
lawyers Texas gave him?
MR. CRUZ: Both of them vigorously defended
him, and in Medellin we devoted several pages of our
brief to going through in considerable detail the many
motions they filed. It was a vigorous defense, and yet
they failed to raise this particular --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And so they have -- the
Texas Court of Criminal Appeals didn't adopt a simple
solution of the case, to say He got all the protection;
that there's no prejudice and therefore there's no
treaty violation.
MR. CRUZ: The Texas Court of Criminal
Appeals didn't have it as option to say, it would have
been easier, one might say, to just go along. The
President is asking you to do this, make the whole thing
go away; just go along. The problem is the Texas Court
of Criminal Appeals had a statute, and a statute that
divested of jurisdiction unless there is new Federal
law.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but that statute
really would not have divested -- if I understand he
Texas law correctly -- if you did agree -- which you
don't, I know -- that there was a preexisting Federal
obligation to honor judgments of the ICJ, then under
Testa v Katt principle and Howlett opinion and others,
the Texas court would have had jurisdiction.
MR. CRUZ: Although that holding would be, I
would suggest, in considerable tension if not directly
contrary to Sanchez-Llamas.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, but Sanchez-Llamas
doesn't deal with the judgment. And It says a separate
Federal obligation --
MR. CRUZ: Oregon is as much a part of the
United States as Texas.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then I think the Texas --
there would be jurisdiction in the Texas court to
entertain this claim. I think you -- you agree with
that?
MR. CRUZ: I do not, because it has to be a
new claim, and if this were a judgment, the judgment --
PLAINTIFF'S CO-COUNSEL: It would be a new
claim based on a new judgment which was after Sanchez --
the Chief Justice's opinion in that case.
MR. CRUZ: Let me point out one consequence
of -- of the President's assertion of authority.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I'm -- you just
-- for -- putting the President's assertion to one side,
it seems to me if you did agree -- and I know you
vigorously don't -- that there were a pre-existing
Federal obligation -- an obligation of the United States
to respect the judgment of the ICJ, which is -- which we
think is wrong as a matter of international law; we have
previously construed the treaties to the contrary -- but
if there were an independent obligation to expect --
Federal obligation -- respect that judgment, it seems to
me that that obligation could be enforced in Federal
court.
MR. CRUZ: I don't disagree with that,
Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You don't.
MR. CRUZ: If -- although I disagree with
the premise.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. CRUZ: But if the premise were true, I
don't disagree with the conclusion.
The statute allows jurisdiction where there
is a new legal basis that was not previously
availability. The only two potential sources of that
are Avena, which we submit is a non-self-executing
international law obligation, or the President's order;
and, in fact, it is worth underscoring if the United
States' theory is correct, there's no reason why the
President needed to wait for a decision from the ICJ.
If the President has the authority to take a
non-self-executive international law treaty and order it
to be implemented and set aside any State law to the
contrary --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, there is. We have
interpreted the law, and we have said as far as what
Article 36 means, we disagree with the ICJ.
MR. CRUZ: I agree with you, Justice
Ginsburg, but the United States does not. The United
States believes that the President has the authority to
make decisions and to implement treaties -- an
independent authority to create new binding law, even
though the obligation is not self-executing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: How many parties to
Avena -- there were 51 -- are being held in the State of
Texas?
MR. CRUZ: There are 51. There were 15 in
the State of Texas. There are now 14 because 1 was
under the age of 18, so is now off of death row; 51 in 9
States across the country.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And Oklahoma has taken
the opposite position, and they -- they did give the
review and reconsideration?
MR. CRUZ: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And has any other State
acted?
MR. CRUZ: Not that we're aware of, no.
There have -- the 51 -- my understanding is it's down to
. For various reasons these individuals are not on
death row but, other than Oklahoma, not related to the
Avena decision.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the fact that
they're on -- on death row isn't at all significant
because the judgment of the ICJ purports to vacate the
convictions as well; isn't that correct?
MR. CRUZ: That's exactly right; and, in
fact, in Paragraph 34 of Avena it asserted the authority
to annul U.S. criminal convictions. So some of the
hypotheticals coming from bench, under the ICJ --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the ICJ flatly
refused Mexican -- Mexico said ICJ annulled the
judgment. The ICJ said no, and it didn't vacate it,
either. It just said that it did a reconsideration to
see whether there was prejudice.
MR. CRUZ: Justice Ginsburg, you're correct
they did not order the annulment. But in paragraph 34
they asserted they could order the annulment. They
simply were choosing --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm looking at page
--
MR. CRUZ: -- not to in this case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm looking at page
6. They require review and reconsideration of the
conviction and sentence.
MR. CRUZ: That's correct. So it is not
just the sentence; and, in fact, they, despite the fact
that their statute does not allow them to have precedent
in any other cases, they said in paragraph 151:
The fact that the Court's ruling concerned
only Mexican nationals cannot be taken to imply the
conclusion reached in the present judgment do not apply
to other foreign nationals finding themselves in
situations. They were in an unprecedented act recording
the authority to bind U. S. Courts in a way, to the best
of my knowledge, no --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Their very own statute,
the statute setting up the ICJ, makes it clear that is
not the case. They can issue a binding judgment in the
particular case. It has no precedential effect for
other cases, not even within the ICJ.
MR. CRUZ: But they can issue a decision
that can be enforced by the Security Council. And had
they issued --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Has that ever happened?
MR. CRUZ: It has gone -- for example, in
the Nicaragua case, there was an effort to take it to
the Security Council there.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the U.S. exercised
its veto.
MR. CRUZ: Correct. And that's part of a
diplomatic treaty, where it's between nations is -- is
that it is not binding in the sense that the domestic
courts will enforce it.
Indeed, if the ICJ had asserted the power it
claimed to annul U.S. convictions, under the U.S.'s
theory the President presumably could have issued an
order effectively pardoning State prisoners despite the
fact that the Constitution limits its pardon authority
to Federal crimes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Cruz.
Mr. Donovan, you have five minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT BY DONALD F. DONOVAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. DONOVAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
First, there is nothing in the ratification
history that suggests that Avena made any assumptions
about whether or not the Optional Protocol would be
self-executing. The Connally Amendment went to the
compulsory jurisdiction of the ICJ, and the discussion
to which Texas has referred is entirely about the
international ramifications.
In fact, the Senate specifically declined to
apply the Connally Amendment to the Optional Protocol.
So that gets to the question that we have been
discussing here, which is:
What is the scope of the enforceability of
an ICJ judgment? There are obviously constraints to
that. One is illustrated by the Chief Justice's
hypothetical. That is, there are affirmative
constraints in the Constitution, itself.
The second is illustrated by a point I made,
but Mr. Cruz misunderstood, which is that the nature of
the obligation emanating from the judgment is directed
at a constitutional branch such as the obligation to
enforce an active statute. Obviously, that is not
enforceable in court.
If the nature of the obligation is to cease
hostilities, that is obviously directed to the President
and is not enforceable in court. And that's illustrated
by the Nicaragua case in which the ICJ issued a
judgment. Congress passed a statute that said it wasn't
going to comply; and the President said he wasn't going
to comply.
That, in turn, applies to the third
constraint, which is the political constraint, itself.
The Nicaragua case illustrates that if the ICJ issues a
judgment that the United States does not want to comply
with, Congress can pass a statute to say we repudiate
the obligation.
So the obligations that we are talking about
here in which the ICJ judgment would be enforceable by
an individual fall squarely in the class of cases that
this Court has decided for two centuries where an
individual has a right conferred by the statute.
And he walked into a court, and he asked
that court to enforce that right, and he invokes that
right in -- as in the Caffa core case, the Roucher case,
cases going back to the founding.
And this Court has said when the right is of
a nature to be enforced in a court of justice, this
Court will enforce it. And that is all Mr. Medellin is
asserting here: The right to enforce a right that is
eminently suitable for judicial enforcement because it
goes to the judicial process, itself.
The second point with respect to Article
III: It cannot be the case that this Court can never
enforce -- gives away its Article III authority when
somebody else enforces a judgment. We know from the
Comegys and the Abba cases that we have cited that the
Court has in fact said that when the U.S. submits a case
to international adjudication that international
adjudication is binding and it's not reexaminable in a
U.S. court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I read the Comegys
case, however you say it, to be for the exact opposite
proposition. There they were saying, this is an
international arbitration, there's no reason to go
behind it.
But the question of whether or not that
arbitration is binding in the bankruptcy proceeding that
was at issue there was very much one for the U.S.
Supreme Court to make.
MR. DONOVAN: But that's because that was
not part of what the court had actually decided, or
rather that the international adjudication had actually
decided. You think about, if the proposition is that
nobody else but an Article III court can decide a
Federal question, this Court could not have decided
Mitsubishi. In Mitsubishi the Court sent Federal
statute antitrust claims to an arbitration panel in
Tokyo and said that the result would be everyone
forcible so long as the panel actually took cognizance
of the claim and actually decided it.
This Court if it evaluated the claim that
Mr. Medellin is entitled to review and reconsideration
as a result of the treaty obligation under 94-1 and the
President's determination that that treaty obligation
will be given effect, this Court would be performing a
supremely judicial function, that is it would be
interpreting and applying Federal law in the form of a
statute, which is exactly what the Supremacy Clause
requests the Court to do.
With respect to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Put precisely, it would be
making it Federal law and then applying it. If you
assume it's not self-executing, somebody has to make it
to domestic law. Now, Congress can obviously do it by
passing a law.
But you're saying the Court can do it, can
make it dmestic law and then enforce it.
MR. DONOVAN: That assumes thatit is not
self-executing, yes. But the whole question here is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, yes, ys.
MR. DONOVAN: -- when we're talking about
self-executing here we're saying what branch is the
obligation directed to. And what the Court has said
time and time again is when the obligation is of a
nature to be enforced in a court of justice it is
directed to the judicial authority.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then what you are saying if
I understand you is that Justice Scalia was wrong when
he said that would be making it Federal law. I think
you were saying that would be a -- the branch that was
responsible for determining how to execute, i.e., to
apply, Federal law. Is that your point?
MR. DONOVAN: That's exactly right. The
thing that makes the treaty Federal law is not the
Court; it's the Supremacy Clause, which makes it supreme
Federal law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What is the
authority -- I get back to where I started. I
understood you to concede that we would have authority
to construe the judgment if it provided, for example,
for a punitive sanction against the officers. What is
the basis under your theory for that authority?
MR. DONOVAN: Well, it's settled that a
treaty cannot contravene an affirmative constitutional
obligation. There would be -- if there was -- if the
ICJ --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it can -- it can
contravene our interpretation of the treaty as a matter
of Federal law.
MR. DONOVAN: There are two different treaty
obligations. There's a treaty obligation under the
Vienna Convention, which this court has now
dispositively interpreted, and there's a treaty
obligation to comply. And it's the very nature of an
obligation to put a dispute to a third party that you
may not agree with the result, and that does not in any
way compromise this Court's Article III authority to
rest that judgment on an obligation committed to by the
political branches, three treaties ratified by the
President and Senate that said when this country commits
itself to do something we're going to do it. Now we
have the President of the United States saying that it's
in the paramount interests of the United States for
purposes of enforcing --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do we have the
authority to interpret the judgment of the ICJ?
MR. DONOVAN: The courts in enforcing that
judgment would. Of course that would be part of the
judicial enterprise. The applicable instrument is now
the Avena judgment, pursuant to the treaties and the
President's determination, independent sources. In
applying that judgment, there may well be interpretive
questions because the Avena judgment lays down standards
and requires obligations and that would be part of the
judicial enterprise.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So we have the
authority to interpret it, we have the authority to
construe whether it's carry to the Constitution, but we
do not the authority to consider whether it's consistent
with Federal law?
MR. DONOVAN: That's right, because that's
the very nature of enforcing a judgment: You do not
re-examine the merits. You take the judgment and you
enforce the judgment. And it's the judicial enterprise
to construe what that -- it may be a question about
construing that -- what that instrument requires, what
that judgment requires. But it's the judicial function
in enforcing that judgment that calls upon this Article
-- the Court's Article III authority, and does not in
any way compromise it, which in turn goes to the
question about what the judgment requires. It requires
prospective review and reconsideration. The Texas court
didn't suggest that Mr. Medellin had received review and
reconsideration. The ICJ made it clear that it had to
be prospective, and one of the fundamental reasons for
that is because the judgment says that the treaty rights
have to be determined on it own. Mr. Medellin is
entitled to show that the violation of the treaty
standing on its own two feet and not filtered through a
constitutional right affected -- that he is entitled to
show prejudicie.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Donovan.
MR. DONOVAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the case in the
