IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ARIZONA, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-1122
LEMON MONTREA JOHNSON. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 9, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOSEPH L. PARKHURST, ESQ., Assistant Attorney General,
Tucson, Ariz.; on behalf of the Petitioner.
TOBY J. HEYTENS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioner.
ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JOSEPH L. PARKHURST, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
TOBY J. HEYTENS, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioner 19
ANDREW J. PINCUS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOSEPH L. PARKHURST, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 60
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 07-1122, Arizona v.
Johnson.
Mr. Parkhurst.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOSEPH L. PARKHURST
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. PARKHURST: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Petitioner asks that this Court apply the
principles established in Pennsylvania v. Mimms to
uphold the pat-down search of a vehicle passenger seized
during a lawful traffic stop. Mimms established that a
traffic stop satisfies Terry's first prong as to
suspicion of criminal activity, and it also established
that a pat down of a driver is justified if the officer
has a reasonable suspicion that the driver is armed and
dangerous.
Fourth Amendment searches must be
reasonable, and the pat down in this case was
reasonable. And it is common -- it's a commonsense
principle that the principles in Mimms also apply to
passengers in the context of a traffic stop.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I didn't hear your first
-- in your opening. Did you say that Mimms established
that it's likely that he's armed and dangerous? I
missed that.
MR. PARKHURST: No, no. That's not what I'm
saying --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm sure it wasn't, but I
missed what you said on that point.
MR. PARKHURST: What I said is that Mimms
establishes that a pat down is justified in the context
of a traffic stop if the officer believes that the
driver is armed and dangerous.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Thank you.
MR. PARKHURST: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you agree that
there's a point in an interaction that begins with a
traffic stop, begins with a seizure, at which the nature
of that interaction is changed so that it's no longer --
so that it becomes a consensual interaction?
MR. PARKHURST: That -- yes, Chief Justice.
That can happen in a traffic stop. There's no evidence
in this particular case that there was any kind of
evolution to a consensual encounter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe I should
rephrase the question. Do you agree that it would be
unconstitutional for an officer to conduct a pat down
after an initial seizure while that same interaction
still continues?
MR. PARKHURST: No, I disagree with that,
Your Honor. An officer can conduct a pat down any time
it is reasonable in light of factors that the officer
may notice about the individual. If the individual
presents an immediate danger to the officer or to the
public, a pat down may be reasonable under the broad
Fourth Amendment principles, even if this happens to be
a consensual encounter or a --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So in your view, or I
suppose the government's view -- well, I'll let the
government argue for itself. In your view, if the
officer is just looking for the man in the gray overcoat
and he stops someone on the street and says, have you
seen a man with a gray overcoat, and the person says,
well, I saw something like that, can he just suddenly
spin him around and pat, and pat that person?
MR. PARKHURST: If the officer possesses
articulable facts that this person is immediately
dangerous to that officer.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then you're doing away
with the first Terry factor altogether. Do you think
all you need is reasonable suspicion that the person is
armed and dangerous? What happened to the reasonable
suspicion that a crime has just been committed or is in
the course of being committed?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, the first prong of the
Terry analysis, justice Ginsburg, is whether the
officer's action is justified at its inception, and one
way that it may be justified is if the officer possesses
suspicion that criminal activity is afoot. But we also
know from other case law that another way the officer's
actions may be justified is during a traffic stop where
there's no criminal activity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, for a Terry --
for a Terry pat down you don't need, do you, articulable
suspicion that the person is armed and dangerous? So
long as you have a suspicion of unlawful activity, you
can stop the individual and pat down. Do you have to
have, in addition to stopping the individual, an
articulable suspicion that he is armed and dangerous?
MR. PARKHURST: I believe that's what Terry
says, that you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Both armed and dangerous?
MR. PARKHURST: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, in your view if an
officer was going down the street and he saw an
individual as to whom he had no suspicion a crime was
being committed, had been or was about to be, but he
said that guy looks like trouble for anybody who has
anything to do with him, so he goes up to him and he
says, I want to talk to you, and because he has
reasonable suspicion that the individual looks like
trouble, he pats him down. Is that a good pat down?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, he would also have to
possess articulable reasons that a prudently -- a
reasonably prudent person would be satisfied with that
this person is an immediate danger to him.
JUSTICE SOUTER: The individual gives him --
gives him mean looks and he has a bulge of something on
his hip.
MR. PARKHURST: Well, that could very well
support a pat down.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then you are doing away
with the first Terry factor. There are two factors
recognized: One, reasonable, articulable suspicion that
a crime is afoot; and two, this person is reasonably
suspected of being armed and dangerous. Your answer to
Justice Souter suggests that you don't need the first
one, you don't need to have any suspicion that a crime
is afoot; it's enough that you reasonably suspect that
the person is armed and dangerous.
MR. PARKHURST: What I'm suggesting, Justice
Ginsburg, is that the first prong of Terry is much
broader than just suspicion of criminal activity.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but in my hypothesis
there was nothing that would satisfy the first prong of
Terry. There is no lawful traffic stop, there is no
indication that the individual has committed a crime or
is about to or is doing so. So, so -- so Terry one is
blank in my hypothesis, and you nonetheless conclude
that as a result of dirty looks and the bulge of a
probable gun on the hip, the officer can in effect
initiate the action with the individual and pat him
down.
MR. PARKHURST: What I'm suggesting, Justice
Souter, is that in the officer's community caretaking
function the officer is authorized to approach an
individual that he thinks is trouble, and in the course
of asking neutral questions, if the officer believes
that this person is immediately dangerous to the
officer, then a pat-down would be appropriate in that
instance. I'm not --
JUSTICE ALITO: Doesn't the officer need --
justification for a stop, for a Fourth Amendment
seizure, whether because of a traffic violation or
because of suspicion of criminal activity; and then in
addition to that, reasonably believe that the person is
dangerous? I thought that would be -- I thought that
was your argument.
MR. PARKHURST: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: In the context of a traffic
stop, you don't need, as to the passenger and the
driver, you don't need suspicion of criminal activity.
The person has been seized as a result of the stop, and
then if you add on to that the reasonable suspicion of
danger to the officer, that would be sufficient.
MR. PARKHURST: What I'm saying, Justice
Alito, is that in this particular case we certainly have
a legitimate stop, and under Brendlin we also know that
the passenger is seized during a reasonably routine
traffic stop until the passenger is released. So what
we have here is a presumption that the officer has the
authority to control the passenger during the routine
traffic stop, and we also have an instance in a traffic
stop where an officer cannot avoid the individual, be it
a driver or passenger. So in our case it seems like to
the easy case where Mr. Johnson and Officer Trevizo were
placed in close proximity, she detected things about him
that she believed made him a threat to her, an immediate
threat, and therefore all we're asking in our case is
that she be -- she have the entitlement under the Fourth
Amendment to pat him down.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But Officer Trevizo
herself testified that she thought the seizure part was
over. She asked him would he get out of the car, and
then she said -- I think she used the word "consensual"
herself, that it was a consensual encounter.
MR. PARKHURST: Well --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That after the initial
seizure was over, and then she wanted to question him
about gang, his gang affiliations -- and didn't she
testify? I seem to remember she did, and she said it
was voluntary.
MR. PARKHURST: She said that he could have
refused to get out of the car. There's two things about
that, Justice Ginsburg. One is we don't need to credit
necessarily the officer's own subjective beliefs as to
the -- whether the subject was free to leave or not.
The second thing is, we know from Brendlin that unless
the officer has given or the individual has asked for
permission to leave, there's -- there is really no
release. So Officer Trevizo was certainly entitled to
enter a consensual conversation with Mr. Johnson during
the lawful seizure, but there was no indication that he
was free to leave. Moreover, even if he reasonably felt
free to leave, it's irrelevant to whether he reasonably
posed a danger to the officer.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I guess what you're saying
is that if there is a stop of the passenger and an
interrogation of the passenger, the passenger can't say,
incidentally, this is consensual, and thereby avoid a
pat down?
MR. PARKHURST: Correct, correct, and
whether or not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And it seems to me there
is some indication that that's what happened here if you
credit the police officer's testimony.
MR. PARKHURST: Right. Certainly --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In other words, you can
have consent within the context of a stop that has not
yet ceased.
MR. PARKHURST: Correct. It would be
analogous to, say, a, an inmate in a prison offering to
give information to one of the prison guards. There's
no question that the inmate is still in custody, even
though the conversation itself is consensual.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask if your view of
the law that, if the officer is pretty sure that the
person he's having a consensual encounter with has a gun
-- he could see the bulge or something -- is that
sufficient or does he have to have some proof that the
person is about to use the gun?
MR. PARKHURST: It would be -- in the
context of a traffic stop because of all the unknowns
that an officer must face, a bulge is usually sufficient
to justify a pat down.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What about just meeting on
-- on the street, the officer meets the man on the
street and asks him where he's going or something like
that, and he sees a -- a bulge in the pocket that
convinces the officer he has a gun, but that's all.
That's the only evidence of a threat to the officer. Is
that enough?
MR. PARKHURST: In that instance, it may be
the prudent course to at least ask whether the person is
armed. On a -- on a random --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What if he says "yes"?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, then the officer could
ask something along the lines of whether he has a permit
to carry a gun. And whether or not the person has a
permit to carry the gun or is lawfully in possession of
the gun, it's a matter of basically the totality of the
circumstances whether --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but I -- I thought
you said that there has to be an articulable suspicion
that he is armed and dangerous.
MR. PARKHURST: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: A bulge would not be enough
to conduct a pat down after a Terry stop, therefore.
MR. PARKHURST: That's exactly -- exactly
what I'm --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then why should it be
enough to -- to justify a pat down here?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, because -- well, there
was no bulge in this case. However, it's a matter of
all the factors. It's a weighing of all the factors.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, I understand. I weigh
all the factors, and there's nothing but a bulge.
MR. PARKHURST: Okay. Well, it's a matter
of whether you believe that the person is dangerous.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So the bulge alone
-- Well, whether I believe? There has to be, you know,
a reasonable basis for --
MR. PARKHURST: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- an articulable basis for
the belief, right?
MR. PARKHURST: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So I don't see why a bulge
alone would -- would satisfy.
MR. PARKHURST: Well, in Mimms it was just a
bulge in the -- the driver's jacket that justified the
pat down. However, a person may possess a gun lawfully,
and that person may or may not be a danger. For
instance, an off-duty police officer, they often carry
their sidearms with them.
They are not going to -- even if another
officer knows that they're armed, they don't perceive
them as a danger, and therefore no pat down is going to
ensue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We have a whole separate
line of cases apart from the Terry stop cases which
allow officers to protect themselves by conducting a
search of the surrounding area when they arrest
somebody. And that justifies a pat down of the person
that they arrest also, doesn't it?
MR. PARKHURST: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whether or not they think
that -- that he's about to -- to draw the gun and shoot
them.
MR. PARKHURST: Correct. It's -- it's a
matter --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why wouldn't that line of
cases be extendible to this kind of a situation?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, it's a matter of
during a traffic stop, Brendlin even says that officers
must be able to exercise unquestioned command of the
situation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why during a traffic
stop shouldn't they be able to ensure their own safety
by -- by patting down the people who have been stopped,
whether or not they have an articulable suspicion that
they are about to draw and shoot? But that's not what
you're proposing, is it?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, what I'm proposing is
the -- the standard Terry test. That --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. PARKHURST: -- the suspicion must be
that they're armed and dangerous.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why go the Terry
route instead of the route that -- that covers search of
the area around the person who is arrested?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, I believe that this --
the facts of this case fall pretty much under Terry. A
-- a traffic stop will -- will impose circumstances that
you're not going to get in a -- in a normal street
encounter, because basically an officer -- we presume
that an officer has the authority to control any of the
occupants of a car. And "control" means not just
ordering them out as in Mimms and Wilson, but also
making sure that one of the occupants doesn't get behind
you while you're dealing with the traffic investigation.
It's -- it's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When -- when did this
end? You just said -- you said when the car is stopped
everyone is seized, the driver and the passengers as
well. The seizure ends at some point. Is that when the
driver is ticketed and the police cruise off or --
MR. PARKHURST: That's the normal situation,
and usually that's the analysis that bears on whether
the driver has given valid consent to a search of the
automobile or something like that. We -- we must bear
in mind that a pat-down search is not an evidence
search. This is not a full search. It's just a search
of the outer clothing for an immediately accessible
weapon.
JUSTICE STEVENS: General Parkhurst --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then how did the -- how
did the officer come up with the marijuana as well as
the gun?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, because once he was
arrested for the gun, then they did a search incident to
arrest.
JUSTICE STEVENS: General Parkhurst, I -- I
seem to be a little confused about the facts of this
case. I had the -- remember the testimony that she
thought the -- that the encounter had become consensual,
which meant that he was no longer -- in her view, no
longer under police custody. But are you also saying
she also thought he was about to assault her; and,
therefore, she was in danger?
MR. PARKHURST: She did not --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There is a substantial
difference between being both in danger and saying,
well, the arrest was all over.
MR. PARKHURST: No, she -- she did. She
believed that he posed an immediate danger to her based
on the numerous factors that she cited in her testimony.
So she was -- she was afraid. She was afraid from the
outset, as a matter of fact, because of the way that he
made eye contact with the officers.
However, we don't want our officers to avoid
their law-enforcement functions just because they're in
contact with a possibly dangerous person.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why had this
descended from a -- a seizure to a post-seizure
consensual encounter? Why was the seizure over?
MR. PARKHURST: Well, we're arguing that the
seizure was not over.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it seems to me you're
-- you're acknowledging that she said that it was a
purely -- you're not arguing it as based on a purely
consensual encounter? I thought that that's what you --
MR. PARKHURST: No. No, Your Honor. We're
--
suggesting that the seizure had never ended in this
case. The Arizona court of appeals --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even though she said so?
MR. PARKHURST: Correct, because we don't
have to necessarily take her word for that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. PARKHURST: That's a -- that's a legal
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The white light is on. I
don't want to -- but your opening argument that you
presented indicated that a seizure is not necessary.
You -- you wanted a further rule.
MR. PARKHURST: I -- well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If the officer believes
that a person is armed and might be dangerous, then they
can pat down. That's -- that's the rule that you
proposed, I thought.
MR. PARKHURST: We believe that that is
true. That's not the rule that necessarily arises from
the facts of this case, because we believe that there is
a seizure throughout the entire encounter, and that
there is really -- there is no question that, as a
seized passenger, Officer Trevizo could pat him down.
And unless the Court has any other
questions, I would like to reserve the rest of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Heytens.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF TOBY J. HEYTENS
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. HEYTENS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The decision in this case should be reversed
for one of two independent reasons. First, at the time
that Officer Trevizo performed this frisk, the Arizona
Court of Appeals erred when it held that the seizure
that had been caused by the initial traffic stop was
already over. This seizure was still ongoing at the
time of the frisk.
Second, regardless of the answer to that
question, under this Court's decisions in Mimms and
Wilson it is constitutionally reasonable for a police
officer to order any occupant out of a vehicle during a
lawful traffic stop and to frisk that individual if the
officer has a reasonable suspicion that that individual
is armed and presently dangerous to the officer. In
this case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you agree that
there is a point at which the encounter initiated by the
traffic stop changes in some way that a pat down is no
longer justified?
MR. HEYTENS: We certainly agree, Mr. Chief
Justice, that at some point the encounter is over, and
that if it is in fact not over, the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if the
encounter is -- by "the encounter is over," do you mean
that they separate; they're no longer together? My
question is whether or not it's a continuing encounter
but transforms somehow in its quality so that the pat
down is no longer justified.
MR. HEYTENS: We agree that at some point a
seizure can morph into a consensual encounter. We don't
have any dispute with that. We would say that the
fundamental reality of this situation is what the Court
recognized in Brendlin, which is that at the time the
car pulls over a reasonable person would understand
himself to not be free to leave unless and until the
police officer says something that makes fairly clear
that the seizure is over and he's free to go.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I suppose there is
an argument, anyway, that even though the initial
seizure is over, the consensual encounter continues.
And at some point the officer, as a result of whatever
happens during that consensual exchange, becomes
concerned for her safety.
MR. HEYTENS: Absolutely, Mr. Chief Justice,
and that's our second argument, which is at the end of
the day we don't think it matters whether he's seized.
Because whether he's seized or not, this is still a
roadside encounter with a person who was a passenger in
a vehicle that was --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask you, suppose
it's a roadside encounter in which the driver is
changing a flat tire and the officer stops and wants to
talk to him for a while and then he suddenly thinks,
well, maybe this guy's armed. Is it okay for him to go
ahead and search him?
MR. HEYTENS: Well, I guess the first thing
I want to say, Justice Stevens, is that it's not okay to
think, maybe he might be armed. The officer has to have
articulable suspicion.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, Maybe he has an
articulable suspicion.
MR. HEYTENS: Okay. Under those
circumstances we think absolutely, and we think your
hypo --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is that any different from
meeting somebody on the -- on the street corner?
MR. HEYTENS: It is different in the sense
that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The flat -- my flat tire
example.
MR. HEYTENS: It is different because it's a
roadside encounter, and this Court has recognized again
and again and again --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But those are roadside
encounters after a traffic violation.
MR. HEYTENS: I -- I agree with you, Justice
Stevens, which is why at the end of the day we don't --
we think that the officer, in basically those facts,
should be able to perform a frisk on the street as well.
I guess just -- again to say, I don't think the Court
needs to reach that issue, because I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You don't rely at all on
the fact this is a traffic stop?
MR. HEYTENS: We do rely on the fact --
JUSTICE STEVENS: On your second point, that
MR. HEYTENS: We think this case is
substantially easier because it's a traffic stop,
because --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why is it easier?
MR. PARKHURST: Because this Court has
recognized again and -- let me give you the example of
Wilson. Wilson is the case where the Court holds that
it is per se reasonable for an officer to order a
passenger to get out of the car.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but those are all
cases in which there is a violation of law that preceded
the activity. I asked you about cases in which there is
nothing other than the officer's interest in patting
down the guy because he thinks he has a gun.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Stevens, I think
Wilson is highly significant in this regard, because the
Court went out of its way in Wilson to point out that
there's no reason to suspect a passenger with any
illegal activity at all. The Court said you could
distinguish Mimms on the ground that with regards to the
driver you have suspicion that he's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, I disagree with that.
The holding there was that the passenger was stopped,
the passenger was seized, so this was a pat down in the
context of an ongoing seizure.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Kennedy, I guess I
would say we disagree with this. The Court didn't hold
until Brendlin that a passenger is seized by virtue of
the initial traffic stop. The Court went out of its way
in Brendlin to say that none of its previous decisions
had answered the question of whether the passenger is
seized by virtue of the original traffic stop. And the
Court didn't even identify --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, even if that's true,
why don't we accept Mimms with the gloss of Brendlin?
MR. HEYTENS: We think that Brendlin is of
course absolutely correct, and we think the passenger
was seized, and we think fundamentally that's why this
case is fairly easy.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you say -- your brief
goes much, much further. And I'm looking at page 9
where you say: "Police have to be able to protect the
officer's safety from a person reasonably believed to be
armed and dangerous whenever the officer encounters that
person in a place where the officer has a lawful right
to be."
I read that to mean if the law -- the
officer is on the street, in a pub, any place where he
has a lawful right to be, that officer can, on the basis
of a suspicion of armed and dangerous, pat down, and you
don't need the first Terry. It's only -- it's only the
armed and dangerous.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Ginsburg, we agree
that that is ultimately the correct Fourth Amendment
rule. But what we're saying is that the Court doesn't
need to decide whether it agrees with us on this
point -- that point, excuse me, to resolve this case,
because there are two very important distinctions
between this case and that one.
The first one is that we know that Mr.
Johnson was seized. This was not a consensual
encounter. We know under this Court's holding in
Brendlin that there was a seizure of Mr. Johnson in this
case. And the question is whether anything happened in
this case to unseize him; and we think that the answer
to that question is clearly no.
And then the second reason is this Court has
recognized over and over again that traffic stops pose
unique heightened dangers to police officers, and so
regardless of what the rule is outside the traffic
stop --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you'd apply the same
rule if the -- if the officer just stopped to help the
guy change his tire.
MR. HEYTENS: We do think that at the end of
the day, Justice Stevens, the overriding command of the
Fourth Amendment is that a police officer's conduct must
be judged by a reasonableness standard, and we think
that overriding command allows police officers to take
limited and appropriate steps to protect their own
safety.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I take it, if I
understood your earlier answer, you would extend the
application of the rule as you understand it to the
encounter simply on the sidewalk by a police officer who
has no suspicion that the individual he wants to talk to
has been, is or is about to commit a crime, but if the
officer chooses to initiate the conversation, he then,
in effect, if he can articulate any suspicion, like
we'll say the dirty look and the bulge on the side, he
can go ahead and pat down. Is that -- is that your
view?
MR. HEYTENS: At the end of the day, Justice
Souter, that is our view. I think that case is harder
than this case, and let me explain why.
It seems like the argument on the other side
is predicated expressly on the notion that unless a
police officer has suspicion of crime, he can just avoid
dangerous people, like any of the rest of us can choose
to avoid them.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you if the
Department of Justice has ever taken this position
before?
MR. HEYTENS: I'm not aware of whether we
have had to take this position before, Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm asking you whether you
have. You don't think they have, do you? It's a rather
extreme position.
MR. HEYTENS: I'm not aware of whether we
have taken this position or not in any previous case,
because I'm not aware of any case that raises the issue
that's raised by the going up to someone on the street
hypothetical.
We have certainly consistently taken the
position that in the context of traffic stops it is
constitutionally reasonable for police officers to
perform Terry frisks whenever they have reason to
believe that their safety is in danger. As I was saying
to Justice Ginsburg, I think -- excuse me, Justice
Souter, I believe -- I think the problem in the
hypothetical where the officer goes up to someone on the
street, it's predicated under the assumption that the
police officer, like you and me, should just avoid
dangerous people.
We think that's fundamentally wrong about
what the nature of a police officer's job is.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, there's something
fundamentally wrong probably about that, but the --
the -- I think the problem that sort of drives the
questioning is that if you extend the rule as far as you
want to extend it, we have to take into consideration
that the standard of articulable suspicion is the
standard that, in practical terms, can pretty well
always be met.
You can -- you know Benjamin Franklin's
remark, it's great to be a reasonable person because you
can think of a reason for anything you do. And that's
what's driving, at least driving my questions.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, I certainly would add,
Justice Souter, that it has to be a reasonable person.
It's not that a police officer can recite some reason.
It's whether a reason that a reasonable person in that
position would find reasonable.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yeah, but what the officer
cites is going to be a matter of fact, and the facts at
that point are gone, they're in the past. And all
you've got is the officer saying, you know, this is --
this is what I perceived. And maybe you've got the a --
defendant somewhere saying, oh, no, it wasn't like that.
But in a -- in a situation like that, if articulable
suspicion, in effect, can justify a sidewalk pat down
without any articulation of a basis to think crime is
afoot, then you've got a -- you've got a pretty wide
open standard in the real world.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, I guess, Justice Souter,
to the extent you're concerned about that, I would say
the same thing is true about whether you have
articulable suspicion of criminal activity, and the
Court has decided that that risk is worth, you know,
dealing with under the context of that question. So I
don't really understand why in principle articulable
suspicion of armed and dangerousness is any different.
I would also say that in this case,
regardless of whether there will be hard cases, the
decision that this Court is reviewing is expressly
predicated on the view that Officer Trevizo had
reasonable suspicion Mr. Johnson was armed and
dangerous. That's on pages 13 and 14 of the petition
appendix.
It is also the predicate of the question on
which this Court grants review. The question which this
Court granted review presupposes that she had a
reasonable suspicion.
Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Pincus.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANDREW J. PINCUS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. PINCUS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
I think the other side made clear that its
--
principal argument is that Terry should be revisited and
that the two tests that Terry prescribed for a pat-down
search, that there be reasonable suspicion that crime is
afoot and reasonable suspicion of armed and dangerous,
should be revised so that all that is required for a
pat-down search is the second Terry standard.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if -- we've
been talking about the officer approaching somebody on
the street who has the bulge in his pocket, what if the
person with the bulge in his pocket approaches the
officer? Can the officer at that point, even if he has
no suspicion that crime is afoot, conduct a pat down?
MR. PINCUS: No, I don't think so, Your
Honor. I think that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: This is -- this is
like the rule in the Old West that the sheriff has to
wait for the defendant to draw first?
MR. PINCUS: No, I think the officer can --
it's -- I think it's important to make clear that the
sliver of cases we're dealing with here are cases where
there is a reasonable suspicion of armed and
dangerousness but not a reasonable suspicion that
crime -- criminal activity is afoot.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So in response to my
MR. PINCUS: If there really is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One moment. In
response to my hypothetical, even though the officer
reasonably thinks he is in a situation where he could be
shot, he can't do anything about it, not even a simple
pat down, even though he did not initiate the contact,
somebody comes up to him?
MR. PINCUS: If he reasonably believes he
could be shot, Your Honor, then probably there is
reasonable suspicion of criminal -- that criminal
activity may be afoot because he'll have --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, let's just
say it's like this case: The guy's coming up, he's
wearing the colors of the Crips gang and he has a bulge
in his pocket. It's not a crime to wear that type of
clothing; it may not be a crime to have a bulge in your
pocket; but he nonetheless has a reasonable suspicion
that he's being -- he's in a threatening situation, even
though he has no basis for thinking that a crime is
being committed.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, I think this
goes a little bit to Justice Souter's comment in the
first part of the argument. These two standards are --
are somewhat -- are mutually reinforcing, as we discuss
in our brief. And if, indeed, as here, the State is
only arguing armed and dangerousness, and not arguing
that criminal activity is afoot, it's clearly putting
itself at the low end of the armed and dangerous.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's not -- Mr.
Parkhurst said in his opening that the traffic stop is
the equivalent of the articulable suspicion that a crime
is the equivalent of the articulable suspicion that a
crime is afoot. It justifies this stop, and then you
have to have something further to justify the pat down,
but the car, the seizure of the car and its passengers,
that is the equivalent of the first Terry. And why
isn't that so? It's a stop; it's a legitimate stop.
MR. PINCUS: I think that you're right,
Justice Ginsburg, that's the second argument that they
make, and our answer to that argument is that we don't
think that Mr. Johnson was seized at the time the pat
down occurred, as the court of appeals here found. The
other side seems to ignore the fact that there is an
actual determination by the court of appeals, looking at
the facts of the situation, that there wasn't a seizure.
And so--
JUSTICE SOUTER: Can we pursue that for a
minute. What -- I guess -- we -- we all start with the
common assumption that -- that there was at least a
legitimate stop to start with.
MR. PINCUS: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And my -- my question which
-- which goes to who was right about whether the
seizure, the legitimate seizure had stopped and the
consensual encounter had begun, my question is what is
it beyond the conclusory statement of the officer that
in effect justifies drawing that conclusion that the
stop was over?
MR. PINCUS: Well, a couple of things, Your
Honor. First of all, the Court has never discussed, but
in Wilson it actually reserved the question, of what is
the duration of the seizure of a passenger.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Do we have -- do we have
any evidence about duration here?
MR. PINCUS: We don't have any duration, but
the question -- I think an important question is does
the seizure of the passenger necessarily in all cases
coextend with the seizure of the driver? This stop was
in an urban area. It might be one thing if it's a stop
on a highway where there's really no place for the
passenger to go. This was a stop in a -- and where
there are concerns about the safety of a passenger who
is allowed to wander off and the potential liability of
the police. Here the stop was in an urban area, and --
and if the Brendlin says that initially clearly the
passenger was seized, the question is how long does that
-- that seizure last?
JUSTICE SOUTER: If in my -- my problem in
this case, I guess, in taking your position is, I don't
think we have got an evidentiary basis to conclude that
what we start by assuming is a legitimate stop has in
fact run its course. I don't see how we can draw that
conclusion. That's what I'm getting at.
MR. PINCUS: Let me pick up some of the
factors we rely on, Your Honor. First, just as a legal
matter, the Court has said in Caballes and other cases
that the scope of a Fourth Amendment intrusion turns on
the purpose. Here we say the scope of the seizure of
the passenger should turn on the ability to secure the
scene. If the passenger is not involved in what -- in
the facts that gave rise to the stop -- if it's clear,
for example, quickly that the passenger doesn't own the
vehicle, the reasons that -- the driver owns the
vehicle, the stop, the basis for the stop relates to the
passenger -- we don't see what the basis is for, in an
urban setting at least, for any further seizure of the
passenger.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, then, in other words,
you -- you are -- I -- I'll be candid with you. I would
have started with the assumption, based on Brendlin,
that if the stop of the car and its driver also effects
a stop and a seizure of the passenger, that you start
out with the assumption that the seizure of the
passenger is going to last for the same duration as the
seizure of the car and the driver unless you have a good
reason to draw some line and say, no, it doesn't. And I
take it that you are not making that initial assumption;
am I correct in that?
MR. PINCUS: We're not relying entirely on
-- on what I just said. But --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I think you're rejecting
it, aren't you?
MR. PINCUS: No, we're not relying -- we're
rejecting that assumption. We don't rest entirely on
the notion that the -- that the seizure of the
passengers as a matter of law has to end. We think
there are special facts here that show that -- that
support the idea that the seizure was over. But I think
one of them --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What are those -- what are
those special facts?
MR. PINCUS: Well, basically there was this
interaction separate from the interaction with the
driver to the extent the passenger -- Brendlin says the
passenger, one of the reasons the passenger would feel
that he or she is seized is because of his or her
relationship to the driver and to the stop here. This
interaction proceeded separately.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Are you saying -- are you
saying if there are a driver and a passenger and two
police officers, and one police officer is dealing with
the driver, saying, you know, where's your insurance
papers and so on, and at the same time the other officer
is questioning the -- the passenger -- are you saying
that that independent questioning of the passenger in
effect eliminates the -- the passenger's seizure as --
as following from the seizure of the driver?
MR. PINCUS: I think it's -- I think it's
part, as the lower court found here, it's part -- it's a
relevant circumstance. This is a totality of the
circumstance test. The court of appeals here looked at
that as one fact, looked at the officer's subjective
intention --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I -- I don't get it. Why
should the fact that an officer, a separate officer is
talking to the passenger, ultimately have anything to do
with the duration of the passenger's seizure, absent a
situation in which officer two says, "by the way, you're
totally free to go"? We don't have that kind of strange
situation. But short of a strange situation like that,
why does the conversation with the passenger have
anything much to do, have any bearing on the -- on the
length of the passenger's seizure?
MR. PINCUS: To the extent -- I think the
question here is what's -- one question is what's
communicated to the passenger.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. PINCUS: If the officer had said in
turn, would you mind stepping out of the car so I can
ask you some questions unrelated to the stop about your
hometown, it seems to us that that statement by the
officer would provide some pretty strong indication that
the seizure was over and that this was a separate
investigation, having nothing to do with the seizure.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But we accept as hornbook
law when they are -- when the police are questioning one
individual whom they stopped, let's say for a traffic
violation, that during that period of seizure, the
reasonable period of seizure, the officer can ask
questions about other subjects, and that doesn't end the
seizure.
MR. PINCUS: Well, the Court has said that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Like the -- passenger.
MR. PINCUS: The Court has said that the
officer can ask those questions, but the Court hasn't
said what the impact of that is on the seizure. And
Here the officer certainly believed that her conduct and
her words and her conversation, which we don't know how
long it lasted or if there were a number of questions,
communicated to the -- to the individual, to Mr.
Johnson, the idea that this was a consensual encounter.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't want to -- I don't
want to take up your whole argument on this hobbyhorse
of mine, but I mean my -- my only problem is, I don't
see that we have got an evidentiary basis here to say
that because of the duration or the mere fact of the
questioning, there is a reason to say that as to the
passenger, a reasonable passenger could say I am no
longer seized, and -- and this encounter is totally
consensual.
The -- the officer testified, no question
about it, but the test is subjective.
MR. PINCUS: It is subjective. And I guess
I would also point, Your Honor, to the Court's decision
in Drayton, which dealt with the question in a somewhat
different context, at a bus search, and whether or not
passengers on a bus would feel that they were seized
when there were officers in the front of the bus and
they were asking questions. And to us, although this is
obviously the converse, a lot of the analysis in
Drayton, which showed that -- which concluded that there
wasn't a seizure there, because of the -- because people
ultimately would feel free to come and go, given the
nature of the interaction --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then don't you lose
under that line of cases? This is the picture that the
officer was painting, or I thought was, to bring this
within the "Mind if I search your luggage" category of
cases.
MR. PINCUS: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So -- she's got consent.
She doesn't have to -- she says, he said okay, he would
get out and talk to me; he said okay when I began to pat
him down; it's only in the middle of it he began to
wriggle a little bit.
MR. PINCUS: I think it's quite clear,
Justice Ginsburg, that there's no question here that --
that there was a consent to the pat down. I think the
lower courts have concluded and the other side hasn't
sought review that there was no consent to the pat down
here.
I think the reason that Drayton is -- is
relevant is that that's a case where the question for
the Court was would these people feel free to terminate
the encounter; and the Court concluded yes, they would.
And we think, given the different
situation of the passenger, it's true that -- that
Brendlin found the passenger seized. To some extent
that was to give the passenger a shield, not to be used
as the sword for further interrogation of the passenger.
It recognized the reality that at the outset surely the
passenger is seized.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You're giving up a
shield here, I take it? If instead of a pat down, the
officer said, where were you last night at 10:00
o'clock, without Miranda warnings, you would say, well
that's just -- that's just fine?
MR. PINCUS: Well, you know, Berkemer says,
in the context even of a traffic seizure, Miranda
warnings aren't necessarily necessary. But what we are
saying is that, given the different basis for the
seizure here, it's that initial conclusion that at the
outset, yes, but that person, unlike the -- unlike the
driver, who is the target of the police activity and
therefore a reasonable conclusion for the driver is he's
seized until the end of that activity, the passenger is
not the target of the traffic stop.
JUSTICE BREYER: What are the facts that
show that a reasonable person in the passenger's
position would have believed himself free to terminate
the encounter?
MR. PINCUS: I'm sorry, Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: What are the facts that
show that the person who was searched, which is Mr.
Johnson -- is that right?
MR. PINCUS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what are the facts
that suggest that he thought he was free to terminate
that encounter with the police?
MR. PINCUS: That the -- that the
interaction with the officer had nothing to do with the
subject of the stop.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. I would say
we've held a lot that that's just beside the point. If
you stop a car for a traffic stop, you can search it for
all kinds of things. You can do all kinds of things not
related. So if that's what they're relying on, I
suspect that that's not right, that it had to do with a
different subject matter.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I --
JUSTICE BREYER: Say I was lawfully stopped.
All right. Go ahead. I want to get all of them in
front of me.
MR. PINCUS: That the officer herself
believed that she had communicated the fact that the
interaction was voluntary.
JUSTICE BREYER: The question is, how did
she do that?
MR. PINCUS: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: She said, "You can leave
whatever time you want"?
MR. PINCUS: She did not do it that way.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. No.
MR. PINCUS: Although the courts --
JUSTICE BREYER: So you're standing there
and the policeman is in front of you, and they have
stopped the car, and the woman who is the policeman
says, "I want to search you." Do you think you're free
to leave?
(Laughter.)
MR. PINCUS: No, Your Honor, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, then. So now we have
got two of them. What's the third?
MR. PINCUS: Well, the third is that it was
in -- it was not a road stop in an abandoned area, where
a --
JUSTICE BREYER:
MR. PINCUS: No,
No, it was on the highway.
it was in an urban area,
actually.
JUSTICE BREYER: It was in an urban area.
Okay. You're stopped in an urban area. The policeman
says you are stopped, and you are stopped lawfully.
Will you get out of the car? Yes. The policeman begins
to search for the -- the gun. Fine. You think you're
free to leave?
MR. PINCUS: Well, obviously it wasn't --
JUSTICE BREYER: What's the fourth? What's
the fourth? I just want to get them all out here. Is
there anything else?
MR. PINCUS: I think we've gotten them all
out onto the table.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So, what they say is
a reasonable person would have found -- felt that he
could just say good-bye, and he would have felt this
even though the car was stopped lawfully, she asked him
to get out of the car, and she began to search him for a
gun.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: I say, can we not reverse
that?
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, a couple of
things. I don't think the question is at the moment --
clearly, at the moment she was conducting the pat-down
search, he was seized. But if that were the test, then
even in the -- in the Terry situation, the person is
obviously in fact seized at the time that the pat-down
search is conducted, but that's not -- the question is
whether there was, in the moments before, there was a
basis to immobilize that person.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I'm saying if the
question is whether the person reasonably thought at the
time of the search he could leave, there's certainly a
strong claim here that he could not reasonably or he did
not reasonably think he could leave. As long as that is
so, the issue in front of us is when you stop a person,
a policeman in the course of your duties, and that
person thinks that he cannot reasonably leave, and you
believe reasonably that he's armed, can you pat him
down? Well, asked that way, certainly a strong
argument, the answer is yes, if you don't want to be
killed.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I guess a couple of
answers to that, Justice Breyer. First of all, if this
is just a case about whether the lower court made a
correct determination about whether there was a seizure
or not, there's not -- maybe there's not much to the
case. We think the lower court did make the right
determination for the reasons that I gave. And I should
say, it seems -- it does seem to me, and I was trying to
get at this point in response to Justice Souter's
question, there are two related questions here. One is
what a reasonable person in Mr. Johnson's position would
believe? One is what is the authority of an officer in
terms of the duration for which a passenger may be
seized?
One answer --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if you look at
the first part of that, what somebody in Mr. Johnson's
position would believe, how does he tell? I mean, even
if the other officer goes to the window and starts
asking the driver, "Can I see your insurance papers,"
there's no representation that's why we stopped you,
that's all we're interested in. They may have stopped
him because they have reason to believe that that car
was involved in criminal activity. They don't have to
disclose immediately what's involved.
So how can the passenger know why the
officer is stopping the person in the first place?
Hypothesize that he has been involved in criminal
activity. He may think, well, they've caught me and
they're just going through this charade to try to get
information about it and make the people feel
comfortable, whatever. I mean, just because he says,
"You don't have insurance papers," that's -- I don't
think it's reasonable for the passenger to say, "Oh,
this is not about me. I can get up and leave."
MR. PINCUS: Well, that may not be -- by
itself, it may not be enough. We think, together with
the other factors here, the fact --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what else?
MR. PINCUS: Well, the fact that the officer
believed, therefore her tone, we have to assume, the way
she -- that she spoke and the way her subjective intent
indicated, that she believed what was going on here was
a conversation in an effort to get gang information --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He is supposed to
assume that it's not about him because of her tone?
MR. PINCUS: No, he was supposed to assume
that it was consensual because of her tone, because that
was her intent.
JUSTICE BREYER: Suppose we go beyond. I
mean, once we go beyond, I become a little at sea as to
what the answers are because policemen do things other
than investigate crime.
A policeman is on protective duty. The
individual he is protecting is approached by a member of
the Crips gang, who has a bulge in his pocket. Can the
police, with reasonable grounds to think that that
person is armed, pat down that person? Or is he
supposed to wait until the gun comes out of the pocket
and the person who is being protected is shot?
A policeman is on a bridge. Somebody stops
the car in the middle of the bridge. Traffic is held up
in all directions. The policeman goes to try to remove
the car from the bridge. In the back seat is a member
of the Crips gang with a bulge in his pocket. Is the
policeman supposed to ignore that?
I mean, policemen do many things, and once
you tell me that we're going beyond the facts of this
case, I can think of all kinds of hypotheticals that
aren't so hypothetical, and I become uncertain about
when the policeman can and when he cannot.
So, how do you respond?
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, I think that
-- first of all, a couple of reactions: First of all, I
think that it is important, and I alluded to this
earlier, the sliver of cases we're dealing with here are
cases in which there is reasonable -- allegedly a
reasonable suspicion that someone is armed and
dangerous, but not reasonable suspicion that criminal
activity is afoot. Those two standards are mutually
reinforcing. In most cases where there is serious
evidence that someone is armed and dangerous, you're
going to have a very -- almost certainly you will have a
reasonable suspicion that crime is afoot because the
dangerousness part requires -- means you'll have
suspicion of assault or some other kind of activity. So
I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Pincus, I want to go
back to the previous subject for a minute. We certainly
didn't take this case to decide whether the passenger
was free to leave or not. That -- that was not the
issue on which we took the case. And you claim that
that issue has already been resolved by findings of the
lower courts?
MR. PINCUS: That the court of appeals here
determined -- its decision rested on the fact that this
was a consensual encounter.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: In order to contradict
that, would we have to find that that's clearly
erroneous?
MR. PINCUS: Well, I think it's a mixed
question of fact and law, Your Honor. So I think, with
respect to the underlying facts, you probably have to
find that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any dispute on the
underlying facts?
MR. PINCUS: No --
JUSTICE BREYER: No.
MR. PINCUS: -- I don't think the underlying
facts are disputed.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, there is a dispute
as to whether the man thought he was free to leave.
That's a big dispute, isn't it?
MR. PINCUS: That is -- that is the disputed
question: Whether -- or whether a reasonable person in
his position --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Did he testify?
MR. PINCUS: No, not at the petition --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So nobody asked him
whether he thought he was free to leave -- which would
have solved a lot of problems.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your hypothesis
about why she -- why he was free to leave is because of
the tone of the arresting officer? The tone of the --
MR. PINCUS: It's the totality of the
circumstances: The tone of the officer, the fact it was
in an urban area where there were some place --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And there's no
finding about the tone of the officer, right?
MR. PINCUS: Well, the officer herself
testified about what her intent was. And I think most
people, when they -- that's their intent, it's carried
through in how they interact with someone.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, you keep emphasizing
that this is an urban area, and it seems to me that's
going to lead to a test that's impossible to administer.
I can think of a lot of circumstances in which the
passenger in a car that is stopped will not think for
practical reasons that there is much alternative but to
wait until the driver is permitted to get back in the
car and drive away.
All of those would fall under your urban
category, wouldn't they? If it's night -- suppose this
was a dangerous area. Suppose this was in an area that
was the turf of a rival gang, so it really wouldn't be
very practical for this person to start walking down the
street. There are not just urban areas and rural areas;
there are expressways in urban areas; there are suburban
areas.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE ALITO: All of those things would --
you would have to draw a line taking all of those things
into account.
MR. PINCUS: It -- it would be a factual
question in every case as it is in the typical Fourth
Amendment arrest case about whether someone is seized.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, we didn't think it
was a factual question in -- in Brendlin. In Brendlin
we said even when the wrongdoing -- this is at page 7 --
even if the wrongdoing is only bad driving, the
passenger will expect to be the subject of some
scrutiny. And his attempt to leave the scene would be
so obviously likely to prompt an objection from the
officer that no passenger would feel free to leave in
the first place. And that's why we held there was a
seizure. You're basically arguing with the premise of
Brendlin.
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, I'm
absolutely not. I think Brendlin clearly holds that
there is a seizure at the outset. The question that
Brendlin does not explicitly address, and it's one the
Court explicitly --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Brendlin says no passenger
would like -- would feel free to leave during the course
of the investigation. And -- and I would have to agree
with that as a -- as a common-sense matter.
It would be amazing to me that this fellow
said: I'm not going to talk to you anymore; I'm
leaving; and -- and the -- and the police officer would
allow it, particularly when the police officer, we know,
searched the person.
MR. PINCUS: Well, I don't -- I mean I think
it -- it may depend upon the other facts in that -- in
that situation, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: What are the facts? That
is, this happened quite close to the beginning of the --
of the stop, didn't it?
MR. PINCUS: We don't know.
JUSTICE BREYER: We don't know. I -- I read
this. But it said -- I mean I thought, from judging it,
that it did happen within a few minutes of the -- of the
beginning. They were still talking to the driver. We
know that.
MR. PINCUS: We -- we actually don't, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: We don't?
MR. PINCUS: We don't. We know that the --
that the conversation seemed to be -- the interaction
seemed to have started shortly after the interaction
with the driver.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. PINCUS: We don't know how they -- how
long they --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, is there any reason
to think it was half an hour?
MR. PINCUS: We just don't know. The -- the
record doesn't say. We don't know.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you agree that if you
-- if you lose on the seizure issue, you lose?
MR. PINCUS: Well, Your Honor, we think if
-- if there was a seizure, then -- then we think there
is a -- a second question, which is even if the person
was seized, it's not clear to us that the Court's
precedents say that -- that that automatically permits a
pat down on armed and dangerousness.
My friends rely on Mimms. The Court in
Mimms made very clear -- and, in fact, as we recite on
pages 31 to 32 of our brief -- footnote 5 in Mimms says
that the reason for the pat down there was that once the
driver alighted, the officer had independent reason to
suspect criminal activity and present danger. And it
was on that basis that the pat-down search was
permissible.
So the Court hasn't said that in the context
of a roadside stop, once you are seized in this, at
least for a passenger, somewhat different sense than a
Terry seizure based on articulable suspicion about that
person's criminal activity, that is enough. We think
the relevant standard there is supplied by the Court's
decisions in -- in Summers and associated cases, which
say the officer can control the scene, and that might
allow a pat-down search if that's what the officer is
trying to do.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess what about -- I --
I guess if we held that you could do this, this pat-down
search here, it would probably carry forward to any
other kind of seizure like a -- a roadblock to inspect
for drunken driving or anything like that?
MR. PINCUS: Well, that's -- that's part of
the concern, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We would say the same
thing: That if there is a passenger in that car, you
could tell the passenger to get out and conduct a
pat-down search.
MR. PINCUS: Yes, even though -- even
though, again, there is no particularized suspicion
about that passenger. So this is a pretty dramatic
expansion of the officer's ability to -- to search, and
we think it should be cabined very closely to those
situations in which there really is a threat of armed
and dangerous.
And as I was saying before, "armed and
dangerousness", "a reasonable suspicion that a crime is
afoot," are mutually reinforcing. If one isn't present,
if the State, as here, is arguing that one isn't
present, it tends to cast doubt on whether the other is
present.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why isn't the -- why
isn't the "seizure" and the "consensual" aspect also
mutually reinforcing but kind of blurring into each
other? It seems to me it's an awfully difficult
decision for the officer to make. I stopped this
person. I know under Brendlin that he is seized, and
I'm engaged in a dialogue, and I have to worry that at
some point he thinks he is free to leave.
MR. PINCUS: I'm -- I'm not sure that I
understand what you are -- what you are getting at in
your -- in your question.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you seem --
your argument assumes a fairly bright line between the
point at which the individual is seized and the point at
which the interaction becomes a consensual search. And
I'm just saying that in the running line of cases, that
line is going to be very blurry.
MR. PINCUS: As it is blurry when the -- in
the converse situation when the question is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. The converse
situation is that so long as the interaction continues,
it is a seizure, and the officer can take reasonable
steps, the pat down to protect, her safety. That
doesn't have a line-drawing issue.
MR. PINCUS: No, I'm talking about the
Drayton situation, Your Honor. When the -- when the
question is: Has a consensual interaction morphed into
a seizure, then there is also a -- a -- it's an
uncertain line. But the Court has said that there it's
a totality-of-the-circumstances test and, obviously --
sort of -- the shoes are all on the other feet there,
because the -- law enforcement doesn't want that to
happen. And so it's arguing that the facts don't amount
to a seizure, and here we're sort of in the converse
situation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You -- you don't concede
in this case, or do you, that Trevizo had a reasonable
suspicion that Johnson was armed and dangerous? That
has not been found for purposes of --
MR. PINCUS: Absolutely not. The lower
court assumed it for the purposes of decision --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So even if you did not
prevail, we would have to remand on that point?
MR. PINCUS: Yes, that point would have to
be remanded so that the court below could address it.
Just to -- just to return to the final
point, the -- the sliver of cases we're talking about
here, "armed and dangerousness, but not crime afoot,"
it's a very small sliver. The government hasn't shown
that that's a real problem that has to be taken care of.
In fact, in this case if the officers really
had believed that -- that there was proof of "armed and
dangerousness," why wouldn't they have argued that they
had proof that crime was afoot, given that they knew
that Mr. Johnson was a felon? We think that the reason
that the State took that off the table was it doesn't
have a lot of confidence in --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it lawful to possess a
firearm?
MR. PINCUS: If you're a convicted felon,
JUSTICE BREYER: Was he convicted?
MR. PINCUS: He had admitted to the officer
that he had engaged in burglary. In fact, that's one of
the reasons to show that he's not dangerous is that he
was very forthcoming about the fact that he had a
conviction. So the fact that the State took that off
the table and didn't rely on it, we think, shows, (a),
that they don't have a lot of confidence that there's
real "armed and dangerousness" here. And so that the
"danger" in a systemic sense, as Justice Souter pointed
out, relying only on that prong as the basis for
cabining off, is discretionary. As justice Kennedy said
in a separate decision in Whren, it's very easy to -- to
conduct an unlawful search.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I have difficulty
accepting your suggestion that there is a sliver of
cases. It seems to me there are a multitude of cases in
which officers might suspect somebody is armed but not
think criminal activity is afoot, but decide they would
like to pat them down.
MR. PINCUS: I think it is the
"dangerousness" element, Your Honor. If they are "armed
and dangerousness," which is the test that the Court set
out in Terry and it is the test that my colleagues are
asking for, "dangerous," to me, connotes a threat to
someone. And it's a very small step, I think, between
being a threat to someone and having a reasonable
suspicion that an assault may be committed.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you argue in -- in all
of this that this guy was not dangerous?
MR. PINCUS: We -- we agree. We argue very
strenuously that he wasn't dangerous, but -- but I -- I
think the key point here is -- is that it -- it may well
be a sliver of cases, but removing the sort of mutually
reinforcing nature of these two tests threatens to
really downgrade the standard in a way that officer
discretion --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How could he not be
dangerous? First, she said: I suspected him because he
was looking behind, but -- and then she said he was
wearing the clothes of a gang, and then he admits to
having been convicted of a burglary. Why isn't it very
normal for a person to be apprehensive?
MR. PINCUS: All right. Let me give three
quick answers to those. First of all, he looked -- this
was an unmarked car, Your Honor. I -- I think a -- a
very reasonable inference is he looked behind because he
was surprised that there were, all of a sudden, flashing
lights and a siren on a car.
The gang colors, as the lower court -- the
Court of Appeals here noted, although Mr. Johnson was
wearing blue, the driver was wearing red. If these were
really gang colors, it -- it -- it is not consistent
with the conclusion that they were gang colors to have
people of different colors who were rival gangs in the
same car.
And the third thing is, as lower courts have
found, acknowledging prior criminal convictions is a
basis for concluding that someone is not dangerous
because they were forthcoming.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not so fast.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: The "armed and dangerous"
requirement, does the "dangerous" requirement mean
endangering the policeman, or is it enough -- is it
enough if -- if you think this fellow is -- you know,
he's just a dangerous character. Is that enough, or
does it have to be an immediate threat to the policeman?
MR. PINCUS: I don't think this Court has
come down one way or -- or the other, Your Honor. I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What do you think?
MR. PINCUS: It seems to me there -- there
is a requirement of immediate danger.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's -- it's not enough if
you think he's -- he's Al Capone?
MR. PINCUS: I don't think if he's just a
fishy character, it's enough. I think the reason is
immediate threat to society.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Parkhurst, you have a minute remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOSEPH L. PARKHURST
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. PARKHURST: This -- this case falls
directly under Mimms and Wilson. Mimms and Wilson both
hold that the officer has the authority to control the
occupants of an automobile with or without suspicion of
any wrongdoing by the occupant.
In this case, also, the traffic stop
satisfies the first prong of Terry, as we know from
Mimms. Also, there's no reason to suggest that this was
any more than the normal length of a traffic stop here.
In fact, the evidence was that the -- one officer was
still talking with the driver while Officer Trevizo was
conversing with Mr. Johnson.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What do you -- what do you
say about the other -- the other side's point that in
the case of a Terry stop there's a -- a mutually
enforcing -- reinforcing aspect?
You have a suspicion that -- there is crime
afoot to begin with, plus the -- the suspicion that the
person is armed and dangerous; whereas, here, you know,
it's a traffic stop is all.
MR. PARKHURST: The -- yes, that's true.
However, we --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So what -- what is required
where you think criminal activity is afoot is not
necessarily going to be the same as what's required when
you -- when there's just a traffic stop.
MR. PARKHURST: She -- Officer Trevizo
testified repeatedly at the hearing that she did not
believe he was actually about to commit a crime. She
could not put her -- put her finger on exactly what it
was that he was doing at the moment.
However, we believe that in the context of a
traffic stop we -- the State has satisfied the first
Terry prong here because traffic stops frequently don't
involve any kind of criminal activity, just as -- as in
this case, a civil violation. However, that was enough
to put the officer and the individual in close
proximity, and if she noticed enough indicia of -- that
he was dangerous, she certainly was authorized to
conduct a pat-down search.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the case in the
