IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
FRANK RICCI, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 07-1428
JOHN DESTEFANO, ET AL.; :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
FRANK RICCI, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 08-328
JOHN DESTEFANO, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, April 22, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:09 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
GREGORY S. COLEMAN, ESQ., Austin, Tex.; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
vacatur and remand.
CHRISTOPHER J. MEADE, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
GREGORY S. COLEMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 4
EDWIN S. KNEEDLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting vacatur and remand 27
CHRISTOPHER J. MEADE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 43
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
GREGORY S. COLEMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 70
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:09 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument today in Case 07-1428, Ricci v. DeStefano, and
the consolidated case.
Mr. Coleman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY S. COLEMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. COLEMAN: Good morning, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
Racial classifications are inherently
pernicious and, if not checked, lead as they did in New
Haven to regrettable and socially destructive racial
politics.
Neither equal protection nor Title VII
justified New Haven's race-based scuttling of the
promotions Petitioners earned through the civil service
process mandated by Connecticut law. The lower court
required no strong evidentiary basis that the City was
acting to remedy or avoid any actual discrimination, but
strong safeguards are needed to smoke out illegitimate
uses of race and to extinguish the racial favoritism
that civil service laws -- excuse me -- are intended to
prevent.
Governmental employment actions grounded in
race must be strictly scrutinized because they engender
divisiveness and cause race-grounded harm that the
Constitution seeks to avert. That standard does not
change with the race of those the government seeks to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I just ask this
question? Is it undisputed that it was a race-based
decision?
MR. COLEMAN: No, Justice Stevens. I think
the city makes the argument that it was not a race-based
decision simply because the effect of the scuttling
resulted in no promotions being given at all. We
believe that that is not a basis for distinguishing
this. That it still remains a race-based decision.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are you contending that
that's an issue of fact that has to be tried out or that
we should accept your version of that -- of that issue?
MR. COLEMAN: I believe that that's an issue
of law, Your Honor. It is no different ultimately than
what the Court concluded in Croson. This type of an
argument that a do-over is not a racial classification
is exactly what happened in Croson. There was a do-over
declared, a -- a rebidding; and yet the Court said,
because that rebidding was declared for racial reasons,
it would nevertheless be subjected to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That was pursuant to --
to an affirmative action plan, and here we're dealing
with this concept under Title VII of disparate impact.
And let's take for one example a test that's given by a
police department, a fire department, and it -- it's a
physical fitness test, and it disproportionately
excludes female applicants. And when the results come
in and there are no women on the eligibility list, the
department reconsiders. It thinks there is something
wrong with this test. It can probably test for the
necessary skills in a way that will not achieve those
results.
Would it be similarly impermissible,
similarly based on an impermissible criterion, if the
department said: We're not going to -- we have got the
results of that test. We're going to throw it out and
substitute another that will not have those skewed
results.
MR. COLEMAN: If that decision was grounded
in a determination that we simply need to ensure that
there are more women on the force, then, yes, it would
be subjected to heightened scrutiny, maybe not strict
scrutiny under that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not more women on the
force, but this test that we're giving has the effect of
excluding most women, just as the high school diploma
had the effect, a disproportionate effect, on one race.
MR. COLEMAN: I think your question gets to
part of the heart of this case, and that is, ultimately:
Is the decision that's being made one that is -- is
based in race or is -- is based on a determination that
there is an improper test? But this decision is
grounded in race if -- if the police department in your
case had clear evidence that the test was simply
unnecessary, that it was not job-related and could be
clearly done by an identifiable alternative, I think at
the end of the day there might be some basis. But if it
is grounded in --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So they would have to go
-- I take it from what you said they would have to go as
far as proving a Title VII disparate impact case against
themselves. They couldn't do anything short of that to
prevail when it is the majority race that is complaining
about discrimination.
MR. COLEMAN: To use the constitutional
analogy, Your Honor, I think Wygant, Croson, Adarand,
other cases, make clear that you do not have to prove
the violation against yourself, but you do have to
demonstrate that you have a strong basis in evidence for
believing you are violating the law. In Wygant the
plurality set that out citing convincing evidence.
JUSTICE SOUTER: The problem, Mr. Coleman,
is that -- that the cases you are relying on, it seems
to me, are cases in which ultimately what is being
judged is a different result in the -- at the end point
of the process which was starting. And the problem that
I have with -- with using cases like that and -- and
essentially the problem I -- I have with your argument
is that it leaves a -- a municipality or a governmental
body like New Haven in a -- in a damned if you do,
damned if you don't situation. Because on -- on the
very assumptions that you are making, if they go forward
with -- with their -- their hiring plan, they certify
the results and go forward with it, they are inevitably
facing a disparate impact lawsuit.
If they stop and say, wait a minute, we're
starting down the road toward a disparate impact lawsuit
and, indeed, there may be something wrong here, they are
inevitably facing a disparate treatment suit. And
whatever Congress wanted to attain, it couldn't have
wanted to attain that kind of a situation.
Why isn't the most reasonable reading of
this set of facts a reading which is consistent with
giving the city an opportunity, assuming good faith, to
start again? And I -- I recognize there's got to be a
good faith condition, and the -- the good faith can
always be attacked. But isn't that the only way to
avoid the damned if you do, damned if you don't
situation?
MR. COLEMAN: No, I completely disagree with
that, Justice Souter. It not simply a matter of good
faith. The use of race in government is so -- the Court
has been so --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you make no distinction
between race as an animating discriminating object on
the one hand and race consciousness on the other. There
is no way to deal with a situation like this any more
than there is a way to deal with -- with setting lines
in voting districts --
MR. COLEMAN: I also --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- without pervasive race
consciousness. That is not unconstitutional, and it
seems to me that you are not observing that distinction
in -- in your reply.
MR. COLEMAN: I disagree with that as well,
Justice Souter. There is a strong difference in what
happened in this case. In partial answer to Justice
Ginsburg's question, et al., this is not an issue where
the -- where the city had before it and was making a
determination that our examination is not job related.
In fact, it is clear on the record that what the city
said is, this comes to the wrong racial result, and,
therefore, there must be something wrong with the test.
When pressed --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, let me ask you this
-- this question, and I don't mean to interrupt your
answer, but it is based on what Justice Souter and
Justice Ginsburg have both been asking. Hypothetical
case: The city says, our test is not very good. We
need a new test.
The expert says, don't pay us to have a new
one. There are two great ones out there. One is in
City A. The other is in City B. Use either one of
those. They are great.
They check. They find out that City A has a
disparate impact in the statistical sense, not in the
legal sense; that it disadvantages minorities, at least
if you look at the passage rates. The other test
doesn't. Are they permitted to take the test that
doesn't have that differential?
MR. COLEMAN: Under our alternative
argument, Your Honor, assuming that -- that fixing
disparate impact can be a compelling interest, we
believe that you would at least have to demonstrate a
strong basis in evidence to show that there is liability
under (k)(2) -- your -- your example --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: My -- my question is --
and you can answer, I guess, both under Title VII and --
and under the Fourteenth Amendment. The city says, the
only reason -- the only reason for our selecting the
test from City B -- and both tests are very good tests
-- is because minorities are better represented on the
passing rate. Is that permissible?
MR. COLEMAN: Under the Armstrong basis of
evidence test, it might very well be because it meets
the second qualification of the disparate impact
statute, in which there is a specific alternative that
is equally valid. If you are -- if you are going to
assume that it can be shown to be equally valid and that
it has less disparate impact --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And do you find -- and do
you find any constitutional deficiency in the city's
choice in that hypothetical case? Is there any
Fourteenth Amendment problem?
MR. COLEMAN: Well, we are certainly quite
troubled that the Court would say, as it has not said,
that the idea of -- of overcoming purely unintentional
discrimination can be a compelling interest for cutting
off what we believe is intentional discrimination. But
barring that, our test, our backup test, is then that
the strong basis in evidence test that exists from
Wygant and Croson would at least in its -- require that
you have a strong basis in evidence for demonstrating
liability under this --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, what -- what if
you've got -- what if you've got the basis of Justice
Kennedy's hypothetical? You've -- you've got a
municipality. It's a racially mixed municipality. It's
got two tests. That's his hypothetical. One of them
seems to suggest that there is going to be a significant
racial disparity in the results if they use it. The
other one from the other city or the other State
suggests not. That's all they've got to go on.
Is that a strong basis in evidence, or did
they walk their way into a lawsuit by you if they adopt
the -- the test that doesn't -- that at least in the
other place hasn't produced the disparity?
MR. COLEMAN: Under that argument, as long
as it can be demonstrated to be equally content valid,
equally or better content valid and to have a lesser
impact, then it would show -- it would establish a
stronger --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They would not have
discriminated against any particular --
MR. COLEMAN: That's -- that's correct, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- white or -- or majority
applicants in -- in that selection, which is what
occurred here. You had -- you had some applicants who
were winners, and their -- their promotion was -- was
set aside. That doesn't exist in these hypotheticals at
all. It's just an abstract question of which of these
two systems should be adopted.
MR. COLEMAN: Well, I understood Justice
Kennedy's hypothetical to be after you have taken a test
and building upon the hypothetical.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It wasn't my --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No. No. It was --
MR. COLEMAN: It was --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It was designed to show,
and maybe it's theoretical, but I want to know the
answer so that I can understand this case. It's
designed to ask you the question whether or not race
consciousness is ever permissible.
MR. COLEMAN: If -- if in your situation is
simply in your situation the initial giving of the test,
can you choose between those two tests, then we believe
based upon what the Court has said in the past that a
city could do that.
JUSTICE BREYER: A city can in fact choose a
test simply because there will be more minority people
who will in fact end up in the positions, that's your
view?
MR. COLEMAN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: You needn't do anything
else? I mean, that is your answer to Justice Kennedy?
MR. COLEMAN: Nobody can know in fact --
JUSTICE BREYER: I want to know is that your
answer to Justice Kennedy or not?
MR. COLEMAN: Under that hypothetical, we
believe they can choose that test.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are you assuming --
JUSTICE BREYER: The answer is yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are you --
JUSTICE BREYER: If that's so, what's the
difference here? The most that you're saying is the
worst that could have happened here; the worst that
could have happened is that some experts told them, this
test -- by the way, test one is -- is even worse than in
Justice Kennedy's hypothetical. It's a test that
probably discriminates negatively against minorities.
So if you admit he could do it even if the test didn't
discriminate negatively against minorities, namely
test -- in his case, why can't you do it triply, in the
case where there's evidence that they did discriminate,
the test does discriminate against minorities?
MR. COLEMAN: Two very strong differences,
Justice Breyer. First of all, our -- our firefighters
had already taken the test; they had earned their
promotions under state law. There was nothing left to
do but to ministerially certify the lists, all right?
The second difference is this. The only --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, that can't be right
if they -- if what you just answered to Justice Kennedy
is -- is right.
Suppose they had very strong evidence that
the test that they had given that had these results,
just as my physical fitness test that excluded all
women -- that had it those results, it wasn't
job-related, and there was a better test available, they
wouldn't have any vested right in getting the promotions
under those circumstances, would they?
MR. COLEMAN: We're not claiming that it's a
vested right. What we're claiming is that sometimes the
Court has permitted governments to use race to remedy
discrimination, and what would be needed in that
hypothetical, Your Honor, is -- is the discrimination;
and under your hypothetical there might very well be a
strong case of discrimination, but under these facts
there is no evidence in this record, and the city
conceded below and never asserted in its bio in this
case that it had any basis to contest the
job-relatedness of this examination or these
examinations that were given. That is not part of the
record in this case. The --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- one of the briefs
said that, and maybe it wasn't done below, but one of
the briefs said part of the claim is that some of the
things that this test tested for were not -- were not
qualities or abilities that were needed in New Haven,
although they might be needed in other fire departments.
The test had not been localized. Wasn't that part of
the -- part of the objection?
MR. COLEMAN: No, Your Honor, not in the
district court. If you look at 1024a of the Pet. App.,
the city's lawyer in front of the district court and in
its pleadings on summary judgment very clearly states
that they didn't believe the job relatedness is even
relevant to the case. All that they needed was good
faith. They didn't need job relatedness, they didn't
need an actual alternative, which is the basis of some
of the hypotheticals you're giving. All they need is
good faith.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then why did they have
the testimony before the Civil Service Board, about --
somebody from another testing company said this is a
multiple choice test; it tests rote memory; we could
have come up with a test that would better test the
skills needed to be -- nothing about the localization,
but something about command presence. There was a term
used, assessment centers; that this test didn't
effectively test the skills that you needed on the job,
and others did.
MR. COLEMAN: Justice Ginsburg, that's not
at all what Mr. Hornick said in front of the Civil
Service Board. What he said is first, I didn't look at
the test; two, I looked at the results and I see
disparate impact; three, I'm not going to tell you what
exams we gave, but I'm mentioning this thing called an
assessment center, but I could design a better test, not
having even looked at this test.
But at the end of the day he also said, I
think you should go ahead and give these promotions and
in the future maybe you could fix your test. He didn't
say here's an alternative; here's why this would be
equally valid, here's why -- excuse me -- here's why
this would have lesser impact. He simply said there is
a concept called an assessment center, and I think that
that might help you in the future, but you should go
ahead and give the promotions on this test. Same --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, some time
ago you said you had two answers to Justice Breyer's
question. I would like to hear the second one.
MR. COLEMAN: Well, I actually think I got
to the -- the first.
JUSTICE BREYER: If you got to that, then I
have -- I'd like one follow-up, and that's it.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe if you don't
mind, you could remind me what the second answer was.
MR. COLEMAN: Again -- again, getting to the
-- the fundamental point is, the use of race is so, so
very important that the Court has always expressed
skepticism and hostility to it, and what we're saying
under this argument regarding a strong basis in
evidence, and I think this answers both your
hypothetical and Justice Souter's, is that what the city
is saying, we don't have to demonstrate a strong basis
in evidence for liability, we concede that we don't have
that; all we have is good faith. And that's not enough.
That leads --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you are -- as I
understand it, you are imposing your strong basis in
evidence test on what you referred to a second ago as
the use of race, and that cannot be correct, because the
use of race includes race-conscious decisions which are
not discriminatory decisions, and they certainly do not
implicate the -- the obligation that you want to impose.
You -- if -- if your argument is going to be
coherent with what we start with, it can't be based
merely on the use of race because if it does, then you
are, in effect, turning any race-conscious decision into
a discrimination decision, and that equation we
certainly haven't made and we're never going to make.
MR. COLEMAN: That's not our intention,
Justice Souter.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then --
MR. COLEMAN: Our argument is clearly that
this is not race-conscious, that it is race-based. The
only determination that the city made is we don't like
the results of this test; there must be something
different that we can do; and we don't need to
demonstrate --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But even --
MR. COLEMAN: -- viability or strong basis
in evidence. We can simply fix it.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't want to turn this
into just a rhetoric exercise, but I think the rhetoric
is important. You say the city took the position, we
don't like the results of this test. That kind of a
statement is consistent with saying, look, we don't like
the race of the people who are going to benefit from
this. It's also consistent with the city's taking the
position that there is such a racial disparity here that
we are either asking for trouble or walking blindly or
perhaps foolishly into a -- a racial disparity lawsuit
based on disparate impact.
Those are two very, very different
attitudes. The first one is discriminatory. I don't
see how the second one is discriminatory.
MR. COLEMAN: But it -- it clearly is,
Justice Souter. I think the distinction we're making in
part is this principle of individual dignity that the
Court has recognized is so strong distinguishes the
hypothetical that Justice Kennedy gave me from -- form
the example that we have in this case where they had
already taken the test; identifiable individuals had
earned their promotions; and then the city says too many
non-minorities passed this test, and we are going to
scuttle these results based on identifiable individuals
who have passed and not based on any -- anything
approaching a demonstration that there is actually any
disparate impact liability.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the cost of drawing the
distinction between this case and Justice Kennedy's
hypothetical example is that if we draw that
distinction, the only way the city can get itself out of
not only a certain lawsuit, but quite probably a
successful lawsuit, is to make, in practical terms, a
preliminary case against itself.
MR. COLEMAN: I --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And it -- I cannot conceive
that Congress intended to put a city into that situation
saying you've either got to blunder ahead into a losing
lawsuit in court, or you have got to stop and expose
yourself to another lawsuit which you can only win by
proving that you at least had taken some steps in
violating the law the first time. That is
inconceivable.
MR. COLEMAN: Justice Souter, I understand
the concern about the employer's point of view, which we
don't think stands here just because of the blatant way
the City went about this. But in general terms we're
not asking, contrary to Wygant, contrary to Croson, that
you prove up a claim against yourself.
But what we are saying is that the standard
cannot be so light that the City very lightly and
without any demonstration whatsoever that there might
actually be liability here, based simply on the numbers,
can say well, we're going to avoid liability and we're
going to favor the minority group over the non-minority
group.
All we're asking for is that the City
undertake an honest and -- and open assessment of are we
really likely to be liable here under the disparate
impact provision of Title VII.
JUSTICE BREYER: What do you do if there is
not a liability in question? Suppose a school district
deliberately, to obtain greater racial diversities in
the schools draws district boundaries in a particular
way among neighborhoods or plans a construction program.
Then suppose having done that, indeed having once drawn
the boundaries, a group comes to the school district and
says you can achieve greater diversity if you redraw the
boundary. You can achieve greater diversity if instead
of building this school where the -- where the
foundations are laid already, you build the school over
here instead.
Is that, in your view, different from your
case?
MR. COLEMAN: I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: It is? How?
MR. COLEMAN: I think it is. I think you're
giving examples from Justice Kennedy's --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's just what I'm doing
exactly.
MR. COLEMAN: It's -- it's really isn't
different from Justice Thomas also had an example in
Grutter. These are --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm interested in the
distinctions, not whether it's similar to Justice
Thomas's or not. I'm interested in the distinctions
between this program -- I'll add one more if you want
just this program, an employer --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I hear his answer to
this one first? I'm getting confused.
(Laughter.)
MR. COLEMAN: I think the Court is certainly
not fully in agreement on these questions, but the Court
has at least an opinion suggested that those types of
examples really are more of -- as Justice Souter, you
were saying, the race-conscious type determination, and
they don't violate this principle of individual dignity.
You're not taking individuals one by one who have
already earned promotions, and you're taking away
benefits from them clearly on the --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the difference between
that and drawing the school district boundary, which
takes from the individual children who live in that
neighborhood the right to go to this school, which they
think is a better one, and sends them to that school,
which they think is a worse one, the difference between
changing that boundary and changing the exam is what?
MR. COLEMAN: The difference that the Court,
I believe, has suggested is that that type of a
redrawing is likely to include a number of traditional
redistricting factors and that race in that instance,
unless it was shown to ultimately predominate, would not
make it a race -- or, excuse me, a race-based effort
that would violate equal protection. I believe
that's --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you one
question --
MR. COLEMAN: Of course.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- because I'm not sure I
understood your answer to Justice Kennedy?
What is your answer to Justice Kennedy's
question about the two alternatives, one of which would
fit exactly into the concluding clause of the first
question presented to achieve racial proportionality in
candidates selected? He says there are two alternatives
before the school board, one would achieve the
proportionality, the other would not. Are they free to
choose the former?
MR. COLEMAN: Again, assuming that no test
has previously been given, if there are two tests, they
are equally valid, one can be demonstrated to have
lesser disparate impact, if there are no other
circumstances, then we think they could likely under
that test --
JUSTICE STEVENS: They could take that test,
even though its sole purpose was to achieve racial
proportionality in candidates selected?
MR. COLEMAN: I disagree that its sole
purpose would be for that reason, Justice Stevens. As
long as it meets the other criteria for job relatedness,
it would still be fulfilling the City's necessary needs
for -- for identifying quality candidates for making
sure --
JUSTICE STEVENS: This is the -- putting to
one side liability in the lawsuit, is the interest in
avoiding disparate impact a valid State interest?
MR. COLEMAN: We certainly have taken the
position if disparate impact is identified purely as
unintentional discrimination, then we don't believe it's
a compelling State interest to overcome --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I didn't say compelling.
I said is it a valid State interest. Just the interest
in avoiding the kind of results you got here.
MR. COLEMAN: I'm not sure that we are
questioning whether there's a State interest in --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The City is not merely
trying to avoid liability, they are trying to avoid a
disparate impact. Is that a valid interest?
MR. COLEMAN: If the disparate impact is
caused by something that could be demonstrated to equate
to discrimination on behalf of the entity, which is what
the elements of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought the whole
idea of disparate impact is it's unintentional, that's
the assumption, disparate treatment, intentional
discrimination, disparate impact, unintentional, but it
has askewed racial results.
MR. COLEMAN: There are two aspects to that,
Justice Ginsburg. The first is that you may have
disparate impact if it is caused by unintentional
discrimination. But you may have disparate impact that
occurs through no discrimination, intended or otherwise.
And Watson clearly recognized that. And when Watson
said we need to have strong evidentiary standards in
evaluating disparate impact liability, it was
recognizing that employers can't act simply to fix
numerical disparities, because otherwise that leads to
soft quotas.
What we need is some demonstration that
there is at least discrimination on behalf of the
entity, and perhaps that's unintentional, perhaps it's
not.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How do we know whether
something is discriminatory or just that it will have a
certain effect? Because it's in spite of. For example,
the Greek standard, the employer wants everybody to have
a high school diploma, he wants an upgraded working
staff, was told by this Court you can't do that because
you would disproportionately exclude one race.
MR. COLEMAN: Congress has spoken on this
issue, has identified job relatedness and lack -- and
the refusal of an alternative in K itself. We believe
this is with the provisions we have cited, H, J and L,
all in which Congress expressed a strong intent to favor
tests.
If I may reserve the balance of my time,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Coleman.
Mr. Kneedler.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF EDWIN S. KNEEDLER
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING VACATUR AND REMAND
MR. KNEEDLER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This Court has long recognized that Title
VII prohibits not only intentional discrimination but
acts that are discriminatory in their operation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: With respect to both
blacks and whites, correct?
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, can you assure
me that the government's position would be the same if
this test -- black applicants -- firefighters scored
highest on this test in disproportionate numbers, and
the City said we don't like that result, we think there
should be more whites on the fire department, and so
we're going to throw the test out? The government of
United States would adopt the same position?
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes, and let me -- your
question had two parts of it. You said there are too
many blacks or too many whites. That is not a
permissible objective under our view. The employer's
action has to be tied to a concern about a violation of
the disparate impact of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yeah.
MR. KNEEDLER: -- under -- under Title VII.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's the part I
don't understand. What you're saying is that the
department can engage in intentional discrimination to
avoid concern that they will be sued under disparate
impact. Why doesn't it work the other way around as
well? Why don't they say, well, we've got to tolerate
the disparate impact because otherwise, if we took steps
to avoid it, we would be sued for intentional
discrimination? This idea that there is this great
dilemma -- I mean, it cuts both ways.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, to -- to say that an
employer violates the disparate treatment provision of
Title VII when it seeks to -- when it acts for the
purpose of complying with the disparate impact
provisions of Title VII would be to set those two
mutually reinforcing provisions of Title VII at war with
one another, contrary to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They are at war with one
another.
MR. KNEEDLER: No, I don't think so.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How can one avoid --
MR. KNEEDLER: One of the purposes of -- of
the disparate impact test, as this Court has recognized,
is -- is as a prophylactic against intentional
discrimination, to root it out; also, as this Court said
in Watson, to identify possible instances of subjective
or -- excuse me, subconscious discrimination, and in
some cases, to break down barriers that have existed in
the past, for example, possibly the 60/40 weighting
requirement that was under longstanding collective
bargaining agreement.
The disparate impact test has been
recognized since Griggs as fundamental to fulfilling the
purposes of Title VII.
Title VII also has another important
objective, as this Court has repeatedly recognized,
which is that the voluntary compliance is the preferred
objective -- excuse me -- preferred means of achieving
the objectives of Title VII. Employers therefore
require considerable flexibility in assessing their
practices and deciding on appropriate action if it looks
like one of their actions -- their practices would
violate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If it looks like or if the
employer just in good faith believes?
MR. KNEEDLER: We think -- we think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: When I say they're at war
with one another, I mean they become at war with one
another when you say that all that is necessary to
permit intentional discrimination is the employer's good
faith belief that if he didn't intentionally
discriminate, he'd be caught in a situation of disparate
impact.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, this --
JUSTICE SCALIA: At that point, they're at
war with each other.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, in -- in our view, the
-- in -- in the situation here where the -- where the
test has been given, and there is a list produced, we
believe that the -- in order to avoid summary judgment
and a disparate treatment case on a claim of intentional
discrimination, the employer would have to show that his
concerns were reasonable ones. It has to be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How does that --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- more than simply a
disparate --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I know you said that in
your brief when you made a distinction between mere good
faith and reasonable belief. So how does one determine
whether the concern that the employer is expressing is
really in good faith or is reasonable? What are the
indicia of reasonableness?
MR. KNEEDLER: I -- for example, a -- a
gross statistical disparity. A statistical disparity
makes out a prima facie case under Title VII. We're not
saying that in all cases simply a statistical disparity
would be sufficient. A gross statistical disparity
could lead the -- the employer to believe that something
was wrong with the test. So I think -- but in addition
if the employer has concerns about the validity of the
test -- as you pointed out, concerns were expressed to
the Civil Service Board in this case.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Kneedler, could you
explain how summary judgment in favor of the defendants
on the Title VII disparate treatment claim can possibly
be affirmed, even if the employer had reason to believe
that the test that was given would expose itself to
liability under a disparate impact theory? If that's
not the employer's real reason for refusing to go ahead
with the promotions, then isn't there liability under a
disparate treatment -- under a disparate treatment
theory, and that's a question for the jury? So how can
we possibly affirm summary judgment here?
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, we're -- we're not
suggesting that the Court should affirm summary
judgment. We're -- we're suggesting remand. The
District Court identified reasons other than complying
with Title VII's disparate impact standard for the
employer's action here, diversity and role model,
promotion of role models which we do not see as falling
within this framework. But if the only evidence that
the plaintiff has that the employer took race into
account was that the employer was aware, as obviously
the disparate impact provisions require him to be, of
the racially disparate impact of the test, and the
employer acts in response to that, if that is the only
evidence the -- the plaintiffs had, then the employer
would be entitled to summary judgment. We think that
the evidence --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sorry.
MR. KNEEDLER: We think that evidence of
pretext or evidence that there is something else has to
be external or something other than --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And a reasonable response
to that, is your position?
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not just in response to
that.
MR. KNEELDER: If it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A reasonable --
MR. KNEEDLER: If it's not reasonable, then
we think that that would be evidence of -- of pretext --
and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you be specific about
what facts you think should be tried on remand? Because
you do distance yourself from the Respondents. You are
not urging affirmance of the summary judgment. You say
there are or may be genuine issues of fact. So what are
they?
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, I think they go
primarily to the district court's identification of
diversity and -- and role models as possible motivations
for what the -- what the employer was doing. The
plaintiffs have also alleged that the -- that there was
influence on the Civil Service Board external to the --
to the board's own decision. By the way, I should point
out in this regard, at pages 166 and 167 of the Joint
Appendix, the two board members who voted not to certify
expressed concerns about the validity of the test based
on what they had heard at the hearing.
We don't think realistically a board in this
situation should be required to do more, because it's
important to recognize that the -- what the employer did
here was not what concerned the Court in Wygant and
cases like this. The Court -- the employer did not
adopt racial classifications with all the potential for
adverse consequences for individuals who are labeled by
race and promote on the basis of race. That's not what
the employer did here. The employer paused and decided
that there might be another nondiscriminatory or less
discriminatory means. In other words --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, counsel, you know,
I've given law school examinations, looked at them, and
bar examinations for years. There's never been one,
when I don't look at it after the fact and say, you
know, this could be better, this -- this was not quite
right.
So shouldn't there be some standard that
there has to be a significant, a strong showing after
the test has been taken that it's deficient? Before it
can be set aside?
MR. KNEEDLER: We -- we don't think so, and
for several reasons. First of all, the action that the
employer has taken in response, as I just said, is not a
racial classification response. It is a facially
neutral response where the -- where the employer has
decided the test will -- perhaps we'll look for another
standard which would be given and applied equally to all
applicants.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you would say that --
and I'm asking the same question the Chief Justice asked
earlier -- you would say that if it had come out the
other way --
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And if there had been a
disproportionate number of minorities who -- who passed
the test --
MR. KNEEDLER: And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You would say that it's
neutral to set that test aside?
MR. KNEEDLER: And we -- and we --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think you'd say
that.
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, we -- there also has to
be some concern that the test may not be job-related and
-- and that there may not be other alternatives. And
we've been talking just about the prima facie case, but
those are important elements as to whether the test is
job-related.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's whether it is -- it is
neutral to set aside a test simply because one race
predominates.
MR. KNEEDLER: No, but the -- but the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How you can call that
race-neutral I -- I do not know.
MR. KNEEDLER: It's facially neutral. I
wanted to make the point that this is not the sort of
intentional discrimination favoring one individual
because of his race or disfavoring another. What the
employer has done here is -- is responded to the impact
of the test in general terms, not on specific --
JUSTICE BREYER: What do you think of an
employer who does the following? He advertises a job.
Everyone comes in and applies. He says May 1 is the
deadline. When he sees the applicants, he thinks, I'd
prefer more diversity. And solely because he lacks
diversity among women, minorities, and whatever, he
says, you know, I'm going to extend the deadline 2
months, and I hope I'll get a few more minority or
female applicants.
Now, what's his reason? He wants more
diversity in the workforce. Now, in your opinion, does
the Constitution permit that extension?
MR. KNEEDLER: I -- I think that's a more
difficult question, but there may -- there may be a
situation where the employer is concerned that his
recruitment or his job announcement has had a disparate
impact in terms of the -- of the applications that he
has gotten. In -- in that situation, the employees who
have responded and may be advantaged, like the people
promoted here may actually be taking advantage of a test
that imposes barriers and disadvantages other people.
So when -- when we consider the impact in a
situation like this on somebody who has passed the
promotion test, it's important to consider that the
people who have passed it may have benefited from a test
that is discriminatory.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, this may be
the same question Justice Breyer asked, but I'd like
something closer to a yes or no answer. Does the
government consider promotion of diversity by itself a
compelling state interest in the employment context as
opposed to the school context?
MR. KNEEDLER: We think -- we think it
probably is a compelling state interest, but it is not
one that -- that can be advanced by race -- by racial
classifications. And that -- and that is our basic
submission here. This was not a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can it be --
MR. KNEEDLER: This was not a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can it be advanced
by taking actions to avoid what is perceived as a
disparate impact?
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words, the
disparate impact is regarded as something you can
intentionally respond to by drawing racial distinctions
solely because you would like a more diverse workforce?
MR. KNEEDLER: No, not drawing racial
distinctions. That's our -- this -- the employer's
response here did not draw racial distinctions. It did
not say so many black firefighters would be promoted --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It didn't care --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- and so many white --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It didn't care -- it
had to draw racial distinctions because it looked at the
test and said, we think there's a problem because of the
racial makeup of who's going to get the promotions.
MR. KNEEDLER: The employer was responding
to the discriminatory test or what -- what it was
reasonably concerned was a discriminatory test --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it looked at the --
MR. KNEEDLER: -- not the individual --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Counsel, it looked at the
results, and it classified the successful and
unsuccessful applicants by race.
MR. KNEEDLER: It -- it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And then -- and you want
us to say this isn't race? I have -- I have trouble
with this argument.
MR. KNEEDLER: No, with respect, it did not
classify according to race; it looked in general terms.
It did not have the names of individual people. It
looked in general terms at what the racial disparity of
the test was. It just --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It didn't look at
names; it just looked at the label of what their race
was. That's all they were concerned about.
MR. KNEEDLER: Title VII's disparate impact
test requires -- requires an employer to be aware of and
respond --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that's inconsistent
with your answer to the Chief Justice who was exploring
whether or not what we have here is a -- is a racial
criteria, pure and simple, and you say, well, it's
general. And then we point out that each applicant
didn't have his name, but they had his or her race.
MR. KNEEDLER: But the employer -- the
employer was not making a decision to go forward and
appoint individuals or promote individuals because of
their race. The employer stopped there and said we're
going to start over. That new test would be given
equally to all employees, not any one particular
employee.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Kneedler, can I ask
you this? You -- you've recommended that we set aside
the summary judgment and send the case back for a
hearing.
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What is the issue of fact
that you think needs to be decided?
MR. KNEEDLER: As I've mentioned to Justice
Ginsburg, I think it would go -- there are several
things. One, it would go to the justifications that
were advanced by, that identified by the district court
here that do not fit into this framework, do not fit
into complying with the Title VII disparate impact test,
and those are promotion of diversity and -- and role
models.
That is -- that is one. Also the district
court did not apply what we believe is the right test,
whether the employer had a reasonable basis for
believing that what it was doing was necessary or a
reasonable basis to believe it might be violating the
disparate impact test. If it did not have a reasonable
basis then we believe there would be a triable issue for
the jury.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When -- when I asked that
you question, you said that one issue of fact was
whether the board was acting in response to improper
influence, to racial politics.
MR. KNEEDLER: Yes. That -- the district
court rejected that argument and whether or not that
should be revisited on remand is -- is another matter.
We're --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't that a controverted
issue of fact? How can you possibly get around that?
MR. KNEEDLER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, one side says what
you say is just pretext; the real reason was just
politics. Isn't that an issue of fact that has to be
tried?
MR. KNEEDLER: Well, under this -- under
this Court's decisions dealing -- dealing with summary
judgment, even on questions of intent, the -- the
plaintiff ordinarily has to come up with some
affirmative evidence that there was -- that there was in
this case an impermissible racial motive to do that.
And the -- the district court looked at what the civil
service commissioners said and concluded that -- that
they did not have an impermissible racial motive, that
they were responding to concerns about the validity of
-- of the test.
JUSTICE ALITO: But does the government
think that you can just -- in a case like this you can
just look at what -- what is said by the ultimate
decision-maker and ignore the input from other people
who may have influenced the process?
MR. KNEEDLER: No, no, we do not. There may
be other people who had input into the process, and
whether the -- the district court evaluated that and
concluded that the -- that the input, that there was not
a triable issue for summary judgment -- to avoid summary
judgment on that question. That would be open to the
district court to reconsider on remand. We don't deny
that -- that it could go beyond that, but our principal
concern here is the analytical framework that an
employer who seeks to comply with the disparate impact
requirements of Title VII which have been longstanding
should not be teamed to have engaged in the sort of
intentional discrimination that either the Equal
Protection Clause or Title VII prohibits.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Meade.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. MEADE
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. MEADE: Mr. Chief Justice, and maybe it
please the Court:
Employers, both private and public, are
required to comply with Title VII's disparate impact
provisions, which seek to root out barriers to equal
opportunity. When an employer learns that a practice
has a severe adverse impact such that it creates an
inference of discrimination, and evidence further
supports that inference, the employer should be granted
some limited degree of flexibility to act. An employer
certainly should not be encouraged or forced to make a
promotion on the basis of the questionable practice.
Title VII's disparate impact provisions are
designed to remove structural barriers to
discrimination, and when an employment practice has an
adverse impact such that it substantiates an inference
of discrimination, an employer should look beyond that
adverse impact.
JUSTICE ALITO: If all the employer --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can I ask you --
JUSTICE ALITO: If all the employer has is
evidence that the test results violate the four-fifths
rule, is that sufficient?
MR. MEADE: In our view it is not
sufficient, and that is not what was at issue here.
First of all, there was a severe adverse impact, much
lower than the four-fifths rule, much lower than what
this Court found in Connecticut v Teal, and in addition,
not just on the pass/fail ratio --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if I could modify the
question. Is there some statistical point at which
that's sufficient, if it's not four-fifths, if it's
nine-tenths --
MR. MEADE: Our view --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- that alone would be
sufficient?
MR. MEADE: Our view is that it might be
conceivable under Title VII in some cases for the
statistical disparity to be so severe such that it would
give an employer a reasonable basis under Title VII.
However, that's not what we argue here.
We argue here that an employer should be
able to act when it has a severe adverse impact which
creates an inference of discrimination, coupled with
evidence that creates doubts about the flaws in the test
or the possibility of alternatives.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can I ask you to
touch on the distinction between racial discrimination
and race-conscious action? The actions that were taken
in many of our cases, in Croson and Adarand, Parents
Involved, Wygant, were obviously race-conscious actions;
there was a reason that the governments in those cases
were taking the action. It was because of what they saw
as the impact on race. Yet we concluded that was racial
discrimination. So what's the -- how do you draw the
line between race-conscious that's permitted and racial
discrimination that's not?
MR. MEADE: Well, two answers, Mr. Chief
Justice. First of all, this race consciousness is race
consciousness that's mandated by Federal law. This is
not a discretionary decision by an employer.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but if we --
if we agree with your -- I mean, you're assuming, it
seems to me in your argument, that the actions that
they've taken here are not intentional racial
discrimination; and of course if they're not, then you
don't have much to worry about. But let's assume that
they are, as we found they were in Croson and Wygant and
Adarand and Parents Involved.
MR. MEADE: Well, the difference in those
cases that you talk about, Croson, Adarand, Parents
Involved, they involve express racial quotas -- excuse
me, express racial classifications, where the government
is making a decision based on a particular individual on
the basis of race.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And the only reason
you say that isn't by an individual is that you have
blacked out the names?
MR. MEADE: No, because it's a facially
neutral action which applies to all test takers the
same. That doesn't mean --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your position is
what? They threw out the test, so you would have no
problem at all if they looked at those results and they
were predominantly black rather than white; you would
say the city can throw out the test and there's no
racial discrimination there at all?
MR. MEADE: No, I would say that there's no
classification. However, there's another way to trigger
strict scrutiny and that comes under cases like
Arlington Heights and Feeney, and the action that the --
the facially neutral action that the city took here
falls under that line of cases. And then --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't see how you can
call it facially neutral. It's neutral because you
throw it out for the losers as well as for the winners?
That's neutrality?
MR. MEADE: There is no classification,
because each individual, and -- when a particular
individual is looked at and a decision is made on the
basis of race, that is a racial classification. If --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So this case would
come out differently, if the list was there with then
names and they go down and instead of saying throw out
the test, they said Jones, you don't get the promotion
because you're white; Johnson, you don't get it because
you're white. And they go down the list and throw out
everybody who took the test; then that would be all
right?
MR. MEADE: Well, the point is, if all the
tests are being thrown out and different decisions are
not being made on the basis of different individuals on
the basis of race, then --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So they can keep --
they get do-overs until it comes out right? Or throw
out this test; they do another test; oh, it's just as
bad, throw that one out; get another one that's a little
better, but not so -- throw that one out?
MR. MEADE: Well, two responses. The first
response is a legal one, the second one is a practical
one. As to the legal answer, if a city were to do that
or an employer were to do that again and again, first of
all, that would go to intent, whether the intent of the
employer were actually to comply with Title VII or for
some other intent.
Second of all, it would speak to whether
there are actually equally valid less discriminatory
alternatives. Second, the practical --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well if -- how many
times before it's a problem?
MR. MEADE: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You say if they did
it over and over again. What if they did it twice here?
MR. MEADE: Well, that would be a question
about whether they had a reasonable basis to do it. And
I would say if they did it a second time, that could
create an inference of discrimination.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What -- what has New
Haven done in fact? This certification was requested in
March of 2004; we're now 2009. What has New Haven done
in order to get lieutenants and captains in the fire
department?
MR. MEADE: Justice Ginsburg, this is
information outside the record, of course. The -- the
city has held tests for other positions, both written
and oral, in assessment centers that have not had a
severe disparate impact -- actually, that have not had
an adverse impact at all under the four-fifths rule.
And specifically for the lieutenants and
captains, what the city has been forced to do is have
temporary acting promotions on a rotating basis based on
seniority. But the city has not gone forward with any
promotions yet, and, in fact, the Petitioners in this
case may in the end receive some or all of the
promotions. But the city has a duty to make sure that
its process is fair for all applicants, both black and
white.
JUSTICE BREYER: I have purposely gone, of
course, to the concurring opinion because I believe it's
the controlling opinion in Parents Involved, and there
are two examples in that opinion. One is strategic site
selection of new schools, i.e., a planned building, and
the second is drawing attendance zones with a general
recognition of the demographics. Those are given as
examples of instances where there is race consciousness,
but it does not trigger strict scrutiny.
Now, why is your case like that rather than
being like those examples where an employer or a
government official picks particular people or uses
quotas in order to get a certain quota or pay attention
to race in an individual selection, both based on race,
which clearly does require strict scrutiny? And if
there is a difference, even then why is yours justified?
MR. MEADE: Justice Breyer, there are two
ways to enter strict scrutiny. One is a racial
classification which makes different decisions based on
different individuals on the basis of race. Cases like
Croson or Wygant or even affirmative action plans are
examples of making different distinctions based on
different individuals on the basis of race.
There is another line of cases about --
where there's a discriminatory purpose plus adverse
impact on a certain group under the Arlington Heights
line of cases.
Here the Petitioners argue that there is an
adverse impact on them. Of course, that depends on the
assumption that there was, in fact, a valid test. But
here, then, under that line of cases the question is:
What is the discriminatory purpose? And this Court's
cases are not clear about what a discriminatory purpose
is under the Arlington Heights line of cases. However,
the answer to your question is: Compliance with a
Federal statute, even a race conscious Federal statute,
cannot be deemed a discriminatory purpose under the
Arlington -- Arlington Heights inquiry. It is very
different.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that -- I am
sorry. Is that correct if we -- we conclude strict
scrutiny does apply under the Constitution? Compliance
with a statute, looking at impact, is a compelling
interest trumping strict scrutiny under the Equal
Protection Clause?
MR. MEADE: No, Your Honor. If strict
scrutiny applies, then the question is: Is there a
compelling interest? And complying -- complying with a
Federal statute needs to be a compelling interest under
the Equal Protection Clause. The reason is, otherwise,
State and local governments would be in an impossible
position of trying to determine whether they should --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess it would go
to how you construe the statute. It seems to me an odd
argument to say that you can violate the Constitution
because you have to comply with the statute.
MR. MEADE: Well -- well, I would disagree.
That would only be true if there were some doubt as to
the constitutionality of the disparate impact
provisions. But here that -- this Court first
articulated "disparate impact." Congress has reaffirmed
that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well -- well, but you are
loading the -- the equation. The Chief Justice's
question I don't think has been -- been fully answered.
You are -- you are saying that you can eliminate
constitutional concerns because the statute is enacted,
which just repeats those same constitutional concerns.
It's -- it's like having two tracks on the audio that
don't quite fit.
MR. MEADE: Well, I -- I may have
misunderstood the question, but compliance with Federal
statutes have to be a compelling interest as long as
that -- that statute is constitutional. Now --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course you're not saying
that -- that the test is -- is compliance. You're --
you're saying the belief that it's necessary for
compliance is a compelling State interest.
MR. MEADE: Or --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean everybody would
probably concede that if -- if continuing would clearly
be in violation, of course, it's a compelling interest.
But the issue here is: Is it enough if the employer
simply worries that if he doesn't make the change, he
may be in violation?
MR. MEADE: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what's the line
there?
MR. MEADE: Well, the line is set out by
this Court's cases. So assuming strict scrutiny applies
and assuming that compliance with Title VII is a
compelling interest, then the question is whether an
employer has a sufficient basis. And this Court's
cases, both in the intentional and unintentional
context, say that that's a strong basis in evidence, and
so that would be the relevant test. This Court has
applied --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You acknowledge strong
basis in evidence is -- is what -- what the city has to
have?
MR. MEADE: Assuming that strict scrutiny
applies --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. MEADE: -- then, yes, then the city
needs to have a strong basis.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can I get back just
-- just -- since I don't understand it yet, the
distinction between intentional racial discrimination
and race conscious action. I thought both the plurality
and the concurrence in Parents Involved accepted the
fact that race conscious action such as school siting or
drawing district lines is -- is okay, but discriminating
in particular assignments is not.
Now, why is this not intentional
discrimination? I understood you to say it was because
you don't have particular individuals being treated on
the basis of their race. You are going to have to
explain that to me again, because there are particular
individuals here. They are the plaintiffs, and they say
they didn't get their jobs because of intentional racial
action by the -- the city. Why is that not on the
racial -- intentionally racial discrimination side
rather than the permissible race consciousness side?
MR. MEADE: Well, again, this is a question
about what triggers strict scrutiny, and compliance with
the Title -- compliance with the Federal statute should
not be deemed a -- a discriminatory purpose. However,
if strict scrutiny applies, then this Court's
traditional strict scrutiny analysis is a way to test
the decision.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that -- you
may be right that that's what the question is about. I
still don't have in my mind from you a line about how we
decide. Because there are many cases, Croson, Adarand,
Wygant, Parents Involved, where we said action taken
obviously because of race is nonetheless discrimination.
So -- and then there are cases where we have recognized
that race conscious action is permissible. Again, what
-- when I look at something like this, how I do decide
which side of the line that's on -- this is on?
MR. MEADE: Well, again, all of those other
cases involved discretionary actions by State actors,
and those are -- were making decisions, trying to
comply, trying to further various goals, and in those
cases making a very express use of race that a
particular individual -- when that person was looked at,
whether in Croson, whether in Wygant, whether in Parents
Involved, a particular decision was made as to that
individual.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But just to take
Parents Involved, it wasn't a necessary -- the driving
factor was not a specific decision with respect to
specific individuals. They didn't care whether it was
Jones or Smith that they were citing. All they cared
about was the race. And it seems the -- the same here.
You maybe don't care whether it's Jones or Smith who is
not getting the promotion. All you care about is who is
getting the promotion. All you care about is his race.
MR. MEADE: Well, the -- the difference
there is that in that case, Jones and Smith, different
decisions were being made on the basis of race such that
there was a labeling on the basis of race. And here
there is no such labeling because here there is a
question about whether this process is in fact picking
the most qualified individuals for the job. And that's
what Title VII is designed to do.
It is, yes, certainly a race conscious
decision, a race conscious statute. But what Title VII
is trying to do is to make sure that we don't perpetuate
discrimination, albeit unintentional, and, therefore, to
take away barriers that have existed over time and that
continue to exist.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When you say "take away
barriers," one thing is not a hundred percent clear.
Your position is we have to do this in order to avoid
Title VII disparate impact liability. Are you not
reciting as a justification either the diversity in
police -- policing firefighting or still overcoming a
legacy of the past where fire departments were among the
most notorious excluders on the basis of race? You are
not -- you are not saying rectification of past
discrimination? You are not saying diversity?
MR. MEADE: We're not saying that. We did
not say that below. And, in fact, the board members who
voted against certification cited flaws with the test
and flaws with the process, and that was the basis for
their failure to certify.
And the problem with a discriminatory test
is that it does not set a level playing field. It may
create an illusion of meritocracy, but the problem is it
not only disfavors certain individuals, but on the flip
side, it also necessarily advantages others --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You just referred --
MR. MEADE: -- and therefore --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. You just
referred to a discriminatory test. What you said in the
district court, and I quote, the issue is not whether
the tests were valid.
Are you just changing positions on that?
MR. MEADE: No, not at all. The ultimate
validity of the test, our position below, was not
relevant; the question is what was before the board.
And the board heard 5 days of testimony over 2 months.
And as I mentioned, the two individuals who voted
against certification cited concerns with the test and
concerns with the process, and that was the basis for
their decision.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What do you mean by --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'd like to talk just
briefly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I would like to talk just
briefly about this point that the -- some of our
hypotheticals where the test hadn't been given yet.
Here the test has been given. And I had some concerns
along the line of Justice Ginsburg's question. She
said, well, it's not a vested interest.
On the other hand, 2000e-(l)(2) says that
test results can't be altered. There's a statutory
interpretation question of whether that means they can't
be used altogether. Two points about the statute.
Number one, doesn't that diminish at least
the force of the argument that this is a vested
interest? It means the tests are -- have a -- have a
certain presumption in -- in their favor.
Secondly, on -- and maybe this is a question
for the -- for the Petitioners rather than you. If we
-- let's assume that we relied on that statute and said
that there's a Title VII violation here because the
statute was violated. I know you have an
interpretational argument there. Would that give the
Petitioners all the relief they need here, or is there
still additional relief under their 1983 cause of
action?
MR. MEADE: To answer your first question,
the question of statutory interpretation, I would
disagree with the suggestion that that gives support to
the Petitioners' side, and for the following reason:
Congress made a careful judgment about what can and
can't be done once tests have been administered, and it
told employers it -- it can't alter the scores when
those scores are being used. And in -- what that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It can't alter the
results. But let's not get into the statutory
interpretation --
MR. MEADE: But the -- but the point is that
that ties the hands of employers so that the employer,
in fact, is limited in what it can do. Just because a
test has been administered doesn't mean that Title VII's
disparate impact provisions suddenly disappear. And as
a number of lower courts have stated, there's no
entitlement to be promoted on the basis of a flawed or
discriminatory test.
The problem is, the alternative is to force
employers to go forward and to use a discriminatory or a
potentially discriminatory test. That has two problems.
First, it's inconsistent with the goal of
merit-based selection; and second of all, if it turns
out that there is, in fact, discrimination, a court then
needs to undo that discrimination. A court will often
need to use racial quotas or set-asides to try to undo
or to remedy the discrimination that has happened.
So it's much better for an employer to stop,
to not go forward with discrimination, even after the
test has been used, rather than to rush forward and to
create potentially further discrimination and a more
aggressive use of race down the road.
Another problem with creating a high
standard is it will discourage employers from removing
barriers to equal opportunity. For example, with
respect to an ongoing practice, if an employer learns
that that practice has a disparate impact, but is not
sure one way or another, and gets rid of that provision,
under Petitioners' theory that employer will necessarily
be liable to either blacks or whites. The only way that
it can defend against a lawsuit by whites would be to
argue that it was, in fact, violating the disparate
impact rights of black Americans.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What type of -- what
type of other things are you talking about there?
MR. MEADE: I mean, it could -- could be,
for example, if there were a five-part training program
that the City or an employer set up, and individuals may
have completed some portion of the training program such
that there would be similar reliance interests like
the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the question,
I guess, would be whether the program was valid or not
under the traditional approaches you take under Title
VII.
MR. MEADE: Exactly. But then the question
is whether you're forced --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So does your
position here depend on a conclusion that this test is
invalid?
MR. MEADE: No, it doesn't. The question is
whether the employer had a sufficient basis at the time
of its action to make a determination that the test
should not be used.
JUSTICE ALITO: And why didn't it have a
sufficient basis here? It -- it chose the company that
framed the test, and then as soon as it saw the results,
it decided it wasn't going to go forward with the
promotions. The company offered to validate the test.
The City refused to pay for that, even though that was
part of its contract with the company. And all it has
is this testimony by a competitor, Mr. Hornick, who
said -- who hadn't seen the test, and he said, I could
do a better test -- you should make the promotions based
on this, but I could give you -- I could draw up a
better test, and by the way, here's my business card if
you want to hire me in the future.
How's that a strong basis in the evidence?
MR. MEADE: Well, first of all, the City did
not act on the basis of numbers alone. It had 5 days of
hearings where it heard from stakeholders on all sides.
And it heard numerous flaws in the test at those
hearings.
For example, there were arbitrary weightings
of the scores which had no scientific basis; the company
skipped critical design steps in the process; and
although this was not before the board, it later turned
out that there was no calibration in either the cut-off
score or how the test was ultimately going to be used.
Previous tests had a much less severe adverse impact.
This test was an outlier.
JUSTICE ALITO: What difference does the
cut-off score make?
MR. MEADE: The difference of a cut-off
score is a determination, a scientifically based
determination to determine who is qualified and who is
not qualified for --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, I understand that, but
the people at the top would -- the problem here was not
the composition of the people who scored above the
cut-off, was it? It was the composition of the -- of
the people who would be eligible for promotion under the
"rule of three"?
MR. MEADE: Well, two responses, Justice
Alito. First of all, as to the pass-fail rate, that
could create a separate disparate impact violation under
Federal law. So that was relevant for separate
purposes.
But in addition, it's also true that the
test was not calibrated for use for rank ordering, to
ensure that a 93 was better than a 91. And this was a
special problem because of an intervening decision by a
court that was -- that was rendered after the tests were
designed, after the tests were taken, after the tests
were scored.
There was -- there's no evidence that the
tests were precise enough to be able to determine who --
who should rank higher versus lower based on those
scores. And the amicus brief of the human resources --
human resources professionals points out this point.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your response to
me that you don't have to show that the test is invalid,
your argument is you just have to show that there's a
basis for being worried that it might be invalid. And
then it seems to me the only distinction is how high a
showing you require. And you reject the idea that you
have to show a strong basis in the evidence?
MR. MEADE: Yes and no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you just said
that. I just thought you just -- I was -- almost wrote
it down.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOUTER: I think your phrase was --
I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I understand from --
I guess I should say I understand from your brief if not
from your argument that --
MR. MEADE: No, no.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You agree with the
strong basis in fact standard?
MR. MEADE: To answer in a way that's
consistent to -- to both of you, the answer is if the
test is under Title VII, strong basis should not be the
standard. This Court has never indicated that it should
be. And that would be much too high of a standard to
place on private employers.
However, if this Court concludes that strict
scrutiny applies, which we think it should not, but if
this Court concludes that strict scrutiny does apply,
then, yes, we agree --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I guess, my -- so
my -- your position is that you should never have a
strong basis in fact standard, because you don't think
strict scrutiny should apply, and you think if it's
under Title VII, it's only reasonableness?
MR. MEADE: That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your position is
that the city -- the -- the government can take action
without -- only if it's reasonable. It's a reasonable
view of whether or not they might or might not be
liable. That's the standard. And then they can engage
in race-based action?
MR. MEADE: We agree with the government's
articulation of the standard of reasonable basis.
Again, I would --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But does it have to be
reasonable basis to believe they would be liable if they
went ahead? Or can reasonableness refer to something
other than the probability of or the -- the likelihood
of liability?
MR. MEADE: I agree that it could be
something less than that. And if --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what is
something less than that, that they might be sued?
MR. MEADE: No, not that they might -- might
be sued. Again, this is, just in the Title VII context,
so this will affect all private employers, some of which
will be small employers where a single human resource
professional will be trying to make the determination.
There won't be hearings as there were in this case. And
the question is sometimes a severe prima facie case
could be sufficient under Title VII, not under the
strong basis standard, but potentially under Title VII.
And if a human resource professional or if an employer
had a belief that further investigation could yield
evidence of a Title VII violation, that would be
sufficient under the reasonable basis standard.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Isn't that -- isn't
that kind of a blank check to discriminate, if all they
need is a reasonable basis to think that further
investigation might be useful?
MR. MEADE: No, it's not because this is a
way to reconcile, under Title VII, the two provisions of
this statute. However, in this case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I'm sorry --
that's an answer about why it would be okay. I'm just
saying, isn't it in fact a blank check?
MR. MEADE: Well, I would disagree. No, it
is not a blank check.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But --
MR. MEADE: Here, however, we had much more.
There was a strong basis in evidence here. This Court,
under the strong basis standard, has suggested that a
strong basis is met when the threshold conditions for
liability are met. That's what this Court said in Bush
v. Vera, a plurality in Bush v. Vera, as well as Abrams
v. Johnson.
The question is how to apply that standard
to this case. That standard would suggest that a prima
facie case, which, again, is not just adverse impact
alone, but it's adverse impact that creates an inference
of discrimination could be enough. Here we have not
just that, not just --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Meade, let me -- let
me go back to one earlier question. Suppose everybody
agrees that you're right on the -- on the record here
now, and the City goes ahead and does another test, with
--
all the advantages and studies they've made and so forth
and so on, and it turns out you just had an unfortunate
selection of candidates, and they come out exactly the
same way. Would you agree that at that time the City
would have to certify the results?
MR. MEADE: Assuming that it was a test that
was valid --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's a test they made
after talking to everybody who testified in this case
and filed amicus briefs and everything else --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE STEVENS: And they came out, and it
turned out exactly the same results.
MR. MEADE: Absolutely. If the Petitioners
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Absolutely what?
(Laughter.)
MR. MEADE: Absolutely yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Absolutely positively?
(Laughter.)
MR. MEADE: Absolutely positively.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I still -- I still
don't have absolutely yes -- of what?
MR. MEADE: Yes, because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, they can --
MR. MEADE: Yes, they -- they need to
certify the -- the results.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They would have to certify
MR. MEADE: They would have to certify the
results. Sorry I was unclear. They would have to
certify the -- the results. The question here is
whether there is in fact a fair process. It's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, just to get
back to your answer to Justice Stevens, you say they'd
have to certify it. You say that, in that situation,
the decisionmaker could not have a reasonable basis for
thinking further investigation is required. Why? Just
because the second test came out the same way? It's not
at all reasonable to think they ought to look at it
further?
MR. MEADE: Well, not on the basis of -- of
the investigation that Justice Stevens, I understood,
hypothesized, as part of the example.
JUSTICE ALITO: And that would be so, even
if another Mr. Hornick showed up and said, I could --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE ALITO: I could make a better -- I
could make a test? And here are some problems with this
second test that you gave?
MR. MEADE: Again, having gone through all
the different examples that Justice Stevens said, at
that point then -- then it would be -- the City would
need to go forward with the test.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. MEADE: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Coleman, to keep
the time even here, I think you have 8 minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY S. COLEMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. COLEMAN: There's another statute that
the Court ought to consider in the Title VII context,
and that's section 2000e-7, which says that Title VII
will not overrule and pre-empt State law unless there is
a violation of Title VII.
In asserting that, under any reasonable
basis, as long as they have a reasonable basis, they can
dispense with all the provisions of Connecticut civil
service law, all these provisions that were put in place
to get rid of cronyism, to get rid of discrimination can
be set aside based on nothing more than a numerical
disparity or perhaps a concern about the test we think
cuts against Congress's intent in Title VII in
respecting these State and local laws that are intended
--
to ensure that employment practices are fair and that
they choose and select those who are best qualified to
put into these very important first-responder
organizations.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you -- I'm still back on
-- a university decides that tenure requirements lead to
fewer women professors, so they say as an experiment
what we would like to do is not have them for a couple
of years; see what happens. On your view is that
unconstitutional? Because, after all, it will certainly
mean that certain majority race assistant professors
have now lost the promotion they otherwise would have.
MR. COLEMAN: I think consistent with the
answer I gave you before, Justice Breyer, that based on
JUSTICE BREYER: That it's unconstitutional?
MR. COLEMAN: Based on that alone --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. COLEMAN: No, it would not be.
JUSTICE BREYER: It would not be
unconstitutional?
MR. COLEMAN: It --
JUSTICE BREYER: And what about --
MR. COLEMAN: You're not taking away tenure
from anybody.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Oh, oh.
MR. COLEMAN: You're just saying we want to
change the tenure process.
JUSTICE BREYER: But what we are doing is
not giving the promotions to the assistant professors
who otherwise would have job security.
MR. COLEMAN: The analogy to your analogy is
that if we have a series of people who go through the
tenure process that exists and it turns out, you know,
we -- we don't like the results, and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, so.
MR. COLEMAN: -- therefore we want to change
JUSTICE BREYER: It's the result -- it's
that you identify the person that makes your -- so in
Texas, for example, they take the top 10 percent of all
the high school graduates and put them in the
university. Now, suppose they just decided, you know
what we want to do? The top 5 percent. We want to see
how that works. And, of course, then there are people
who in fact would have gotten into the university -- and
perhaps we can imagine a majority of the majority race
-- and now they don't. Can Texas do that?
MR. COLEMAN: Well, you've chosen a very
controversial subject.
JUSTICE BREYER: I know that, but I -- I --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: That was not my objective.
MR. COLEMAN: If --
JUSTICE BREYER: I want to test out just
what it is about this case.
MR. COLEMAN: If -- if that is not done on
the -- on the basis of race, then, no. The institution
of the 10 percent rule itself, most people believe --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, you said no. Can
Texas do that or not?
MR. COLEMAN: Likely, yes. The answer is --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. COLEMAN: -- it can do it.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. And the difference
here precisely is what?
MR. COLEMAN: Is that, under State law,
these individuals had gone through an existing process
and had -- under State law, had been determined to be
the most qualified candidates and, barring anything
else, would have been promoted. So the classification
that is made clearly does distinguish between those who
are qualified for promotion and those who are not
qualified for promotion and would not receive.
It violates that -- that singular principle
of individual dignity to have these individuals be told,
on the basis of race, you're not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if it were shown
that, in fact, this test was not job-related and, in
fact, the majority of fire departments scotched this
test years ago and substituted what most agree is a
better test, even so you would say it would violate the
rights of the plaintiffs you represent, even --
MR. COLEMAN: If --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Even if there's strong
evidence that it's not job-related and that there's a
better test that doesn't produce these skewed results?
MR. COLEMAN: I don't think that's what
we've said, Justice Ginsburg. Under our alternative
formulation in which the Court recognizes --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what -- what would
that do to the civil service merit system that says if
you pass the test you should be certified?
MR. COLEMAN: The difference is this,
Justice Ginsburg: The example you have given would
clearly satisfy or likely satisfy a strong basis in
evidence that you are actually in violation of the
disparate impact provision of Title VII. There are
three prongs. The first is adverse impact; the second
is that your test is not related; and the third is the
existence of this alternative that is equally valid and
that results in lower disparate impact.
The City has never asserted -- and I hear it
today continue to say, we don't have to show those other
two prongs, that a numerical disparity enough may allow
the City to conclude that there must be something wrong
with the test. This kind of res ipsa loquitur theory of
disparate impact is one that the courts have not
recognized and that Watson said we cannot allow because
it results in racial balancing and soft quotas based on
disparate impact --
JUSTICE BREYER: But in your -- in my
example, to go back, the thing you've identified, it
seems to me, is Texas couldn't do this. It couldn't
look at the class that they're going to choose with the
percent and say, you know, there are not enough
minorities, I think we'll go to 15 percent this year.
MR. COLEMAN: That I agree with, Justice
Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: It could not. And
moreover, in the case of the tenure, what the school
couldn't do is it couldn't say, looking over at the
present tenured faculty and those who were just ready
for promotion and who in all probability will be, we're
going to go to the non-tenure system this year. We're
going to go to the non-tenure system this year.
MR. COLEMAN: I also agree with that.
JUSTICE BREYER: That they couldn't do that.
And again you that say the ordinary employer across
America who announces a deadline for getting in
applications cannot, once it sees those applications,
say, you know, there are not enough minorities. I want
to extend the deadline.
MR. COLEMAN: That's also correct, Justice
Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. And therefore
this is a very far-reaching decision.
MR. COLEMAN: No, not necessarily, Your
Honor. Okay, what --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You are -- you are saying,
as I understand it, that if the -- if the city in a case
like this, prior to giving a test, looked at the test
and says, wait a minute, this is going to produce really
disparate results, they can stop, regroup, and think it
through again and maybe come up with a different test.
MR. COLEMAN: If --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if they don't realize
that and they go ahead with the test, and they then see
the -- the disparate results, it's too late. And it
seems to me that the trouble with drawing that
distinction is that the city is not in the testing
business. They are unlikely to know what the results
are going to be. So you're saying that the city that is
-- that is prescient can adjust, the city that doesn't
find out there's something wrong or at least undesirable
from their standpoint until after the test results
cannot readjust?
MR. COLEMAN: I don't think that's our
position, Justice Souter. The first case I think is the
hypothetical Justice Kennedy posed to me. The second
case, as we've been talking about, is that you identify
the disparate impact after the test has been given.
Under this alternative theory that would allow a -- an
employer to respond, all we are asking under the strong
basis in evidence test is that you not react out of a
concern, or out of this mere reaction to the numbers,
but that you then look, is the test valid? Do you have
convincing evidence, in the words of Wygant, to form a
strong basis in evidence that if you did go forward --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if they see it coming,
they don't have to show a strong basis in evidence for
changing the test prior to the time they give it?
MR. COLEMAN: Consistent with what -- my
conversation with Justice Breyer, if they see it coming
and do it ahead of time, it doesn't violate that
principle of individual dignity and that -- and doesn't
discriminate against particularized and identifiable
individuals.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the case in the
