IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
EDWARD NATHANIEL BELL, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-1223
LORETTA K. KELLY, WARDEN. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, November 12, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:15 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
RICHARD P. BRESS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
KATHERINE BURNETT, ESQ., Senior Assistant Attorney
General, Richmond, Va.; on behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
RICHARD P. BRESS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
KATHERINE BURNETT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
RICHARD P. BRESS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 51
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:15 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 07-1223, Bell versus Kelly.
Mr. Bress.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD P. BRESS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BRESS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The problem at the heart of this case is
construing subsections (d) and (e) of 28 U.S.C. 2254
together in a way that makes sense. The last time that
this Court construed those two provisions together was
in Michael Williams. Michael Williams presented a
different issue.
But we believe that looking at how Michael
Williams would play out with a small change in the facts
will help frame the issue that's before the court today.
Now, as the Court recalls, in Michael
Williams the Virginia Supreme Court denied Williams the
investigative assistance he needed in order to help
develop a claim based on his suspicions of jury
misconduct. He, therefore, didn't make the claim in
State court.
On -- in Federal court he got investigative
--
assistance; and, in speaking with the investigator, two
of the jurors referred to the foreperson, Bonnie
Stinette, as Bonnie Minehart.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Bress, before we get
into that, could I just ask you a threshold question?
We took this case to decide a question, and one of the
factual predicates of the question is that the State
court refused to consider certain evidence. And I'm
puzzled about that.
What was the evidence that the State court
-- do you say that the State court refused to consider
evidence that was proffered to it?
MR. BRESS: No, Your Honor. The State court
did not refuse to consider evidence proffered to it.
The State court refused to permit the full development
of the evidence. And it -- I mean it misled the court
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I didn't hear the -- the
last part.
MR. BRESS: The State court refused to
permit the evidence to be fully developed, Your Honor.
They didn't refuse to consider evidence.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What do you mean by that?
What specifically did they --
MR. BRESS: Specifically, Your Honor, the
State provided 120 days to develop the State habeas
petition. The Petitioners during that time developed 14
different claims, including the claim that's at issue
here today.
In the course of that they interviewed, I
think, 11 different witnesses. For the ineffective-
assistance-of-counsel claim they got affidavits. They
also interviewed all 12 jurors for five different claims
of juror misconduct. They interviewed five different
witnesses for Brady claims, et cetera.
They ran out of time, Your Honor, and they
asked the court for more time on repeated occasions.
They asked the court to investigate --
JUSTICE ALITO: But that really does not
present the question that you asked the Court to decide.
MR. BRESS: Well, Your Honor, if you read it
that way, it would not, but I don't read the question
presented that way. I read the question presented to
present the question of when the district court properly
hears evidence after a finding of diligence by the
prisoner and holds that the State court didn't provide a
full and fair opportunity to that prisoner to develop
the facts in State court, that where the evidence is
important the -- the district court may consider that
evidence, rather than giving deference to the State
court.
And giving deference to the State court is
not even on the table any longer in this case. It was
-- what the Fourth Circuit did, the Fourth Circuit took
the new evidence into account and deferred to the State
court nonetheless.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why wouldn't he have
brought that new evidence to the attention of the State
court first? Why wasn't he obliged to bring it to the
attention of the State court?
MR. BRESS: He didn't have the new evidence,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, he could have a
post-conviction proceeding in the State court.
MR. BRESS: Actually, no, he couldn't, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: A State habeas.
MR. BRESS: I'm sorry. The -- as the
Virginia Commonwealth attorneys point out in their
amicus brief, there is a rule in the Virginia State
court that any facts not set out in the habeas petition
at the State level can't be brought in later. He wasn't
able to bring the facts in afterwards.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, weren't the
facts merely cumulative evidence of his claim that was
before the State court?
MR. BRESS: No, they weren't, Your Honor.
There were three categories of new facts or new evidence
that came in on Federal habeas.
And if I may, the first -- the first of them
had to do with facts that undermined the State's claim
of aggravation. The State relied on only one
aggravating factor. That was future dangerousness. And
in the course of that, in developing it, their number
one emphasis was on one adjudicated -- unadjudicated bad
act, and this was a story told by Billy Jo Swartz about
an alleged horrific assault on her and of Tracy
Nicholson, who was a girlfriend of the Petitioner.
What the jury didn't know at the time was
that both Tracy and her mother, who were there, said
that the incident did not occur, that there was no
assault there, and Billy Jo Swartz was a liar.
Now, on State habeas, Joanne did submit an
affidavit and, in that affidavit, said that Billy Jo
Swartz had lied. That created a dispute of fact at the
State level, but unfortunately rather than hear the
witnesses to determine the credibility and -- the
Virginia Supreme Court instead decided against
Petitioner.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I think that
supports my suggestion, which is that the evidence was
cumulative. There was a dispute on that issue. There
was evidence on both sides. And now you say, hey, we've
got more evidence.
MR. BRESS: Well, it's not more evidence,
Your Honor; it's just that a dispute over the facts
where credibility is at issue shouldn't be decided on
the papers.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the Virginia Supreme
Court, on habeas, said we are going to accept as true
all the facts as the Petitioner alleged them. They said
specifically "all facts alleged in the petition will be
taken as true."
MR. BRESS: And if they had done that, Your
Honor, I think that we'd be in a different position.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: They said they did.
MR. BRESS: They said, on the one hand, they
did, and yet, on the other hand, when they were looking,
for example, at Joanne Nicholson's testimony, they said
she could have been effectively impeached by other
statements that she had made, that in their household,
she had never seen Bell be physically abusive to her
daughter. Now, Joanne Nicholson and Tracy Nicholson
have said throughout that he was never physically
abusive to Tracy. The supposed impeachment would have
come from police court records that have never been
introduced in this case. So the Virginia Supreme Court,
without a hearing, just said, on the one hand, we accept
these facts as true and, on the other hand, even though
Joanne Nicholson would testify that this event never
occurred that way, she would have been impeached so the
jury wouldn't have believed it.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, your argument is
dependent on the proposition that the claim that was
advanced in the Federal habeas proceeding is a different
claim from a claim that was adjudicated on the merits in
the State court?
MR. BRESS: That's right, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: And if that's the case, I
don't understand why your adversary is not correct that
it will always be possible in capital cases for an
ineffective assistance of counsel claim that has been
adjudicated on the merits in the State court to be
advanced and get de novo review in Federal habeas, where
every aspect of the defendant's life that is potentially
favorable can be advanced as a basis for mitigation.
You know, when your firm with all of its expertise and
resources comes into the case at the Federal habeas
level, will it not always be the case that you will be
able to find some additional mitigation evidence and
then, under your theory, that will be a new claim and it
well get de novo review?
MR. BRESS: I'd like to answer that
question, Justice Alito, in two ways: One very
practical, which is that the Ninth and Tenth Circuits
have adopted the rule that we advocated for years. The
Sixth Circuit and the Fourth Circuit have adopted that
rule for Brady claims, and we haven't seen the flood
that supposedly is going to come through the gates.
Secondly, on a more theoretical level, for
someone to be able to introduce this new evidence on
Federal habeas, they have to first be able to
demonstrate that they were diligent in attempting
formulate it in the State court. Second, they've got to
be able to demonstrate that it's important and
importantly changes the overall factual mix. Now --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't get the diligence
part because the whole ineffective assistance of counsel
is the client isn't expected to do any of this; it's
counsel that's been ineffective.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, I'm referring to
Michael Williams, which talks about diligence by the
State habeas counsel.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, it doesn't translate
into ineffective assistance of counsel because the
client is not the one -- the lawyer has been -- has not
been diligent, but there is nothing that the client
could do. I just don't see how --
MR. BRESS: Well --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- how you could talk
about the diligent -- the diligent client bringing up
the ineffectiveness of his lawyer.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, we understand and
appreciate the diligence of habeas counsel is not any
kind of excuse and can't be -- statutorily it can't be,
actually under 2554, but what we are talking about is
whether the prisoner and his counsel were diligent in
seeking to develop the facts for their claim when they
were on State habeas. That's what Michael Williams had
to do with it. Michael Williams equated diligence with
reasonable efforts and said that the contrary would be
negligence.
In this case we've got a finding by the
district court that Bell and his lawyers were diligent
in seeking to develop their ineffective assistance of
counsel claim at State habeas. And that's what allows
them under (e), that's what says that they didn't fail
to develop the evidence under (e)(2) and allows them to
go through the gate of (e).
Now, in order to get here, you have to
demonstrate that diligence. You also have to
demonstrate that you're able to develop new facts that
matter, that are important, that are significant.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you use the -- to say
that it's a new claim, because that's what it has to be,
right, but it's such an extraordinary use of "claim." I
mean, we have exhibit cases, the notion is a claim, is a
tort claim or a contract claim, but not additional
evidence in support of the basic claim. The basic claim
is ineffective assistance of counsel.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, I appreciate that
it's not "claim" as it's used ordinarily in the Rules of
Civil Procedure or when you're talking about making
claims in that sort of a complaint. However, this
Court, including an opinion -- Banks v. Dretke, for
example, talked about the two different Brady claims in
that case as separate claims, even though they were
withholdings by the same prosecutor. More closely even,
in Michael Williams, there were two separate
withholdings of evidence to impeach the same witness.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So I'm trying
to figure out how the statute works.
MR. BRESS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it seems to me that the
way it's supposed to work -- have you read, by the way,
the facts of the case for December in Bell v. Cohen?
No? Okay. Forget that. I was going to shorthand that
because it's similar to the hypothetical I'm thinking
What happens is that the -- the State court
now says, okay, I assume all the facts in your favor and
you don't prevail. All right. Now, he goes into
Federal court and he has some new facts. Now, either
they are such that they transform the claim and it's a
new claim. I mean, in that case there is an argument
for that, maybe not in yours, or they aren't. Now, if
they aren't, then what he is supposed to do, the judge,
is go look and decide on the basis of what they
presented to the State. That's the end of it.
Now, if they are, he is supposed to exhaust.
You go back, you exhaust this new claim like any other
new claim, and if the State bars it, then you go and see
if there was cause and prejudice. And that's how it's
supposed to work. And if there was cause and prejudice,
then you have the hearing. Okay? That's how it's
supposed to work factually.
I have no idea if that's what went on here,
but if it -- it didn't seem to me -- there was some
confusion about whether the procedures are adequate in
the State. Then there is some other thing that this
might be the same claim. I mean, I don't see how we get
to the question we took this case to decide, frankly,
without knowing what the basis was and whether it was
correct for the district court to give him any hearing
at all.
MR. BRESS: Okay, Your Honor. I'd like to
address that. I think that that's essentially how this
works in this case. What the district -- what the
district court did here is it first made a finding of
was there diligence? Because it has to do that under
Michael Williams to even take the next step. Did the
Petitioner --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's the first step. The
first step, I'd go and see -- but at any rate, you go
ahead.
MR. BRESS: Right. But it had to take that
step. And it had to take that step, by the way, of
course, with (d) in mind as well, because this Court in
Schriro said there is no reason to have hearing if it is
separately precluded by another predicate. In Schriro,
obviously, it was the refusal to -- to allow mitigating
evidence. So it does that. Then it determines
separately under Townsend, was there a problem in State
court that -- did you have a full and fair hearing, and
if you can prove the facts that you state, would you
win, and so those allowed the court the discretion to
hold a hearing.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why wouldn't you say
right off the bat, new claim, go present it to the State
court, and exhausts it?
MR. BRESS: Well this couldn't have been
presented in the State court.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not?
MR. BRESS: Well as the State argued below,
it would have been procedurally deficient.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, no. Suppose we
have -- that's what I want, not these facts, but I want
the facts where really, he couldn't have discovered
this, because the first time that the district attorney
opened his files for the Brady claim was 140 days after.
So we now have some totally new, which he couldn't have
gotten; no one disputes it. Where, that kind of
thing -- I think he would have to present it to the
State court, wouldn't he?
MR. BRESS: Well, Your Honor, according to
the warden at least, in this case if you took let's say
the facts of Banks v Dretke, which this Court decided,
where when you were in front of the State court, what
you knew was that the girlfriend of the prisoner had
said that one of the witnesses was particularly close to
law enforcement, and on that basis they made a claim, a
Brady claim in State court. It was denied because it
wasn't factually developed enough, all right?
So they went to Federal court and in Federal
court they got a lot more evidence that supported that
claim. They actually found out that in fact this person
was a Government informant, and on that basis this Court
found cause and prejudice and addressed that that
claim --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, you must have been
assuming then that the State would not give that person
a -- a new opportunity to consider the new evidence.
MR. BRESS: Well, that's absolutely true --
JUSTICE BREYER: Suppose it were really new.
MR. BRESS: The State statute is
unequivocal.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but so is it in
Tennessee, and in Tennessee there is an exception where
you could bring the thing up because you couldn't
possibly have gotten over it.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, there is no
exception here in Virginia.
JUSTICE BREYER: So in Virginia a person
discovers for the first time, 140 days later looks at
the D.A.'s files, and discovers something that shows the
whole trial was a farce -- I mean, something
unbelievable, and there is no way for the person under
Virginia law to bring that up in a State court?
MR. BRESS: Not in this sort of a claim.
No, Your Honor, there isn't.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Bress, your --
you're argument that this can't be brought up assumes
that it is a new claim rather than the same claim,
right? Because if it were just the same claim then the
question would be it is simply cumulative rather than
new?
MR. BRESS: If it's the same claim for
54(d) purposes, yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. And I guess
it gets back to Justice Ginsburg's question. We usually
don't consider claims different if there is just new
evidence, but here didn't the Fourth Circuit necessarily
determine that this was the same claim in deciding to
defer to the State court findings?
MR. BRESS: Yes, it did, Your Honor. The
Fourth Circuit viewed this as the same claim and that's
the root of some of our disagreement with them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And if fact you got
more than you were entitled to, because it did look at
the new evidence, albeit through the guise of deference,
but it shouldn't have even looked at that at all.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor. We would agree that
that -- that interim solution is not a plausible
solution, so we would agree with that, on the new
evidence --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if we think that
they were right -- and we are, I think we are getting
away from the question presented -- if we agree that
they are right, that this is the same claim and it's
just additional evidence, then you lose.
MR. BRESS: No, not necessarily, Your Honor.
We also argued on separate grounds where the State's
procedure is inadequate, then the -- the State's
application of -- of Federal law would have been
unreasonable.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Bress, may I ask you a
question --
MR. BRESS: And if that's true --
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I ask you a question
which sort of goes to the utility of raising that issue
here, and it's a preliminary, not a doctrinal question.
But --
MR. BRESS: Sure.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- my understanding is that
in the United States District Court on the Federal habe
-- the district court made a -- drew a conclusion based
on the evidence before it, no deference to the State
court, that in fact your client did not demonstrate
prejudice. And my understanding is that that --
although the Fourth Circuit did not rely upon that, my
understanding is that that -- that finding remains
undisturbed. Is that correct?
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, what the district
court found, as the Fourth Circuit saw it and as we see
it, was that the State court's finding of prejudice was
not unreasonable. Now, I acknowledge that when you read
the district court's oral ruling you won't see a
reference to 2254(d).
JUSTICE SOUTER: No.
MR. BRESS: However, when you look at what
the State court wrote in its written ruling, what it
says is there is a colorable claim that the State court
was unreasonable, on -- in application of law to the
facts and development of the facts, and then it said
that they will -- that the court would not decide this
issue yet, until it has a hearing; and so the Fourth
Circuit looked at what the district court wrote and
presumed that consistent with what it had written, it
then confronted this issue, the issue of reasonability,
orally; and it didn't require that when a judge is
saying something orally, as opposed to putting it in a
written opinion, that it dot every i and cross every t.
It assumed that it meant what it had said earlier. If
this Court has any doubt about that, however, it could
certainly remand with instructions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I that what it was saying
is there is legitimate -- this is a Strickland question.
Strickland has two parts. Part A is were counsel
inadequate; and Part B is did it make any difference?
It seemed to me the district court was just making a
straight out Strickland determination and not deferring
to anything else. It was just saying no, I've looked at
all the evidence, and yes -- they certainly were -- they
were not effective. On the other hand, there is no
prejudice because using the strict Strickland test,
there was no reasonable likelihood that a jury would
have come out differently.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, consistent with the
Fourth Circuit, we don't read him to say that. But even
if he meant that, the Fourth Circuit certainly on --
looked at this from a reasonableness standpoint, and not
from a de novo standpoint. So even had the district
court meant a de novo review and engaged in it, we still
didn't get the correct standard or review on appeal.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, that may be. I didn't
mean to imply you didn't have a Fourth Circuit question.
I -- I guess I was raising a question to whether it is
wise to make this the case to decide the Fourth Circuit
issue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Bress, this case
involves Section 2254(d), right? Does that appear
somewhere in the briefs? It would be nice to have it in
front of me.
MR. BRESS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, it's a central
thing the case is about. I cannot find it in any of the
briefs. Appendix to the petition for cert; I got -- I
got to go back to that. Don't you think it's important
enough to be in your brief?
MR. BRESS: If I may return to the Chief
Judge's -- Chief Justice's question from earlier, there
are other new claims, new facts here that are equally
important in deciding whether this is a new claim. For
example, physical child abuse first came into this case,
and really was first discovered --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I know, but they're
-- your underlying theory is that if you get a lot of
new evidence, that somehow changes the claim. And
again, I think Justice Ginsburg -- I'm having trouble
getting my arms around that, and particularly since it's
problematic in this area where there is always new
evidence.
You're looking at someone's childhood. You
can always find a new anecdote, a new concern going
either way, that you know, this was unusual because he
was a good child, or this is excused because he had such
a bad upbringing.
MR. BRESS: Mr. Chief Justice, two responses
to this. Number one -- and you know, as I've said
before, this Court has used claim I think in similar
ways. It may have been colloquial but it at least
demonstrates that it can use it.
I'm not saying it's the most normal, or the
ordinary course definition, but I am saying that it's
the definition that's necessary to read (d) and (e)
together in a way that makes sense; and if I can just
explain why I think that's true.
If you look at (e), (e) says that you can
get a hearing even if you weren't diligent in State
court, if the facts that you need to develop were not
reasonably available in State court and if they would
prove by clear and convincing evidence that you are
innocent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All right, well
just -- we've got two but just to stop you on one. The
fact that they excuse your failure to raise and present
the evidence in State court doesn't mean that when you
get the evidence you have a new claim. It just means
that they are going to let you raise a claim you could
have raised before.
MR. BRESS: Well, if what they are talking
about is -- if that includes the ability when you are in
State court -- assume, for instance, House versus Bell,
just if can take that as an example.
I'm sorry, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I've gotten over it.
MR. BRESS: I don't know, but if we can --
if we can just look at the facts of that case briefly:
Assume that in State court, despite diligent a effort,
they were able to come up with some of the evidence but
not all of the evidence that they later came up with in
terms of the blood spattering, the DNA, and such.
Their claim is denied on the -- on the
merits because they weren't able to get much of the
evidence in and denied in State courts. They couldn't
go to Federal courts where they were able to bring in
all of that evidence, and let's say even more, enough to
prove by clear and convincing evidence that they were
innocent.
Under the warden's view, you'd still go back
to the State court opinion and decide whether it was
intrinsically reasonable. And so long as it is, you
wouldn't -- the State court gets affirmed, and none of
that new evidence of innocence comes in.
Now, I guess it's a possible solution, but
the question is: Is that what Congress really intended
here?
JUSTICE BREYER: I might say the new claim
-- okay, so it's a new claim. I don't know if yours is,
by the way, but suppose it's a new claim. Then what you
ought to do is go back to the State court and exhaust.
So now what you show is that that's futile.
Now we get to your question before us.
Okay. So it's an imaginary case. It's less imaginary
in December than here. But, anyway, the -- the -- you
get back to the State court. Now, what is supposed to
happen?
At that point I guess the statute leaves the
judge free to develop the facts. It doesn't say you
can't. Okay. So then you do it.
Now we have the question, which when we took
this we thought we could reach, but I don't know if we
can -- now we have the question: When the judge makes
the decision on the basis of those facts, if they have
never developed any of this in State court, fine. Then
have -- then just do it. If it is a regular case, don't
defer it.
But suppose some of the things have been in
State court related to this but not others. Now what do
we do?
MR. BRESS: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean that's not an
obvious answer to that one.
MR. BRESS: I -- I think that in -- in that
case, by the way, you still have to defer to the State
factfinding. I think you always have to when the State
determines particular facts.
JUSTICE BREYER: What it's going to do is
it's going to be finding facts on the basis of certain
evidence. And what you will have gotten your new claim
granted on is the fact that you found some new evidence
that's very significant, and you couldn't possibly have
found it before.
Now what do we do? Do we defer in part; do
we defer -- I mean now what does the district judge do?
MR. BRESS: Well, I think that, again, you
have to defer under (e)(1) presumably to particular fact
findings and find that by clear and convincing evidence
you've disproved those facts. But, otherwise, I don't
think you could find the application of law to fact. I
don't think you can under Holland, et cetera.
Now, you know, just to make this a little
bit clearer, hopefully, in -- in Keeney, upon which this
Court drew in Michael Williams, the Court looked -- the
Court did -- looked at a potential distinction between
the failure properly to make a claim in State court and
the failure properly to develop the facts for that
claim.
Now, the Court looked at that distinction in
the context of seeing whether cause and prejudice, which
applied to certainly the major claim in the State court,
should apply to the failure to fully develop it. And
what it said is that distinguishing between those two
circumstances is irrational.
Now, I would submit that it's similarly
irrational to attribute to Congress the intent to
distinguish between the circumstances, or because of
these limitations you have in State court, despite your
effort, you weren't able to fully develop the record.
And the State decided the case on an
inadequate record. It comes to Federal court. Do you
simply defer? I mean do you simply stop when you say
the State court reasonably decided this case based on an
inadequate State court record, or do you allow that
record to be fully developed and decide it on its
merits?
That's, I think, the issue that we are
presenting today. I'd like to reserve --
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I just ask one quick
question? The -- the answer, I take it, on -- based on
what you just said, the answer to the -- the need-
to-exhaust point is you don't have to exhaust because
you already tried to exhaust in the State court, and
they didn't give you enough time to get your evidence
in. That is --
MR. BRESS: That's precisely it, Your Honor.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Bress.
Ms. Burnett.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF KATHERINE BURNETT
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. BURNETT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The claim in Bell's case is the textbook
example of a claim that the effective death penalty
intended for 2254(d) to apply to. In the Virginia
Supreme Court, Bell presented his claim with his
allegations of what he says counsel didn't present and
didn't find at trial. And the Virginia Supreme Court
assumed the truth of all of those allegations and did
not contest any of them. There were never any facts in
dispute. The State never contested any facts.
The State court assumed them all true, and
then applied -- faithfully applied this Court's
established precedent under Strickland and Wiggins, in
particular, and weighed that evidence that he had
claimed had not been found by his counsel against the
aggravating evidence in this case of a drug dealer who
killed premeditatedly a police officer in a small town
and upon weighing that found as a -- as a matter -- as a
de novo matter on the merits that he could not show
prejudice. Because there was no reasonable probability
that a jury would have found a life sentence giving --
assuming the truth of everything he alleged.
Now, when he went to Federal court, the
Fourth Circuit faithfully applied 2254(d) to that after
addressing all of the same evidence and also agreeing
that there was no prejudice, and then said that the
State court decision was not unreasonable under 2254(d).
Now, Bell comes to this Court and says for
the first time that I have a new claim, and that was not
made below, and this is not a new claim. Everything
that he presented in Federal court was presented to the
State court. There is absolutely no difference. In
fact, to the effect that there was some difference in
the district court and the State alleged -- we pleaded
default because he presented a few new affidavits.
The district court resolved that and said:
I'm not even going to look at those because they aren't
critical to my decision. I am only going to look at --
and he described in particular the exact same record
that the Virginia Supreme Court had found. And then the
district court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, what about the
point that Mr. Bress made that there wasn't enough time
in the Virginia Supreme Court on habeas to develop
everything that was later put before the district court;
that there was a very short time to get the petition in,
and there were many issues other than ineffective
assistance of counsel?
MS. BURNETT: Well, Justice Ginsburg, there
were approximately 12 issues in this case that the
district court disposed of in a very lengthy opinion.
It was only this one issue that the district court found
-- believed that he needed to have a hearing on, we
believe erroneously. But, nevertheless, he had the
hearing and -- and listened to all the same evidence.
Nothing, Justice Ginsburg -- in our opinion
nothing prevented Bell from presenting the allegations
--
that were presented to the Federal court and all the
allegations that he presented to the State court. There
was no State court procedure or denial of anything.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Did he make any request
from the State court for more time?
MS. BURNETT: Your Honor, I don't -- I don't
JUSTICE SOUTER: Your brother is nodding
yes.
MS. BURNETT: He may very well have, but the
point is that there was nothing that he presented to the
Federal court that he didn't also present to the State
court. So he was not prevented from -- that -- that's a
red herring in this case.
Now, he had some very strong arguments that
he made in both the State court and in the district
court on other claims; not on this claim but on other
claims, that he believed that he should have been able
to develop certain evidence. And the district court
actually on those other claims -- some of them, it found
faulted and some not. But not on this claim. On this
claim --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If we had -- if we had --
and I -- I emphasize I'm -- I'm not suggesting this is
your case. But if we had a case in which with respect
to the disputed issue he had asked for more time -- I'll
make it easy. He had asked for more time and -- and had
-- had indicated that there were leads that needed to be
followed that couldn't be followed unless he got more
time and so on, and the State court refused. Could he
then come into the Federal court and say: My claim here
is not only ineffective assistance, but ineffective
assistance with the overlay of the refusal of the State
courts to give me an adequate opportunity to develop my
-- my ineffective assistance claim? And if he made a
colorable showing on those two issues, would he then
have an opportunity for a Federal evidentiary issue, and
would the findings that eventuated from that be subject
to -- in effect, to -- to being short- circuited by
deference to the State court findings?
MS. BURNETT: I think my answer to that has
to be that it depends because the statute before the
effective Death Penalty Act in 1996 had clearly had what
we would call the Chandler v. Dane factors in which
would you look at the adequacy of a State court process.
Those were removed after 1996, so the statute does not
provide authority for a Federal court to go in and
determine was the process adequate if the decision,
itself, was reasonable. Now if we are talking -- this
is why this case --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if you don't -- I guess
what I'm getting at is if we don't in that circumstance
recognize that there is a legitimately different claim
which is not, for the reason I suggested to Mr. Bress,
not subject to further exhaustion requirements because
they tried and the State court wouldn't let them do
it -- if we don't in that case recognize that there is a
claim that can be litigated in the Federal court, which
will not be subject to deference to State court
findings, then there is a very clear hole in the law,
and I assume Congress didn't mean to leave it. I
understand you're saying that is not this case. But
isn't that a legitimate problem to-- to face at some
point.
MS. BURNETT: Justice Souter, we don't
believe so and here's why: Because it is true, Congress
did not change the procedural default doctrine. In the
Effective Death Penalty Act Congress left that alone.
In fact, this Court recognized that in House v. Bell.
So when we are talking about new facts or new claims,
either one, you're talking about unexhausted or
defaulted matters, which the district courts are very
familiar how to handle that. Has he shown cause and
prejudice? Has he shown diligence?
JUSTICE SOUTER: I think you're right in the
main. I think that's generally correct. The case that
I'm concerned with is the case of the -- of the Brady
claim, because if we are proceeding under (e) then as I
understand the cause and prejudice can only be
established in the case we are talking about if there
can be shown a probability of a different verdict.
The Brady standard, however, does not
require the probability of a different verdict. Brady
uses the term "reasonable probability that there would
have been a different result," but that has been clearly
defined in the cases to mean reasonable possibility. So
that in fact with respect to Brady claims subsection (e)
is imposing a higher requirement than Brady did and a
higher requirement than would have been applied before
Brady. And that is the case, it seems to me, that we --
it may not be this case, but that's the case that we've
got to be concerned about in coming up with doctrine
here. Isn't that a legitimate concern?
MS. BURNETT: Justice Souter -- and I agree
that's not this case. But this Court's already crossed
that bridge. That was Michael Williams. Michael
Williams was where the individual comes to Federal court
with brand new evidence and he has no remedy left in
State court. It is defaulted, and what do we do with
that? And this Court very clearly -- now, as the issue
was presented to this Court in that case it was whether
he gets a hearing or not, so that's what was addressed.
But this Court also addressed the fact that it most
likely was and was a defaulted claim and that it --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I don't, I don't think
this Court understood the implication of it when you get
into the Brady issue. And my only concern is we've got
to leave that door open because I don't think Williams
confronted that.
MS. BURNETT: And I -- I agree with Your
Honor that it's not this case. I think Michael Williams
addresses it and I think that the current existing in
place cause and prejudice and actual innocence
exceptions to default answer all of that. And I believe
that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I understand your position.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm still trying to
understand the statute. I think their point is we get
around (d), (d) doesn't bar us because the district
court here, the Federal district court, found that it
was an unreasonable determination of the facts, not
unreasonable on the substance, but unreasonable because
of the procedure. In other words, the State that barred
this evidence was having an unreasonable procedure and
therefore the determination of the facts is
unreasonable. So you're saying that isn't what those
words "unreasonable determination of the facts" mean.
MS. BURNETT: Well, what I'm saying --
JUSTICE BREYER: You mean you're saying that
(d)(2), "unreasonable determination of the facts," means
the factual outcome. In other words, if the factual
outcome is reasonable it doesn't matter if the
procedures are inadequate; is that your claim.
MS. BURNETT: Well, no. I believe that --
JUSTICE BREYER: No? I thought you just
said that in answer to Justice Souter.
MS. BURNETT: I believe that (d)(2) very
clearly -- yes, I think I'm agreeing with you that
(d)(2) addresses the actual facts which underlay the
State court decision.
JUSTICE BREYER: And not whether their
procedures are correct?
MS. BURNETT: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MS. BURNETT: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So that's the first
thing we have to decide to get to the question. If your
wrong on that -- and I doesn't know the answer to it --
if you're wrong on that, then they're rid of (d). So
they say then, we're rid of (e) because it falls within
(a)(2), the factual predicate and due diligence, okay.
They say we are rid of (e) because of that. Now, how
they get around capital (B) I'm not sure, but that isn't
in the case.
MS. BURNETT: Justice Breyer, I'm not sure
they they've argued those exceptions (a)(2) at (i) and
(ii). I believe they're simply arguing --
JUSTICE BREYER: They're arguing due
diligence.
MS. BURNETT: My reading of their brief is
they are saying: We are Michael Williams and all
Michael Williams dealt with was the opening sentence of
(e)(2).
JUSTICE BREYER: (I). You mean of (e)(2) --
MS. BURNETT: Of (e)(2).
JUSTICE BREYER: (E)(2).
MS. BURNETT: "If the applicant has failed
to develop," and Michael Williams interpreted that as
someone who has not been diligent in developing the
record.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So we also get --
they get around that because they say the due diligence.
You also have an argument about how (2) applies. And if
you're wrong about both of those then we get to the
question, which would be: If the -- if the hearing's
properly before us and it's a new claim -- it's also
saying it's a new claim -- if it's a new claim it has to
be exhausted. So under Virginia law, under Virginia
law, is it really true that -- suppose, not this case,
but suppose a Defendant 140 days after discovers the DA
says, makes some remark. He couldn't have known about
it. He goes to a special file. He couldn't have found
out about. And lo and behold, it's the worst thing you
can imagine, and you can imagine some pretty bad ones
but this is even worse. Now under Virginia law are
you -- is it your view that Virginia courts would say
you're out of luck, good-bye?
MS. BURNETT: Yes, Your Honor, and this
Court has recognized that --
JUSTICE BREYER: No matter what, it's
goodbye?
MS. BURNETT: Yes, and here's why: Because
Virginia has twin statutes that would bar any further
applications to State court. One is the statute of
limitations that is strictly applied and the other is a
statute which says in essence --
JUSTICE BREYER: No excuse? Even if --
MS. BURNETT: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MS. BURNETT: And this Court has --
JUSTICE BREYER: So they are right about,
they are right about the exhaustion being futile.
MS. BURNETT: It is defaulted, yes, Your
Honor. In Virginia those are defaulted claims, and now
we are in Federal court with those claims. The Federal
court judges are very familiar with how to do with them.
Has he shown cause and prejudice?
JUSTICE BREYER: The first time he discovers
DNA evidence in the DA's file that shows he couldn't
have done it, there is no way to get relief under
Virginia law?
MS. BURNETT: Not in State court.
JUSTICE BREYER: Not in State court.
MS. BURNETT: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, then they're right
about that.
MS. BURNETT: That's correct. So now he is
in Federal court and he has -- he has the thresholds of
cause and prejudice or actual innocence. And that's a
very familiar thing, is what I'm saying, is that the
district courts are familiar with.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, then let me ask you
on the merits. If he's right there and it's exhaustion
and it really was a new claim, then wouldn't we apply a
decision that does not defer to the State court, because
after all the State court never heard this issue?
MS. BURNETT: That's not this case. But in
a hypothetical case where there are new facts,
unexhausted defaulted claims or facts that are presented
to a Federal court --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. There is no real
argument between the two of you as to the -- as to the
issue that we thought was presented.
MS. BURNETT: Well, I think not.
JUSTICE BREYER: But there's certainly an
argument --
MS. BURNETT: The argument is --
JUSTICE BREYER: If it's really a new claim,
you're going to say they applied --
MS. BURNETT: Well, our argument is that,
Court, don't use this case to say that, because if the
Court uses this case to say that it will be putting its
imprimatur on what the district court did in holding a
hearing when we don't think it was appropriate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The Fourth Circuit
-- I'm sorry to interrupt you, but the Fourth Circuit
didn't decide that question either.
MS. BURNETT: They did not. It was not
presented to them, Your Honor.
Nothing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How do you want us to
dispose of the case that doesn't, that doesn't do that?
What do you want us to do?
MS. BURNETT: I think the Court could
dismiss this as improvidently granted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's it?
MS. BURNETT: I think the Court could do
that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you, so I
understand your position on the underlying question if
we don't dismiss. Am I correct that the granting of an
evidentiary hearing was based on a showing by the
Petitioner that he failed to develop facts which might
change the result?
MS. BURNETT: Justice Stevens, there was
never any showing, there was never any showing of
diligence.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why did the -- why did the
Federal court grant a hearing?
MS. BURNETT: The Federal court simply
announced that he was going to hold a hearing on this
claim and decide later --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Wasn't he only entitled to
do that on the basis of a showing that there was more
evidence that the State court did not consider?
MS. BURNETT: Yes, Your Honor. I believe
first he had --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So maybe the district
court was dead wrong, but the assumption I think we made
when we took the case was that there was a body of
evidence that had not been available in the State
proceeding that might be available in the Federal
proceeding.
MS. BURNETT: I think that was the
misunderstanding.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And if that were true -- I
know you disagree with that and I understand your
argument. Maybe we shouldn't have taken the case. But
if that were true and the Federal court then had to
decide on the basis of all the evidence, do you read the
statute to say at that time he may only rely on the
evidence presented to the State court?
MS. BURNETT: The way I read the statute is
that that is the first thing that the judge was required
to do. He had to first determine whether the State
court's decision was reasonable.
JUSTICE STEVENS: All right. Suppose he
looked at the State court evidence and he says, that was
not enough. The State court's decision on the merits
was reasonable based on that record. I have a different
record before me. May he look at the different record?
MS. BURNETT: He can -- I think -- I think
then we are talking about what I was just saying, new
facts, new claims.
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's what we're talking
about. May he look at it?
MS. BURNETT: And then the judge has to go
through the determination, before he can decide whether
he can look at it, of whether these new facts or new
claims meet cause and prejudice or actual innocence.
JUSTICE STEVENS: All right. Forget the
cause and prejudice for just a moment. But if he looks
at that new evidence and he decides that any neutral
judge would have reached a different result from the
State judge on that evidence, may he reach that result?
MS. BURNETT: I don't think just -- I do not
believe the judge can do that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then what's the point --
MS. BURNETT: -- just simply to say I'm
going to look at just the correctness of the decision
first, and then decide whether it's correct.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What you're saying is the
correctness of decision based on the State court record.
And if he decides there was a sound decision on that
record, that's the end of the ball game; is that your
position?
MS. BURNETT: Well, I think it is, unless --
unless there are actually new matters that are presented
to the Federal court that the Federal court now is going
to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's the same claim. It's
the same claim.
MS. BURNETT: Yes. Even on the same claim.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then it seems to me the
statute has constructed a pointless procedure.
MS. BURNETT: Your Honor, I -- I don't see
that at all. It seems to me it's a very orderly
progression, that the -- that the -- the Effective Death
Penalty Act is now telling district court judges, and
has made clear that it's doing this for judicial -- for
purposes of judicial economy, for finality, for --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why shouldn't the district
judge in light of the new evidence decide whether the
judgment of the State court was -- would have been
reasonable if it came out the same way, including this
new evidence in the -- in the consideration? Why
shouldn't he do it that way.
MS. BURNETT: It could do that, Justice
Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I know it could. But I'm
asking whether it should.
MS. BURNETT: I think -- I think that
doesn't really fit with the statute -- with the
statutory language.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it seems to me the
statute certainly contemplates that the States have the
first --
MS. BURNETT: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the first cut at this
thing, right? How else do you give them the first cut?
MS. BURNETT: Yes. Absolutely. And that's
what I'm saying, and I think that -- to -- if the claim
is going to in any way differ, it's going to change from
what was presented to the State court. On one level,
that is all new matters that are defaulted, and in a
very literal sense how can -- and I don't believe
Congress intended for Federal courts to look at new
matters, however they got to them, that were not
presented to the State court, and on that basis
determine whether the State court's decision was
reached.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the Federal court is
supposed to do what?
MS. BURNETT: The Federal court is supposed
to first look at the claim that was presented to the
State court, under 2254(d), and the claimants before it.
If it's the same claim, if it's the same matters that
were adjudicated on the merits in the State court, it
has to make the decision up front, was it reasonable or
not?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MS. BURNETT: Okay. Now it makes that
decision, and then after that, if the Petitioner says
well, I have new matters, that I never presented to the
State court, the Federal court has a -- a road map.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Now -- but the road map
that you are now saying could be followed is the same
road map implied by -- in your earlier answer to Justice
Scalia, your reference to the new claim as being a
defaulted claim.
MS. BURNETT: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But we are concerned -- I
think we are all concerned with the -- with the claim in
which it is not defaulted, in the sense that he is at
fault in any way for failing to get it into the Federal
court -- I'm sorry -- get his entire presentation now
into the State court then. So that it is not a
defaulted claim in the classic sense. It is not a claim
in which he is at fault by having failed to present it
in the State court.
And in that case, if it cannot go back, if
the State court will not take it back, don't we have to
find at least implicit in the totality of subsections
(d) and (e) the possibility of litigating the -- the
fully developed claim in the Federal court without a
need to defer to the State court findings?
MS. BURNETT: If implicit in your question
is -- yes, implicit in your question is that the
Petitioner has demonstrated cause; and he may or may not
have depending on the facts.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, he -- I agree with
you on the -- on the cause part; but the -- up to this
point. He has got to demonstrate cause and prejudice or
at least he has got to develop cause. Let me put it --
ask you this question. If he simply says look, I tried
to get this in to the State court, and he shows that,
but the State court for whatever reason just would not
take the evidence that he wanted to put in, is that
enough for him to have --
MS. BURNETT: It may be. It may be. And
once again, that's certainly not this case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I'm -- I'm not asking to
you stipulate --
MS. BURNETT: Right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that it's this case.
But it's the case we are worried about around the
corner.
MS. BURNETT: It may be.
JUSTICE SOUTER: If that is -- this Court --
that's why I'm saying it's a very established law as to
what cause is, and external impediments. I mean, this
Court has many cases that describe that. The lower
courts are very familiar with determining that, and so
they can -- they are capable to making that
determination as to whether the Federal court can now
look at a new matter whether it's a new claim or --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But all we are -- I think
all we are really getting at is that there are different
kinds of new matters. There are some new matters of
which he absolutely knew nothing at the State court
stage, and he is now saying don't hold that against me:
i.e., I'm showing cause and I'll show prejudice. This
is new matter that he did or potentially know about and
tried to get into, and under our hypothesis, the State
court says no, I'm not going to hear it, or I won't give
you the time, whatever the case may be.
In that case, isn't it -- don't we have to
say under the statute all he has got to show is cause in
the sense that he tried and the State court wouldn't let
him? In order to --
MS. BURNETT: And that may -- and that may
very well constitute an external impediment --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MS. BURNETT: -- to him being able to
present it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Having established cause,
he would then in your view not have the Federal court
decide the matter de novo. But the only question before
the Federal court was whether there was in addition
prejudice.
MS. BURNETT: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That is to say, whether --
but for the error, any reasonable factfinder would find
by clear and convincing evidence that he was innocent --
MS. BURNETT: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- right?
MS. BURNETT: Correct. And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In that instance is there
room for the district court to hold an evidentiary
hearing?
MS. BURNETT: Well, I think then you get --
that's -- I think it's actually a separate matter. We
first have to get to whether the Federal court can look
at a new matter de novo. If it can look at it de novo
then I think we go to the pre-Effective Death Penalty
Act law about when you have a hearing. Are there
disputed facts? Are they -- that make a difference?
Is it something that actually, you know, needs to have
resolution in a hearing?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can you envisage
circumstances in which an ineffective counsel
assistance, an ineffective assistance of counsel claim
was presented in the State court and then there is a
second ineffective assistance in counsel's claims or a
further supplemental ineffective assistance of counsel
claim based on new evidence that the district court
might hear? Does that ever happen?
MS. BURNETT: I think it can happen,
certainly. I don't think it's restricted just to Brady.
I mean, I think that it -- it is -- it is the same
analysis, no matter what the claim is, it's the same
analysis that the Federal court needs to go through to
look -- to see whether it can consider new matter.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you think there could
be instances, we might imagine, in which there could be
two ineffective assistance of counsel claims, the second
of which could be heard in the district court with
evidentiary -- with an evidentiary hearing?
MS. BURNETT: I think it's certainly
possible. I think that the statutory setup and this
Court's established habeas procedures that it had in
place for decades permits that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess the State court can
say, you know, 60 days after the trial is -- is
doomsday. No more new evidence. We are not going to
consider anything new after that, even if you find Brady
stuff or anything else. Suppose that's
unconstitutional -- but it isn't. I mean, is that
unconstitutional?
MS. BURNETT: Well, no, Your Honor, I don't
believe it is. In fact, the State court -- we don't
have to provide for direct appeals.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. So if it's not
unconstitutional, then you just provide what you say,
that the district court sees whether by clear and
convincing evidence the case would have come out the
other way.
If it were unconstitutional, and I guess
this is what is sticking in our craw -- my craw,
anyway -- if it were unconstitutional, it seems to me
there ought to be a way to make the State take the first
cut at it. Make the State say oh, yes, even with this
new evidence we would still find this person guilty; and
then in Federal habeas you would -- you would apply the
deference that 2254(d) requires. You'd ask whether that
was a reasonable determination.
MS. BURNETT: Right. And all I can say to
that, Justice Scalia, is this Court has never held that
the Constitution applies anywhere after the direct
appeal, and that's only the right to cancel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's the fallacy in my --
in my reasoning. Or you're saying I shouldn't be
troubled by what has been troubling me, namely that he
had no way to get this before the State court. They are
entitled to close -- close the gates?
MS. BURNETT: Yes, Your Honor. And as a
collateral review; that's where they are closing the
gate, not on direct review.
If there are no further questions, I simply
ask to affirm.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. BRESS: I'd like to start where --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have three
minute remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD P. BRESS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BRESS: I'd like to start where --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have three
minutes remaining.
MR. BRESS: I'd like to start where the
General left off. In McNeal and Claudy, this Court did
hold that, in certain instances, a State habeas court
must hold a hearing if there are facts in dispute and
they are not willing to assume them. I agree that a
State doesn't have to have a proceeding at all, but if
it has one, it has to be fair.
I know that my time is short. I'd like to
go through some of the questions you've asked.
The State did deny us additional time,
expert assistance discovery, and a hearing in this case.
The Federal court specifically found that we were
diligent. That's at 84a. And in Michael Williams, this
court said that the finding of diligence also
constituted a finding of cause for purposes of cause and
prejudice, which makes sense because you've got a
prisoner who has done the most they can and yet hasn't
been able to fully develop the record. There was no
external impediment. As you'll recall, in Michael
Williams, the information was there; it was just very
hard to find.
Finally, we presented very substantial new
evidence on the Federal level here. It's simply not
true that there is no new evidence. The new evidence
included evidence undermining the sole aggravating
factor, both the live testimony of Joanne Nicholson,
which allowed the court actually to determine whether
she would have been a credible person to undermine the
testimony. The State had held on the papers she wasn't
credible, which the State can't do on the papers.
Secondly, the evidence said he was
physically abused as a child. He was beaten with
electrical cords, with planks, with a belt, leaving the
scars on his body that he bears today. He saw his
father knock his mother's teeth out for trying to
protect him.
JUSTICE ALITO: What is the test for
determining whether the addition of new evidence is
sufficient to make it a new claim?
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, I think the test
really ought to be whether an objectively reasonable
jurist could find it important in the overall mix of
information. And it just strikes me that, if you're the
judge in that kind of a case, what you're going to go
through is -- if I accept that the State court was right
with the evidence that it had and I sort of put myself
in that frame, would I, nonetheless, if I were that
State court, have found this evidence important when I'm
making this decision?
JUSTICE SOUTER: It's a materiality
standard, really.
MR. BRESS: Exactly, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, it's a new claim
if it is one on which you would have prevailed, but it's
the same claim if the result would be the same.
MR. BRESS: I don't -- I don't think it
necessarily has to be that way, Your Honor. I think you
can have a case where the evidence that was before them
was absolutely nil; now they're offering a good bit of
evidence that you would at least want to weigh as an
objective jurist, even though you decide against them.
I think that's possible.
I think the reason you've got to adopt this
position, however, is that there is no DNA -- I mean, no
innocence exception that the General has put forward.
If the General is right, it isn't a new claim just
because you now have DNA evidence that proves you're
innocent. You made that claim of innocence earlier in
the proceeding, in your earlier ineffective assistance
of counsel claim. What you have new now is you've got
the DNA evidence. In her view, it's the same claim.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you know, it does
read -- 2254(e) -- it does read, "a factual predicate
that could not have been previously discovered through
the exercise of due diligence." That sounds like
exactly what you're describing, the discovery of DNA
evidence you didn't know about.
MR. BRESS: And I agree completely, Your
Honor, that (e) says you can hear it, but the Attorney
General says you can't because under (d), she'd say,
you'd already be foreclose because the State court has
already adjudicated your claim on the merits --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I think she said --
MR. BRESS: -- and these new facts don't
count.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- she answered -- the
answer that I wrote is the same thing that you could
have on the Brady claim you could also have for
ineffective assistance of counsel. It's a wholly new
matter. I thought that's what she said.
MR. BRESS: Your Honor, I think she said
that what you would have to look for, I think, is
whether "wholly new matter" means "new evidence." If
she says it's new evidence, such as new DNA evidence, we
agree completely. That's not what she said previously
in this case. Previously, she had said that new
evidence in that sense, like DNA evidence, can't make
that claim a new claim and, therefore, you're foreclosed
under 2254(d), so long as the State court's opinion is
intrinsically reasonable based on its inadequate record.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Bress, I want to
apologize to you for accusing you of not printing
54(d) and (e) in your brief. You indeed did.
MR. BRESS: Well, thank you, Your Honor. I
thought --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm grateful for your not
throwing it in my teeth.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the case in the
