IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
MARK A. BRISCOE AND SHELDON A. :
CYPRESS, :
Petitioners : No. 07-11191
v. :
VIRGINIA :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, January 11, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for
oral argument before the Supreme Court of the United
States at 11:40 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
RICHARD D. FRIEDMAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Petitioners.
STEPHEN R. McCULLOUGH, ESQ., Solicitor General,
Richmond, Virginia; on behalf of the Respondent.
LEONDRA R. KRUGER, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
RICHARD D. FRIEDMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
STEPHEN R. McCULLOUGH, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondent 31
LEONDRA R. KRUGER, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Respondent 49
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
RICHARD D. FRIEDMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 60
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:40 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear argument
next in Case 07-11191, Briscoe v. Virginia.
Mr. Friedman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD D. FRIEDMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. FRIEDMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
We ask the Court in this case to take no new
ground beyond that established just last term in the
Melendez-Diaz case, but the stakes of this case are
high. If the Court were to reverse Melendez-Diaz and
hold that a State may impose on the defendant the
burden of calling a prosecution witness to the stand,
it would severely impair the confrontation right and
threaten a fundamental transformation in the way
Anglo-American trials have been conducted for hundreds
of years.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The State court has
interpreted their provision to give the defendant the
choice of subpoenaing the witness or asking the State
to bring in the witness. Why is that overruling
Melendez-Diaz?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Your Honor, the -- the State
courts, since the time of this case -- since the time
that these cases were tried, raised the possibility of
asking the -- that the defendant could ask the witness
to bring -- that the defendant could ask the
prosecution to bring in the witness. It doesn't
really change anything from a straight subpoena
statute in any -- in either event.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, how is that
different from a notice statute? If --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If we take the statute
as the State supreme court has read it --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- they say: In my
mind, it's a notice statute; tell the prosecutor you
either want them to call the witness or you subpoena
the witness. That's what the State court has told us.
Whether or not you had notice of that interpretation
is a separate question.
MR. FRIEDMAN: That --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Let's separate out the
two questions.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Okay, fine, fine. The -- the
two aspects that Melendez-Diaz said were wrong with
the subpoena statute are both present in this statute
--
even as interpreted by the -- by the State supreme
court. That is, nothing in Melendez-Diaz -- I'm
sorry, nothing in the Magruder case -- the opinion
here suggests that the prosecution would bear the
burden of calling the witness to the stand. I think
the Magruder case, the decision of the State supreme
court is very explicit and goes in accordance --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that's our first
question --
MR. FRIEDMAN: That’s --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Does the Confrontation
Clause require, not just the ability to
cross-examine --
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- but an affirmative
obligation to place the witness on the stand?
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's correct. That's
correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I just ask you one
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes. Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Would swearing the
witness in and saying to the witness "Is this your
report?" and the witness saying "Yes" -- what would be
unconstitutional about that, given our case law that
says that any prior statements by a witness are
admissible once the witness is on the stand or
constitutionally admissible once they are on the
stand?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. Right. The cases
involve that were California v. Green and United
States v. Owens. In both cases, there were questions
asked of the witness about what happened. So I do
believe -- though it hasn't been resolved in this
Court, I do believe that the prosecution should go
beyond simply saying "Is this your" --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no, no. "Should" is
a different question than the one I asked.
MR. FRIEDMAN: No. I mean, I think the
Constitution -- I think constitutionally, the -- the
prosecution would be compelled at least to ask: What
is your recollection? Do you endorse this statement?
But even if that's not true --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do you have anything
historically or in any case that would suggest that
that is a constitutional requirement? I mean, I do
accept that there is plenty that says you have a right
to be --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- to confront the
witness.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But what would require
the prosecutor to actually do more than I just
suggested? "Is this your statement? Is this your lab
report?"
MR. FRIEDMAN: Your Honor, so far as I can
tell, it's hardly ever been tried, for the obvious
reason that if all the prosecution does is say, "Is
this it," and not ask a further question of the
witness --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's not terribly
persuasive. I don't disagree with you.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. It -- well, that’s --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It’s a matter of trial
tactic, but I'm not talking about trial tactic.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes. Right. But I -- but
it's something that prosecutors don't try because they
would have to bear the -- the risk. So part of my
response is: Well, let them go ahead and try it if
they want to.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Bear what risk?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Bear what risk? What risk?
Bear what risk?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Bear -- bear the risk that
the -- that the witness has gotten on the stand and is
not even asked to recall. Bear the cost of putting a
witness on with no recollection.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, he says, "Is this
your lab report and do you stand by it?"
MR. FRIEDMAN: “And do you stand by it?" --
that's the critical point. That's going beyond the
hypothetical, as I understood it from Justice
Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I see. So -- okay.
MR. FRIEDMAN: But -- but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. I understood the
hypothetical to be -- to be otherwise, then.
MR. FRIEDMAN: But -- no, no. If it's "And
do you stand by it" --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. FRIEDMAN: -- then that's fine.
But I do know of a couple of cases involving
child witnesses where they don't ask -- they put the
witness on the stand, and they don't ask anything
about the events at issue. And in those cases
there’s -- courts have held that that's -- that’s not
acceptable. So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but -- so
what difference? That's because there’s nothing in
evidence about the incident, correct?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Well, no. No, then they
presented a former statement by the child. So -- so I
do think that there is some justification --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And that was a --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Those were found -- I
don't -- were those found as violations of the
Confrontation Clause?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Those are found to be
violations of the Confrontation Clause. The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or due process?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Confrontation Clause. State
v. Rohrich, which is cited in my brief on another
point, and Warren, an Illinois appellate case from, I
think, just last term.
JUSTICE ALITO: It's not clear to me what
your answer to these questions is. If all the
prosecution does is call the analyst on the stand and
admit -- have the analyst provide a foundation for the
admission of the report, let's say, pursuant to the
hearsay exception for recorded recollection, and does
nothing more, would there be a Confrontation Clause
problem?
MR. FRIEDMAN: And there’s -- there’s the
question, “Is this your report? Do you stand by it?”
Then -- then I don't think there is a Confrontation
Clause problem, because -- because the prosecution has
put the witness on the stand, has asked those
questions, and then the witness -- and --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's the difference
between that situation and the situation in which the
report is -- is admitted, subject to -- and the
analyst is available, and the defense can question the
analyst if the defense wishes to?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Well, I think -- I think the
difference is that once you ask the question -- “Do
you stand by it?” -- then the witness has testified
one way or another. And the prosecution, as I say,
bears the risk that the witness will not testify in
accordance with the prior statement. California --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: On the past recollection
recorded, the witness doesn't stand by the statement.
The witness says: I made the statement, have no
current knowledge; I can't stand by it or not stand by
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's right. I take
California v. Green at its word. California v. Green
says and Owen follows up and says that if the witness
does not testify in accordance with the prior
statement, then the defendant has had some of the --
has had considerable benefit of cross-examination
already. So -- so the prosecution has to -- has to
put the witness through that pace to make sure that
that happens. Beyond that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand what you
just said. Want to say it again?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes. California v. Green
says that if the witness testifies inconsistently with
the prior statement, that the defendant has had the
benefit of cross-examination in showing the
inconsistency. So -- so Justice Alito asked me what’s
the difference, and I'm saying a difference, one
difference is, that if the witness does not testify in
accordance with the prior statement, that's apparent
to -- that's apparent to the jury. There are also all
the practical differences that we emphasize.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You are asking us now to
state something that you admit is in really no
constitutional case or historical case, that says the
right to confrontation means that the witness has to
tell the story, and the form of telling that story has
to be a verbal recitation; it can't be past recorded
recollection because you just said they have to tell
--
the story. It can't be based on official documents or
anything else, because it has to be their story. Am I
hearing you wrong?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, I don't believe so. I'm
saying that the -- that the witness has to take the
stand, has to -- has to testify live, viva voce, face
to face, in the time-honored phrases which have always
governed testimony in an Anglo-American trial. Then
the -- I think the witness has to at least be asked
what happened. If the witness says, I don't recall,
then the prior statement may be introduced. I’m not
JUSTICE BREYER: What is the --
MR. FRIEDMAN: I’m not asking the Court to
go beyond anything that has previously been said.
JUSTICE BREYER: What is the theory of this?
I understand in hearsay, which as we have just seen
demonstrated, is very complicated, filled with all
kinds of rules --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- some of which I may
recall and others of which I certainly don't.
(Laughter.)
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: But the -- the
Confrontation Clause, I would have thought, would have
picked out the heart of that. So we have Sir Walter
Raleigh and Sir Walter Raleigh says, "Bring in
witnesses," which they wouldn't. So why shouldn't we
say what this clause is about is Sir Walter Raleigh?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Well, if --
JUSTICE BREYER: Bring in the witnesses.
Now, once you bring them in, the defendant can do what
he wants. He has had his chance to cross-examine
them. End of the matter, and leave the rest up to the
hearsay law.
MR. FRIEDMAN: I want to emphasize that the
Confrontation Clause is about a lot more -- there were
nearly 200 years of history between Walter Raleigh and
the Confrontation Clause, and what was established is
that in an Anglo-American trial witnesses give their
testimony live, face to face, and Melendez-Diaz
emphasized last term you can't prove the case via an
affidavit.
So -- so it's -- it's the fundamental
question that -- that Crawford establishes --
fundamental principle that Crawford establishes is
this is the way witnesses testify in our trials:
live, in front of the jury, subject to oath and then
cross-exam.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why -- and -- I trust
the trial process, and much of your brief was talking
about that process --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- and the fact that
it's much more effective when the witness tells their
story and you get a chance to cross-examine than if
you have to start from the platform of
cross-examination. Once a defendant makes it known
that a -- he's going to cross-examine a lab
technician, don't you think that in the vast majority
of cases the prosecutor is going to put that witness
MR. FRIEDMAN: I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And if he does or
doesn't, why shouldn't we leave it to the normal trial
strategy and practice to leave to that prosecutor the
burden of non-persuasion, which is what confrontation
was about?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Which is --
MR. FRIEDMAN: If -- if the prosecutor is
certain that the defendant is going to put the witness
on the stand, then -- then the prosecutor has some
reason to -- to put the witness on first. The problem
is that the -- the defunct Virginia statute puts the
burden on the defendant of bringing the witness in,
and the defense --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well -- well, I was
starting from a different proposition than you did --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. I'm sorry -- but --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- because I think
that’s a question for your adversaries: How could you
have known --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that you should have
asked the State to bring that witness in?
But putting that aside --
MR. FRIEDMAN: But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- assume we are reading
it the way the Court has now.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. The -- the fact is
that under the Virginia statute, given -- and as
interpreted by the Commonwealth, too -- given that the
defendant has the burden of putting the witness on the
stand, defendants rarely exercise that right, because
it's a corrupted right, because it isn't nearly as
valuable, as I think Your Honor understands, as the
right to stand up and cross-examine a witness who has
actually just testified.
I don't think that the right given by the
Virginia statute is -- the former Virginia statute is
actually the right to cross-examine. It's not in form
cross-examination, and it's not in substance
cross-examination. It's a right to make the witness
the defendant's own, and that's the way -- that's the
way the statute is -- is worded.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Friedman, one of the
problems that has been brought up is that this is an
inordinate expense, and you're wasting the time of the
analyst. Do you recognize any economy -- for example,
that the analyst could testify from the lab, have
video conferencing, and so the analyst, while the
prosecutor must call her, can testify from the lab
instead of coming down to the courthouse?
MR. FRIEDMAN: That -- that is a --
certainly a possibility, at least on consent of the
defendant, and some States, including my own State of
Michigan, has been experimenting with that. And I
think that's a plausible possibility.
Now, if the defendant were to insist on --
on live testimony, that is an open -- that's an open
question as to whether video testimony would be
acceptable. This Court some years ago refused to
transmit to Congress a proposed amendment to Federal
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and the majority in a
statement by Justice Scalia said there is a virtual
satisfaction of the confrontation right, not a real
satisfaction.
So the matter as to whether it could be done
without consent hasn't been satisfied -- hasn't been
determined. But certainly on consent it could, and in
many cases I believe the defendants -- that those
defendants who do want confrontation would be
perfectly willing to accept video.
But I do -- I do want to respond also to the
-- the premise. I -- I believe that sufficient data
is now available to show rather clearly that the
expense is not inordinate.
JUSTICE ALITO: How can you say that? We
have an amicus brief from 26 States plus the District
of Columbia arguing exactly the contrary.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes, I --
JUSTICE ALITO: They say that there is a
very substantial category of cases in which defendants
really have no interest whatsoever in contesting
either the nature or the quantity of drugs involved,
but they will refuse to stipulate to those things
simply for the purpose of putting a financial burden
on the prosecution, because they know, if they do
that, it may be helpful for them in getting a better
plea bargain, plus there is a certain risk that the
analyst will not show up, and they will get the
benefit of that.
MR. FRIEDMAN: So, Your Honor, I think that
what the -- the States' amicus brief shows is that
there are -- there are a lot of drug prosecutions, and
there are a lot of drug analyses, and then there is
this speculation about the type of gamesmanship that
you have mentioned. But if we look for hard data,
there is nothing supporting that.
So let's look at a couple of jurisdictions
that have perfectly valid notice-and-demand rules.
Ohio -- it's less than one appearance per lab analyst
per month. That is in the State lab. Less than one
appearance per month.
JUSTICE ALITO: If this is not a burden on
these 26 States plus the District of Columbia, why are
they bothering to make this argument? Just for
amusement?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I’m sure not for amusement.
I think there’s a certain amount of solidarity. I’m
sure that they would rather not have whatever expense
there is. But, frankly, I think a large part is that
they recognize that the defunct Virginia statute is an
impairment to the confrontation right and makes it
harder for defendants. It makes -- it makes it less
likely that the confrontation right is going to -- is
going to be invoked.
Let's look at the District of Columbia. The
District of Columbia, it's about -- it's about a half
a person a year in extra expense caused by lab techs
having to come and testify.
That's -- that is not a large burden for the
District of Columbia, and in fact, the District of
Columbia -- the lab that services the District of
Columbia has gotten by with five fewer technicians
than it did before the change.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I assume you've
picked the best example for you. D.C. is a small
place. You go to a big State, and the lab is not
always right next door.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Your Honor, I -- I’m just
little old me, and I just picked what I could get.
And, frankly, the example I picked was because the
Solicitor General's brief had data on the District of
Columbia, so I asked some more questions. That's why
I got -- that's why I got the District of Columbia.
Ohio -- I asked because they are a neighboring State,
and I was able to get some information.
JUSTICE BREYER: You could have -- you could
have hearsay that is not prepared for testimony.
There are all kinds of categories. And suppose, in
your case, this hearsay of business record or --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And how often will you say:
I understand it's admissible, but I would like as well
to call the witness who prepared it. Will you do that
very often?
Suppose you learn that that witness is -- is
,000 miles away, so you say, I’d like to call this
witness, and you know perfectly well that it's going
to be virtually impossible for that witness to be
produced. What happens?
MR. FRIEDMAN: We are talking about
non-testimonial hearsay?
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm trying to think of
something that’s hearsay, and --
MR. FRIEDMAN: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and what I'm trying to
figure out --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is will defense
attorneys, if they have the right under the
Constitution to insist that a lab technician be
present, in cases where they happen to know that lab
technician has left the job and is married and is
reliving in a distant State, say okay, let's call her.
And that way the prosecution really cannot present the
case except at inordinate expense.
And I'm concerned about that --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- but I don't see quite
how to deal with it, how much of a problem it is, and
the impact on this particular situation.
MR. FRIEDMAN: I -- I don't think it's a
significant problem, and I do want to say -- I didn't
-- I didn't select data. I just got -- presented the
data on the States that I had, and my own State of
Michigan --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Friedman, aren't there
States that have been proceeding this way even before
we came down with our opinion?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Absolutely, absolutely,
including my own State.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And which States are they?
MR. FRIEDMAN: They -- well, they include my
own State of Michigan; they include the State of New
York --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they are not under
water, are they?
MR. FRIEDMAN: The problems of the State of
Michigan are not attributable to the use of this
procedure, no.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your answer to
Justice Breyer has to be, of course, you would insist
that the person be called. It would be malpractice
for you not to.
MR. FRIEDMAN: It -- it is -- yes, but it's
not a significant problem, and one reason it’s not a
significant problem is that the possibility of a
deposition is always --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know except
anecdotally, but Massachusetts seems to be having huge
problems, reported anecdotally, with the --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Not -- not according to --
not according to the chief of the -- chief trial
counsel, Suffolk -- the Suffolk district attorney's
office --
JUSTICE BREYER: Rouse -- is that --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Excuse me.
JUSTICE BREYER: The woman, Barbara --
Barbara Rouse?
MR. FRIEDMAN: In my reply brief on page 27,
I quote Patrick Hagan, who says -- who says: "The sky
has not fallen; we can do this very well."
JUSTICE BREYER: And then there are
conflicting reports in the newspapers, but I don't
know.
MR. FRIEDMAN: It's -- and, of course, there
can be an adjustment period, but -- but States can
adjust. I think the -- the simplest answer to your
question, Justice Breyer, is the use of depositions,
and I think prosecutors probably have been underusing
depositions. But -- but if a lab tech is about to
retire and that lab tech has done a test that is about
to be used, then take the deposition.
JUSTICE BREYER: What happens if the lab
is -- is divided into four or five parts and there is
several different machines and we have different
people at different times using these different
machines and performing different operations and each,
at the end, certifies that the red light was on or it
was this or it was that? Now, do we have to call all
those people?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, I don't believe you have
to call all those people.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not? Each of them --
MR. FRIEDMAN: I do believe that there has
to be --
JUSTICE BREYER: Each of them looked at a
special part. Each of them said --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that it was this or
that, and in respect to each of those statements, it’s
this or that. That is hearsay.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. The problem, of
course, isn't hearsay. The problem is -- the only
question is --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, it's no
confrontation because in this instance the hearsay
prevents the confrontation.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right. The -- the
prosecution has to present the testimony of witnesses.
It has to present the testimony live. Depending on
how the lab is organized -- usually, labs can organize
so that only one person needs to -- needs to present.
In any event, of course, the State is
acknowledging that, if the defendant brings -- demands
they have to bring in the witnesses, that’s not at
issue.
JUSTICE BREYER: Your answer to my question
is, if a laboratory is so organized so that six or
seven people perform different steps of the operation,
if it is organized in that way, all of them must be
brought?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I -- I don't believe so. I
believe --
JUSTICE BREYER: You don't believe so, but
you gave me an answer saying they did have to, so --
because you said they could organize differently. So
now explain to me why they don't.
MR. FRIEDMAN: But even if -- even if they
are organized in that way, for instance, if one person
observes all the -- all the procedures, that’s
sufficient. Apart from that, as Melendez-Diaz
indicates, it's up to the -- it's up to the State to
decide what the evidence they are going to present is,
whether --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose one person doesn't
observe all the procedures. One person prepares the
sample, another person puts it on the paper, another
person reads the machine, another person calibrates
the machine.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes. Right. Well, I think
Melendez-Diaz indicates that it’s up to the State to
determine what the -- the evidence that’s going to be
presented, and there may be gaps. I do want to
emphasize that this is an issue that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no, no. The evidence
is presented, and the test comes out so -- positive,
so that the gun fires or that it's a drug or that it's
a DNA sample. Can the conclusion be presented by one
witness from the lab, when that witness did not
observe all of the procedures?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I think -- I think that there
probably has to be a witness who has observed the
procedures. If I am -- and that's an issue that will
be presented to the Court, we can be pretty certain.
I think that issue is entirely orthogonal to the issue
here because the Commonwealth is acknowledging --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. Entirely
what?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Orthogonal. Right angle.
Unrelated. Irrelevant.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was that adjective? I
like that.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Orthogonal.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Orthogonal?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right, right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ooh.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I knew this case presented
us a problem.
(Laughter.)
MR. FRIEDMAN: I should have -- I probably
should have said --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think we should use that
in the opinion.
(Laughter.)
MR. FRIEDMAN: I thought -- I thought I had
seen it before.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Or the dissent.
(Laughter.)
MR. FRIEDMAN: That’s a bit of -- a bit of
professorship creeping in, I suppose.
But the Commonwealth is acknowledging that
they have to bring in witnesses if the -- if the
defense demands, so this is another issue as to who
are -- who are the witnesses. And it’s --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But, in your view, it
wouldn't satisfy the Confrontation Clause if, say, the
supervisor shows up and said that this is -- this is
the way the analysts operate and describes the
procedures.
MR. FRIEDMAN: In my view, it wouldn't, but
if I'm wrong, it doesn't change this case whatsoever.
It does not change this case whatsoever. It has
nothing to do with the issue here. The issue here is
-- is the witnesses who are going to testify and how
much they -- they testify, and I want to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the reason that I ask
is because floating in the back of my mind is -- is if
-- (a) does the Confrontation Clause apply?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And if the answer to (a) is
yes, then are there different kinds of implementation
rules in different areas where there are other signs
of security, where there are other reasons for
thinking it's not bad testimony? That line is not
something that’s necessarily workable, and -- but I
brought it up to try to think about it.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Yes. I think -- I think it's
an interesting question, and it’s question 3 in the
evidence exam that I am just grading, in fact. But I
think that’s an issue that the Court will have to
resolve.
And, as I say, my views are what they --
what they are, but if you reject my views on that, it
doesn't change this case whatsoever.
What I think is important to recognize is
how fundamental a transformation in the Anglo-American
trial is threatened if -- if the Court were to hold
that the prosecution can present an affidavit and
leave it to the defendant, if he dares, to put the
witness on the stand.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, does that square with
where we started out? We have situation A, where the
prosecutor calls the lab analyst, and the lab analyst
says, this is my report, and I stand by it, period.
Now, it's up to the defense to cross-examine. That's
situation A.
Situation B is the report is admitted
without the analyst present, but the defense can then
-- without the analyst on the stand --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: But the defense can then
cross-examine the analyst.
MR. FRIEDMAN: I wouldn't call that
cross-exam --
JUSTICE ALITO: There’s such a slight
difference between those two situations. Now, how is
that a fundamental transformation of the way
Anglo-American trials are conducted?
MR. FRIEDMAN: It's fundamental
transformation because the prosecution can present a
stack of affidavits, and they wouldn't even have to be
affidavits. They could just be signed -- they could
just be statements. It could present videotapes. It
could present audiotapes. It could craft those and
rehearse those behind the scene. It could present
those to the trial --
JUSTICE ALITO: No. Let's just not get
beyond the facts of this case, where all -- all that
we are dealing with is a -- an analyst's report
relating to the -- the nature of the substance that
was tested and, if it's a controlled substance, the
amount. That's it. It doesn't extend to anything
else, videotapes or anything more. There’s such a
slight difference between those two situations.
MR. FRIEDMAN: I think there’s an enormous
difference in -- in impact. It's an enormous impact,
as I've emphasized in my brief, because of the
impairment of the ability to examine.
I don't believe it's cross-examination. In
practice, it is -- if the defendant said, I don't want
to cross-examine, but I still insist that the witness
get up on the stand and let's see what the witness can
do -- and the Commonwealth makes no attempt to
distinguish between these witnesses and other
witnesses for what is -- what is satisfactory
confrontation. It says: This is good confrontation.
He could do it with all witnesses.
If the Court pleases, I will reserve the
balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Friedman.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. McCullough.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STEPHEN R. McCULLOUGH
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. McCULLOUGH: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
I think an appropriate place to start would
be how the Supreme Court of Virginia construed the
statute and get past that and into the confrontation
issue.
The first thing I would note there is that
the Petitioners simply have not challenged the
decision of the -- the interpretation of the Supreme
Court of Virginia that it placed on the statute. So I
think, to the extent that they are now, for the first
time in their reply brief, trying to raise a separate
due process issue, that the construction of the court
was so unreasonable that it violates due process, it's
far too late in the day to do that. So I think the
Court --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It goes -- that goes to
the waiver question.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How did they know at
trial that they were supposed to say to you: I don't
want a subpoena; you bring them in.
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think the -- the way the
Supreme Court of Virginia construed the statute is
perfectly sensible. What it says -- and the key
phrase is on page 2 of our brief -- that "no" --
excuse me -- "such witnesses shall be summoned and
appear at the cost of the Commonwealth." And unlike
some statutes that say the defendant shall subpoena or
shall summon -- for example, like the Idaho and the
North Dakota statutes that the Petitioners cite --
they are express in saying it has to be the defendant
who issues a summons. This just says "shall be
summoned."
In a criminal trial at the time these
Petitioners were being tried, there were two parties
that have the authority to issue summons. One was the
clerk of court; that is, a defendant would go to the
court and say: These are my witnesses; have them
produced for trial on this date. And the other was
the Commonwealth. So the statute simply doesn't say
it has to be the Commonwealth, it has to be the
defendant. It's silent. The Supreme Court of
Virginia has a long history of construing statutes in
a way that obviates a constitutional problem.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you're -- you're
still begging the question. How -- they did what any
reasonable defendant would do and say: I object to
the admission of this lab report; I have a right under
the Confrontation Clause to have the -- the lab
technician here.
And the Commonwealth court said, no, you
don't.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so did the court on
appeal.
How did they know that this was a notice-
and-demand statute as opposed to a subpoena statute?
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think it was incumbent on
counsel to raise the issue exactly like counsel for
the defendant did in the Grant case. And I think it's
noteworthy that in the Grant case the -- the motion
was filed well in advance of trial, on November 2nd,
07, before the Supreme Court of Virginia ever
construed the statute in this fashion. And so the
fact that a statute may be susceptible to more than
one interpretation doesn't obviate the need for
counsel to take the steps that are necessary to
protect the right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I ask you: If we
were to -- how do we articulate a rule, or do we need
to, that would take care of the fears of your
adversary that trials would become trials by
affidavit, that the -- that prosecutors will choose to
put all witnesses on -- by videotape, by affidavit, by
deposition, whatever mode they choose except bringing
them into court -- and forcing defendants then to call
the witnesses and do a what's -- what I call a
cold-cross?
What rule would we announce in this case --
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that would avoid --
what constitutional construction of the Confrontation
Clause would we issue that would protect against that?
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think there are several
constitutional, legal, and practical considerations
that make this --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no. Forget the
practical. Talk about the legal, constitutional.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right. Constitutionally,
there are two obstacles to a wholesale type of trial
system where the prosecution would simply present a
stack of affidavits.
The first of those is the Due Process
Clause, which -- for example, in these child witness
cases, what a number of courts have held is that it's
going to inflame the jury against the defendant if a
videotape is introduced and then the defendant is
called -- forced to call the witness to the stand.
And that's simply not the case with these types of
witness. So the Due Process Clause itself puts the
brakes on the type of wholesale at-trial --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They're trial witnesses.
Anything else?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Another is the fact that
under the Confrontation Clause, the cross-examination
has to be effective. And so if the prosecution on the
day of trial dumps a series of affidavits on the
defense, it's going to be pretty difficult for the
defense to be in a position to effectively
cross-examine.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, just one or two. Just
one or two affidavits. Or it -- the court has a rule
you have to provide those affidavits several weeks
before trial. That would be okay?
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think, under the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We'd have a whole
--
European-type trial, right? It would be trial by
affidavit.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right. I don't think the
Confrontation Clause, in terms of what it's
historically intended to protect, blocks that
scenario.
I think the key to the Confrontation Clause,
what this Court has said for a long time, turning to
the history of the clause, is that it's designed to
protect the reliability of the government's evidence.
And the way it does that is by subjecting that to the
crucible of cross-examination, face to face, of live
witnesses. And this statute protects exactly that;
that is, the defendant says he wants the witness there
JUSTICE SCALIA: It does more than that. It
does more than that. It is the prosecution that has
had to place the witness on the stand. It has not
been up to the defense to say, oh, no, I object to
this affidavit, I would like you to bring -- no. The
prosecution has to bring in the witness. That has
been what the Confrontation Clause has meant.
MR. McCULLOUGH: We agree that we have to
produce the witness for court, but we see little
constitutional --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, you don't agree with
that. You say you don't have to do it unless the
defendant objects and issue -- gets a subpoena issued.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, we agree that if the
defendant does provide the notice, as with the notice-
and-demand statute, that it -- that it’s our burden to
make sure that witness is there. And if -- as the
statute provides, the witness has to be summoned and
appear.
So this statute has always been strictly
construed against the prosecution. If it fails to do
exactly what the statute requires, that cuts against
the prosecution. So the witness does have to appear.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How is that clear from the
statute?
MR. McCULLOUGH: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How is that clear from the
statute? It just says that a subpoena shall issue.
What if a subpoena issues and nobody comes?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right. And it -- the fact
that the prosecution -- excuse me, that the statute is
interpreted strictly against the prosecution comes
from several decades of jurisprudence from the Supreme
Court of Virginia, and we cite those cases on page 1
our brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: A strict construction of
statutes in general, or a strict construction of this
provision?
MR. McCULLOUGH: This particular -- this
particular statutory scheme. For example, if the --
.2-187, the statute that precedes this, says that it
has to be filed 7 days before the trial. And if it's
filed 6 days, forget it, you have to bring in a live
witness.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm talking about the
specific issue of the person subpoenaed not appearing.
Do you have a case?
MR. McCULLOUGH: No, I don't have a case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So we don't really know.
MR. McCULLOUGH: -- but I -- but I think the
answer follows inexorably --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know how -- how
strict construction gets you to the -- to the result
that when it is the defendant who has to take the
initiative to get the person brought in, if the person
doesn't show up, it's -- it doesn't fall on the
defendant; it falls on the prosecution. I don't see
how strict construction gets you there.
MR. McCULLOUGH: The -- the Grant case, for
example, which our Court of Appeals of Virginia said
was simply was an application of the holding in the
Magruder decision. There the defendant did -- well in
advance of trial, sent notice to the Commonwealth and
said, I want the witness there. The Commonwealth
didn't get the subpoena out. So that was the first
part of that, "shall be summoned." And the court of
appeals said you should never have allowed this in,
without the live witness being present.
And so what -- although Grant didn't address
the appear part, the same answer is true; that is, the
defendant says, I want the witness there; the
Commonwealth issues a summons, but the witness doesn't
appear. It's the same result.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I think that
underlying this is a fairly simple problem,
conceptually. Imagine we have Sir Walter Raleigh at
trial, and there’s an affidavit for missing witness A
and witness B and witness C, and they are over in a
room somewhere, whether they were treated badly or
not, and they have written these pieces of paper. In
they come.
And Walter Raleigh says: "Bring me the
witness." Now, suppose they had trotted him out, and
he cross-examined him. Still, those pieces of paper
came in, and they weren't cross-examined. And so what
do we do about that? They weren't cross-examined, and
how did they get in here?
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think your question goes
to the very heart of why we have the Confrontation
Clause. It wasn't because of this formalistic order
of proof that our modern trials have. And -- and one
thing that makes this case conceptually difficult is
we are so accustomed to this clean order of
presentation -- that -- that that's how we have all
tried our cases, that's how we are used to seeing
them, but that's not the heart of the Confrontation
Clause.
The Confrontation Clause is because, for
example, the colonists were subject to anonymous --
JUSTICE BREYER: As I read this statute, it
does let in that piece of paper.
MR. McCULLOUGH: It does. But --
JUSTICE BREYER: And so why then, by
analogy, isn't the statute bad?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, because --
JUSTICE BREYER: If -- unless you -- unless
you have some special kind -- I mean, you’d have to
some special -- specially reliable evidence that sort
of fell within the Confrontation Clause but not
totally. And that's what I -- the more I think about
that, the harder that one is to do.
MR. McCULLOUGH: I think there are --
JUSTICE BREYERE: So -- so --
MR. McCULLOUGH: There are characteristics,
of course, to this particular type of evidence that
were debated in this Court's Melendez-Diaz opinion
that make this procedure certainly more appropriate,
and one of those is, these -- what -- functionally
what you are doing when you have this witness on the
stand is either past recollection recorded or past
recollection refreshed, because they are doing
approximately 900 of these certificates a year. They
are largely fungible things like -- like crack cocaine
or powder cocaine. And so we're miles from the type
of scenario where --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, to put my chips on
the table, which you probably understand, I thought
the reliability of this evidence in the mine run of
cases was such, and the distance from Sir Walter
Raleigh was sufficiently great, that it fell outside
the scope of the Confrontation Clause for those two
reasons, but mine was a dissenting opinion.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right. I --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, therefore, what do I
(Laughter.)
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, I think, though, even
-- even going back to the very heart -- the historical
heart of this clause, the problems for these colonists
was anonymous accusers and absentee witnesses. That's
-- that's why -- they were enraged because of this
deeply unfair trial procedure. It wasn't because, for
example, a harbor master might be called in and
records of what ships came in for these colonists who
were in the vice admiralty courts, and some paper is
introduced about what ships came in, and then they get
an opportunity to cross-examine them before the
prosecution has asked any questions of the -- the
harbor master.
That's not the problem, that the
Confrontation -- Confrontation Clause --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, the problem you
describe, the hearsay rule would have solved that
alone, wouldn't it?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, that's one of the
practical --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So -- so what's left for
the Confrontation Clause to do?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, the Confrontation
Clause is designed to ensure -- the core of it -- and
we agree with this -- is what this Court has said for
a long time, a face-to-face encounter with a witness
who is cross-examined face to face, under oath.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it doesn't have to
happen in the prosecutor's case. In other words, the
prosecutor puts in the reports and rests. And the
defendant says, there wasn't sufficient evidence; I
move to dismiss the case. It couldn't be dismissed at
that point. The prosecutor would prove its case by
the affidavit alone.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right. But first -- a
couple points in response.
First of all, the statute doesn't say at
what point the defendant gets to treat this witness as
an adverse witness. It just says the report comes in,
and then the defendant can call the witness as an
adverse witness. And the Supreme Court of Virginia
deliberately left the question of the order of proof
unresolved, because it viewed those things as a due
process issue. So I don't think it's axiomatic under
the statute, although it's possible, that the
defendant would conduct a cross-examination during his
case.
But -- but beyond that, the Confrontation
Clause isn't designed to constitutionalize Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 29 or a motion to strike.
The defendant could still -- in Virginia procedure,
it's a motion to strike. The defendant could still
make that motion at the close of all the evidence.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it's still not clear --
not clear under the statute that if the witness
doesn't show up, it's the prosecution that bears the
burden.
MR. McCULLOUGH: No, I think that’s very
clear.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that clear?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Under both the plain
language of the statute and the way it’s been
construed adversely to the Commonwealth. The plain
language of the statute is the witness shall be
summoned and appear. So there’s a requirement of
appearance. And if the defendant asks the prosecutor
to summon the witness, the witness then has to appear.
And going -- and we cite some of these cases, again on
page 1 of our brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't say what the
consequence of his not appearing is. That the -- that
the written testimony is -- stands and is admitted,
without the opportunity to cross-examine the witness?
MR. McCULLOUGH: The consequence emerges
from this line of cases, Justice Scalia, that if the
-- the statute requires the witness to appear, and if
the Commonwealth doesn't do exactly what the statute
requires, a live witness -- or excuse me, the
certificate does not come in without the live witness.
Just like, if you don't -- the statute says file 7
days before court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, the prosecutor issues
the subpoena.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right. And that would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The witness does not show
MR. McCULLOUGH: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not talking about fault
on the part of the prosecutor. I'm talking about the
fact that the witness has died, has fled the State, is
simply not available.
MR. McCULLOUGH: But I think the language
answers that. The witness has to appear. The statute
says shall be summoned, and the requirement is that
the witness appear. If the witness does not appear --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, he is required
to appear. But what happens if he doesn't appear?
MR. McCULLOUGH: I'm sorry, but we seem to
be going in -- in circles. And I want to answer your
question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, we’re not going in
circles at all. You -- you appeal to the language
that the witness shall appear as resolving what
happens when he doesn't, and it doesn't resolve that.
It just says he must appear. And if he doesn't appear,
what happens?
MR. McCULLOUGH: If he doesn't appear, the
Commonwealth has failed to do what the statute
requires, which is to make sure the witness appears.
And if the Commonwealth fails to do exactly what the
statute requires, it must -- it cannot rely on a piece
of paper.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I don't see the
statute requiring that. It requires that of the
witness, he shall appear.
MR. McCULLOUGH: And -- I mean, to the
extent there’s -- there’s any question about that, I
don't think it's a matter that this Court should
resolve in the first instance. I think it would be a
matter of remand to the Supreme Court of Virginia to
determine what -- what the statute requires in that
instance.
Let me just spend a moment since we've
talked about the costs. Our experience in Virginia,
we -- of course, we've repealed this statute. This
Court signaled in Melendez-Diaz what a safe harbor
was, with notice and demand, and so we went there.
And what we have seen under our new statute
is rampant demands for the witness to appear, followed
by: Oh, well, he's here; I’ll stipulate. Or no
questions of the witness. So our experience under
this old statute compared to our new one is that we
had far more -- or far less under our old statute of
this sort of tactical demands for confrontation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How new is the new one?
MR. McCULLOUGH: It went into effect
August 21, 2009.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. The -- the reply
brief of -- of the Petitioners mentions that -- that
the same thing, a spike occurred in other
jurisdictions after Melendez-Diaz, but then the spike
went down, after -- after 6 months or a short period.
MR. McCULLOUGH: The spike has plateaued
somewhat in Virginia, but we are still seeing
extensive gamesmanship. And I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is peculiar about
Virginia that -- or what is peculiar about Michigan or
the other States that have this system and somehow are
able to live with it?
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Virginia criminals are
nastier; is that it?
(Laughter.)
MR. McCULLOUGH: No, I -- I think -- I -- I
don't know that -- that there's anything particularly
different about Virginia criminals. I will say that
this type of statute -- as this Court noted in
Melendez-Diaz, defense attorneys don't want to
necessarily antagonize the court and so on by making
these kinds of gamesmanship demands.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. McCULLOUGH: Well, a cross-examination-
focused statute like this one more blatantly exposes
that type of gamesmanship and, therefore, may have a
better deterrent value, as opposed to a garden variety
statute.
I do want to just say, really briefly, that
the practical concerns, even if they are not
constitutional concerns, are very important because
the prosecution always bears the burden of persuasion,
and a live witness is always more compelling than a
piece of paper.
And so the -- the practical realities of
this -- a trial by affidavit simply are not likely to
be there.
I see my time's expired. I thank the Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Kruger.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LEONDRA R. KRUGER
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING RESPONDENT
MS. KRUGER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
A State adequately safeguards the
confrontation right recognized in Melendez-Diaz when
it guarantees that it will, on the defendant's
request, bring the analyst into court for face-to-face
confrontation and cross-examination at trial.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not what we said in
Melendez-Diaz, unfortunately.
MS. KRUGER: Well, Melendez-Diaz --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We said the following:
“More fundamentally, the Confrontation Clause imposes
a burden on the prosecution to present its witnesses,
not on the defendant to bring those adverse witnesses
into court. Its value to the defendant is not
replaced by a system in which the prosecution presents
its evidence via ex parte affidavits and waits for the
defendant to subpoena the affiants, if he chooses.”
So you are asking us to overrule that --
that statement?
MS. KRUGER: No, Justice Scalia, not at all.
We believe that a State complies with that very rule
from Melendez-Diaz when it ensures that the analyst is
present in court to submit to cross-examination, which
is the core of the confrontation right. This Court
affirmed in its decision --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He's present only if the
defendant asks for him, right?
MS. KRUGER: That's right, and that's --
that’s because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's exactly what
this addressed. It's not -- it's not replaced by a
system in which the prosecution presents its evidence
by -- and waits for the defendant to subpoena the
affiants if he chooses.
MS. KRUGER: This Court has recognized that
the confrontation right is designed to achieve a
particular purpose, and that is to ensure that the
government's evidence is subject to adversarial
testing at trial.
It is ultimately up to the defendant in
every case to decide, no matter how the prosecution
presents its evidence on direct, whether or not it
wants to confront the witness and submit that
witness's testimony to adversarial testing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That may be. It's a
perfectly reasonable argument. I just object to your
saying that it doesn't contradict Melendez-Diaz.
MS. KRUGER: I think it would be surprising
to discover that Melendez-Diaz went quite so far.
This Court has never before recognized a dimension of
the Confrontation Clause that would govern the manner
in which the prosecution presents its evidence, except
for the rule that it affirmed it in Crawford, which is
that so long as the government ensures that the
witness is available for cross-examination at trial,
the Confrontation Clause places no constraints on the
government's use of prior testimony or statements.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So the
statement, the sentence in this opinion, that, in your
opinion, would have the effect of limiting
Melendez-Diaz without overruling it, what is that
statement?
MS. KRUGER: I think the statement is it
requires only that the Court reaffirm what it already
said in Crawford, in the context of the lab analyst
testimony at issue in this case, which is, again, when
the analyst is available for cross-examination at
trial, the government has complied with what the
Confrontation Clause demands.
It has provided a constitutionally
sufficient opportunity for the defendants to submit
that analyst's findings to adversarial testing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it just doesn't --
doesn't apply just to analysts, right? I mean, is
there anything peculiar about analysts? Would it not
exist for any other witness?
MS. KRUGER: Well, our principal submission
is that the Confrontation Clause provides, in every
case, an opportunity for effective cross-examination.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MS. KRUGER: And there may be independent
constraints on the manner in which the prosecution
presents its evidence under the laws of evidence in
the jurisdiction because of the government's need to
satisfy its burden of proof and ensure a fundamentally
fair trial under the Due Process Clause.
To the extent that the Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand what --
is that a yes or a no?
MS. KRUGER: Well, it is to say that
Confrontation Clause is not what prohibits that
practice. What prohibits that practice are other
equally effective sources in the law --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So as far as the
Confrontation Clause is concerned, this would apply to
other witnesses as well?
MS. KRUGER: I think that that’s right, but
even if the Court were to disagree with that
submission, this Court could rely on the kinds of
distinctions that it has drawn in other cases, like
Inadi or like White v. Illinois, which recognized that
there is a class of hearsay evidence that’s not simply
a weaker substitute for live testimony at trial, that
has independent, probative significance that makes it
somewhat irrelevant whether or not the court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Indicia of reliability --
you want us to go back to that? Is that --
(Laughter.)
MS. KRUGER: No, it's not a question of the
reliability. What Crawford did was replace a system
in which hearsay evidence and its admissibility was
dependent on reliability with one in which the
touchstone is an opportunity for cross-examination.
And it's precisely in response to that point
that Crawford, again, reaffirmed the rule that it
first announced in Green, that so long as the
out-of-court declarant is present at trial to explain
or defend his out-of-court statements, the
Confrontation Clause is satisfied.
JUSTICE BREYER: What if it doesn't quite
work, that the Confrontation Clause seems to be
expanding, just with the opportunity for
cross-examination creating all kinds of incursions
into areas where it’s not necessary for fairness
purposes?
Then does it make sense to say -- hey,
unfortunately, to say that the only workable system is
that you have a system which has exactly the
confrontation point, but indicia of reliability do
have an impact as to what the implications of the
Confrontation Clause violation are, in terms of
practical trial necessity.
MS. KRUGER: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, there we are,
accepting the warnings of the dissenters in Crawford.
(Laughter.)
MS. KRUGER: I don't think that the
touchstone of this Court's analysis need return to the
now discredited Ohio v. Roberts regime.
It's simply a practical point. To the
extent the Petitioners are arguing that their
opportunity to confront and to cross-examine is
constitutionally inadequate merely because the
prosecution hasn't guaranteed that it would call the
witness to the stand first, I think the court can take
due account of the fact that that is not necessarily
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what about Raleigh's
witnesses -- you know, the hypothetical I gave you,
for the heart of the matter, the heart of the matter,
and they stick it in their affidavits, and you say,
oh, don't worry, don't worry, you can cross-examine
them later in the trial.
MS. KRUGER: I think, to the extent that the
Court were otherwise inclined to invent a new body of
Confrontation Clause jurisprudence to govern the
manner in which the prosecution puts on its witnesses
and questions them, this isn't the appropriate case to
do it because, as we have seen from Petitioners’
submission earlier this morning, there is no
substantive difference from a defendant's
perspective --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you -- are you
suggesting or are you saying even a trial by affidavit
is okay under the Confrontation Clause? Is that your
position?
MS. KRUGER: Our principal submission is
that the Confrontation Clause allows the government to
rely on affidavits, so long as it bring the affiants
into court, so that the defendant can ask whatever
questions --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So you are absolutely
saying that, under the Confrontation Clause, trial by
affidavit of any witness would be okay.
MS. KRUGER: That is our principal --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So are you -- are you
then saying that there is some other constitutional
limit to that choice, outside of the Confrontation
Clause? And if you are, what would be that other
constitutional limit?
MS. KRUGER: We do think that there are
constitutional limits in the Due Process Clause, and
it's guaranteeing the right to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, how many hundreds of
cases will it take to identify those limits under that
very clear Due Process Clause?
(Laughter.)
MS. KRUGER: Well, it's -- it’s somewhat of
a difficult question to answer because this is not a
question that arises particularly frequently. The
laws of evidence, as a general matter, express a
strong preference for the prosecution to present its
evidence through live testimony --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't we want clear rules
for the presentation? Don't we want clear rules, not
gambling on what the Supreme Court will say about due
process?
MS. KRUGER: I think that it's difficult to
imagine that a new-found constitutional rule that
would require the prosecution to present its evidence
in a certain way in every case would lead to that sort
of clarity. It would, if anything, create --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Ms. Kruger, can I just ask
this question? I just want to be sure. Supposing you
have an eyewitness. Can you follow the same procedure
that you recommend for the scientific witness here --
and for an eyewitness?
MS. KRUGER: We think that you could, so
long as the defendant has an adequate opportunity to
cross-examine that eye witness about the testimonial
statement.
But even if you disagreed with that, we
think that the Court can take due account of the fact
that there is a significant difference between the
kind of testimony that an eyewitness provides and the
kind of testimony that a forensic analyst provides.
The forensic analyst's lab report is not
merely a weaker substitute for live testimony. It is,
in fact, I think, as we see by the relative
infrequency with which analysts were called into court
before Melendez-Diaz, something that has been seen to
have equal value, regardless of the manner in which
it’s presented.
And, for that reason, we think that, in
order to decide this case, all this Court needs to
decide is that, in the context of forensic lab
analysts, what the Court said in Crawford still
stands, so long as the government presents the analyst
at trial for face-to-face confrontation and
cross-examination.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why do we have to
say anything in this case? Why is this case here
except as an opportunity to upset Melendez-Diaz?
MS. KRUGER: I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This Virginia statute no
longer exists, does it? So we are pronouncing on the
validity of a Virginia statute that is now gone,
right? They have adopted a statute that complies
completely with Melendez-Diaz.
MS. KRUGER: That's true, and I think that
that's because Virginia was unwilling to stake the
validity of however many convictions in the interim
on the outcome of a case. But this --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not criticizing
Virginia; I'm criticizing us for taking the case.
(Laughter.)
MS. KRUGER: I think that this -- this case
presents, I think, an important opportunity for the
Court to provide guidance to States that are currently
grappling with how to respond to the practical
problems that have been presented in the wake of
Melendez-Diaz.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So do we say to them,
contrary to what Melendez-Diaz is, that subpoena
statutes -- when you read the statute, it says the
defendant has to subpoena the witness. On its -- on
the face of this statute, without the Commonwealth
court's gloss on it --
MS. KRUGER: I don't mean to quibble,
Justice Sotomayor, but the statute does not in fact on
its face say the defendant must subpoena. It says the
witness shall be summoned. But I think to the extent
that you had any questions about whether or not the
Commonwealth's interpretation of that language were
correct, the appropriate course would be to remand to
the Virginia Supreme Court to allow them to address
that question of State law in the first instance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That question of prior
State law, right?
MS. KRUGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Friedman, you have 4 minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD D. FRIEDMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. FRIEDMAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
This is not a notice-and-demand statute. It
does not even provide notice to the defendant unless
he asks for it ahead of time. It doesn't give any
deadline as to when he should make a demand or take
any other action. It just says that -- and I invite
the Court's attention to the language of the
statute -- it says that the defendant may cause the
witness to be summoned.
There’s no -- there’s no deadline. It
doesn't put the burden of no-shows on the prosecution.
It's the defendant's witness, and it clearly doesn't
call -- it doesn't provide that the prosecution should
call the -- the witness. Virginia --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the -- just
the first one, the no-notice problem, that's kind of
silly, isn't it? Because if you are being prosecuted
for 50 grams of crack cocaine, you can expect the
government is going to try to prove that.
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's likely, of course.
But the fact is Virginia knows how to write a good
notice-and-demand statute and has done it, and
contrast the -- the new statute, which gives 28 days
notice. It's -- it's very glaring. If Virginia
wanted to write a notice-and-demand statute before, it
could have.
Now, I think I can explain what’s different
about Virginia. And what happened is after the --
after the defendants' -- after the defendants' trials
-- let me say, after the defendants' trials, the --
the prosecution is saying, you could have subpoenaed.
And they said this isn't testimony. Okay? They were
wrong on both of those counts.
After the defendants' trials, in a case
called Brooks, the -- the Virginia Court of Appeals
suggested that the defendant could ask the prosecution
to bring the witness in. Many defendants did that,
including Grant, the defendant on whom -- in the case
on whom the Commonwealth relies so heavily.
The prosecution ignored those requests. It
was still taking the view that this is not -- this is
not testimonial. Up until the moment that this Court
decided Melendez-Diaz, the Commonwealth in Virginia
in -- in Grant said, we don't have to bring the
witness in; the witness -- the defendant should
subpoena the witness if he wants.
No court has ever held -- no court has ever
held in Virginia that the prosecution bears the risk
of -- of no-shows.
Now, the Commonwealth and the United States
suggest: Oh, it's okay to -- to transform the way
trials are conducted by allowing the prosecution to
present affidavits because you can backfill with the
Due Process Clause. I think that goes against
decisions of this Court that say when there’s a
specific right addressed to a particular situation, we
rely on that, not on the Due Process Clause.
JUSTICE ALITO: But I take it your position
is it wouldn't matter. If the -- if Virginia said
that the -- the Commonwealth bears the risk of a
no-show, that wouldn't make any difference?
MR. FRIEDMAN: That would -- that would not
be enough, no. It's enough -- it's enough --
JUSTICE ALITO: So we have to assume that
that's the case.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Well, that's -- that's one
problem. The no-show. But --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, would you like us --
MR. FRIEDMAN: -- but there are two -- they
are both problems.
JUSTICE ALITO: Would you like us to grant,
vacate, and remand in this case and say because it's
unclear who has the risk of a no-show?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, no, no, Your --
JUSTICE ALITO: And then Supreme Court of
Virginia on remand could decide whether in fact the --
the prosecution bore that risk?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, Your Honor, because it's
sufficient that the statute is very clear and the
Commonwealth doesn't deny that it's the defendant's
burden under the statute to call the witness to the
stand. So whatever the no-show issue, however that
might stand under State law, what Melendez-Diaz called
the more fundamental problem, which is that the
statute imposes on the defense the burden of calling a
witness to the stand, is clearly provided for in this
statute. So there's no reason --
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think Melendez-Diaz
addressed the question of the order of proof? Where
did it address that?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I don't think this is a
question of order of proof. This is a question of who
puts the witness on the stand. Melendez addressed
that very explicitly in part III-E and said that an
affidavit doesn't do, that the prosecution has to
present prosecution witnesses.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So is the proper solution
to grant, vacate, and remand in light of
Melendez-Diaz?
MR. FRIEDMAN: May -- may I respond to that?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Thank you.
Your Honor, I think that the -- the proper
response here is the Court has taken the case; there
is enough without any -- resolving any ambiguities of
the Virginia statute to say that the -- this procedure
is unconstitutional, because it imposes -- even
without worrying about the no-show point, it imposes
upon the defendant the burden of putting the witness
on the stand. Given that all these States and the
United States are contesting that this procedure is
acceptable, I think it’s proper for the Court to say
right now that it -- that it is not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:41 p.m., the case in the
