IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ALLISON ENGINE COMPANY,
INC., ET AL.,
Petitioners
v. : No. 07-214
UNITED STATES, EX REL.
ROGER L. SANDERS AND
ROGER L. THACKER. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, February 26, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:06 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Petitioners.
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Respondents.
JAMES B. HELMER, JR., ESQ., Cincinnati, Ohio; on behalf
of the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
Curiae, supporting the Respondents 26
JAMES B. HELMER, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 41
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 55
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:06 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
today in Case 07-214, Allison Engine Company versus
United States ex rel. Sanders and Thacker.
Mr. Olson.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. OLSON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The False Claims Act addresses and redresses
fraud on the government, not on every recipient of
government funds. The liability-imposing provisions of
the False Claims Act refer ten times in a single
sentence to a submission to the government, getting a
claim paid or approved by the government, or defrauding
the government. Liability is to the government and it's
based upon the amount of damages that the government
sustains.
years ago, construing an even broader
statute, this Court unanimously determined that
defrauding the government in any manner for any purpose
does not include defrauding recipients of Federal funds.
That's the Tanner case. The United States made the same
arguments in the Tanner case in 1987 that it's making
today in connection with the False Claims Act, and this
Court unanimously decided that case that defrauding the
government did not include defrauding grantees or
recipients of Federal funds.
There is no evidence in this case that false
or fraudulent claims were submitted to the United
States. Indeed, we don't know from the record what was
submitted to the United States, when it was submitted to
the United States, what it contained.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the
certificates of conformance with specifications of? I
believe they were the Navy's specifications and Allison
submitted to someone those certificates of conformance.
MR. OLSON: The district court very
carefully analyzed that evidence, as well as all the
other evidence in the case, Justice Ginsburg, and found
that an inference could not be drawn with respect to
what had happened or when it happened because there is a
time lag to drawing an inference from certificates of
performance when you don't know when those certificates
were made, when they were submitted to the government,
what they said.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Could the government have
asked -- could the Navy have asked for them?
MR. OLSON: The Navy, you mean in connection
with the litigation or in connection --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No. In connection -- the
Navy -- the engines are being supplied for Navy
destroyers and the Navy obviously has an interest in
making sure that the -- they measure up to the
specifications. So my question is whether in this
procedure for dealing with subcontractors there is any
kind of audit where the Navy can say, we want to see the
certificates of conformance for those engines or other
documents relating to them.
MR. OLSON: The answer to your question as I
understand it, Justice Ginsburg, is yes, the Navy had
the right to test the equipment, look at the -- look at
the specifications, examine the specifications, ask for
corrections if they were unsatisfied, to test the
products. The Navy had the right to do all of those
things.
And one -- fundamental to this case is we
don't know whether they did, whether they were satisfied
with the generators as ultimately delivered to them,
whether there were corrections, if there were
deficiencies or deviations from the specifications when
they were first submitted to the shipyards, whether
those were corrected, whether those deviations were
immaterial. Because --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Did the Navy have the
right to audit the subcontractor's books?
MR. OLSON: It's my understanding -- I'm not
0 percent sure of that, Justice Kennedy, but it's my
understanding that the government did have the right to
follow the process all the way through. There's no
evidence that they did so.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose they audit the
subcontractor's books and they don't discover a fraud
and leave. Would there be liability then under your
view?
MR. OLSON: Well, I think it would depend
upon what was in the books and whether there was --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The books show that X
dollars were spent for certain parts and that was far
too much. That was an inflated figure. It fools the
government. The government then paid the
subcontractor -- pays the contractor; the contractor
pays the subcontractor.
MR. OLSON: It -- that might be,
Justice Kennedy. Regarding the terms of the statute,
whether you might interpret that as providing under
(a)(2), providing a record or document to the government
with the intention that the government pay or approve a
claim, I think you'd have to examine the evidence in
that context.
What we don't have here, we don't know what
was submitted to the government. What the lawyers
representing the claimants in this case -- and this is
from page 5a of the appendix to the cert petition,
footnote 3. We -- this is what the -- when they were
asked about this issue: We haven't shown you the ship
yard's invoices to the United States and we're not going
to show you those. Because they are totally irrelevant
under the False Claims Act.
Now, that could not be more wrong, it seems
to us. You can't determine -- if there's going to be a
fraud, a claim of fraud against the United States, you
have to know what the United States received to see
whether it's fraudulent, to see whether any deviation
from the facts were material, whether the deviation from
the specifications where maybe the product was better,
maybe it deviated in an insubstantial way or an
immaterial way, maybe the government had an opportunity
to fix it.
We don't know whether there was reliance by
the government. We don't know whether there was a loss
by the government. And we don't know, if there was a
loss by the government, the quantification for the loss.
JUSTICE BREYER: I must be just missing
something here. Tell me what I'm missing. What about
the definition of "claim"? It says a claim includes a
request under a contract for money or property, and the
request is made to the contractor if the United States
provides any -- any of the money.
Is there an issue here as to whether some of
the money provided -- are you saying there was no money
provided by the United States or maybe there was no
money provided?
MR. OLSON: No. The way the record -- the
record is a little confusing with respect to that,
Justice Breyer, but I think that one of the witnesses --
I don't know how he knew --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. OLSON: But one of the witnesses said,
yes, the money that we received was money that came from
the United States.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well -- so why doesn't that
end it? Why doesn't -- how do you win, then, given the
language I just read?
MR. OLSON: Well, that's the definition of
the word "claim."
JUSTICE BREYER: "Claim." And there has to
be a claim.
MR. OLSON: There has to be a claim. But
then section -- you're reading subsection (c).
JUSTICE BREYER: That's right, that's right.
MR. OLSON: Subsection (a) provides the
standard for liability. So you can have a claim, but
you're not liable for a false claim unless it's
submitted to the government, unless it's knowingly made
to get a fraudulent claim paid or approved by the
government.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, you say (a), but
we're talking about (a)(2) --
MR. OLSON: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- in connection with (c).
MR. OLSON: Yes. I -- I'm looking at the
statute --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you were quoting from
(a)(1).
MR. OLSON: No, I quoted from both (a)(1)
and (a)(2). (A)(2) --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I know that, but doesn't
(a)(2) stand by itself, especially as -- as (c) is
written, (c) and (2), (c) and (a)(2) make perfect
grammatical sense without any presentation to the
government.
MR. OLSON: Well, it reads out the words "by
the government" from that section, which is what the
statute looked like until it was specifically amended.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, the words "by the
government" are in (a)(2).
MR. OLSON: Pardon me?
JUSTICE STEVENS: The words "by the
government" are in (a)(2).
MR. OLSON: They are in (a)(2), but the way
Justice -- the way Justice Kennedy was reading it, I
respectfully submit, would read out those "by the
government." What (a)(2) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're saying, in addition
to being a claim, that's not enough reliability? It has
to be a claim that's presented to the government?
MR. OLSON: It's presented to the government
and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And all that (c) does is
tell you what a claim is. So that, even if it's not a
claim against the government but just a claim against a
subcontractor, that still can be the basis for liability
so long as it's presented to the government.
MR. OLSON: It's presented to the government
or, under (a)(2), knowingly made to get --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But (a)(2) says it has to
be paid or approved by the government.
MR. OLSON: It has to be made or used to get
a claim paid or approved.  In other words, it has to be
something that's created, then given to the government,
so in order to get a claim paid or approved by the
government. What I am --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you said given to the
government. It's "paid or approved by the government."
MR. OLSON: Well, I think a reasonable
reading of the statute is -- and this is essentially
what this Court unanimously decided 20 years ago in the
Tanner case, that these cases about defrauding the
government must involve something that causes the
government to suffer a loss, some something that impacts
the government. Even -- even the government today is
making the same statement that there has to be a loss.
What I'm saying with -- it's important,
Justice Kennedy, that -- that if you are going to want
to get something paid or approved by the government, you
have to do something that gets it to the government in
some fashion.
And reading (a)(1) and (a)(2) and (a)(3) and
the Tanner decision and the history of this statute from
63 all suggest very strongly, I submit, the plain
language of the statute is that it's -- involves fraud
against the government.
Now, you may submit something to a prime --
you may be a subcontractor that submits something to the
prime contractor, and this very -- this case is a very
good example of it, and this case is very much like the
Tanner case. What did the prime contractor do with it?
If it was false or deficient or out of specifications,
the prime contractor had a right to say: Wait a minute,
tighten those bolts up a little bit more, or we're going
to deduct it, a little price from that, and we're going
to tell the government that there's a deviation from the
specifications.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if it's disguised,
how would the -- how would the prime contractor know?
MR. OLSON: Well, that's just the point,
Justice Ginsburg. We don't no one way or the other
unless the evidence is submitted. We don't know what
the government received, so we don't know whether the
government was deceived. So, if I submit that it might
well be in this case -- we don't know how much time
elapsed between the submission of the invoices or the
other materials from the subcontractor to the prime
contractor. What happened then between then and when
the ships were delivered to the Navy? Lot of things
could have happened. We don't know.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there wasn't any
trial, was there?
MR. OLSON: There was a trial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was?
MR. OLSON: And there was a motion at the
close of the evidence of the plaintiff's case. And at
that -- it's at that point that counsel said: We are
not going to show you the invoices to the United States.
We're not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, how could -- they
would have at a minimum, even if your theory is not
correct -- they would have to prove loss to the
government. Otherwise they would have no claim.
MR. OLSON: That's -- that's correct,
Justice Ginsburg. And that's my point.
If you can't -- if you don't know what went
to the government, you don't know whether a claim or a
document or a statement, to use the words of the
statute, went to the government, you don't know whether
what the government got was false; you don't
know whether they --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does the other side concede
that point, that you have to prove loss to the
government? I don't think they do, do they?
MR. OLSON: I'm not sure. I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think they do.
MR. OLSON: What the statute says --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, the government
certainly has that in its brief.
MR. OLSON: What the statute says is that it
is liability to the government for the damage the
government sustains. Now, it may well be -- there's
penalties even if there isn't damage to the government.
I would concede that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You could say that the
missed funds which are in the hands of subcontract -- of
contractors, harms the government, even though it
doesn't come out of the government's pocket, because
those funds were given for a particular purpose, and if
that purpose is frustrated, the government is harmed.
That would work, without saying that the government has
lost any money.
MR. OLSON: Well, you could say that, but
you don't know whether the government got what it
wanted. You don't know whether the -- if something
deviates from specifications in a contract, it might
deviate on the plus side of something, it might deviate
in an immaterial way.
The contractor, the prime shipyards here,
and the government had the right to correct any
deficiencies.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, suppose the
government gives money for building schools, okay, to a
State and a fraudulent claim is submitted as -- in
connection with the construction of the school.
The government has been cheated in that the
money it gave for a school is not going to the school;
some of it is going into the hands of the fraudulent
contractor.
MR. OLSON: Well, what you've done with your
question, Justice Scalia, is left out the link. What
happened -- what -- the government may have made
-- given money to the schools. Subcontractors might
have submitted something false. The prime contractor
might have discovered it and said: Correct this or --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand that, but
that's a different point.
MR. OLSON: No, it isn't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I am talking now about the
point of whether the government itself has to suffer any
harm other than the fact that the money it gave was not
used for the purpose for which it gave it. That alone,
it seems to me, could be harm.
MR. OLSON: Well, it -- it might under some
circumstances be harm. It might not under other
circumstances be harm. It might be misleading in an
immaterial way. It might -- there might have been no
reliance by the government. There might have -- the
government might have said -- the contract between the
prime contractor and the subcontractor might have
different requirements than what the government wants.
None of those --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Mr. Olson, it seems to me
you're fighting a hypothetical. Let's say they built a
lousy school, sub-spec. The roof is falling in; the
plumbing leaks. It's a fraud, but they've given the
money, the feds have given the money to the States and
the States have let this slip by. Justice Scalia's
point was the Federal Government has been injured.
MR. OLSON: The Federal Government may have
been injured. The question is what does this statute
redress? There are other statutes. There's a major
fraud provision of Title 18 that has major penalties for
fraud by subcontractors against contractors in
connection with public projects just as the one -- like
the ones you're describing.
But if this Court's Tanner decision is
correct -- and it was only 20 years ago; it was
unanimous -- it defined the term "defrauding the
government" and it said "defrauding the government"
means defrauding the government, not filing a false
claim --
JUSTICE BREYER: But that's why the
definition -- it seems to me at the moment -- that's why
I'd like your view -- that the language is perfectly
ambiguous, the language of "knowingly makes a false
statement to get a false claim paid."
Now, the "false claim" is the claim that
they made to the contractor, because that's the
definition. And you are saying: Well, they made this
statement to get a false claim paid by the government.
Now, you could read those words "paid by the government"
to say "and there has to be a causal connection," which
is what you're saying, that you have to make the false
statement, make the claim, and that led the government
to pay.
But you could also say it's paid by the
government when the money to pay it comes out of
government funds, because it was paid by the government
even though the government gave the money to build the
school 100 years ago. But it's there in the bank
account, and then the contractor took the money from the
bank account that the government put in and paid it. In
such a case, linguistically, you can say it's paid by
the government.
MR. OLSON: It has to be a false claim paid
by the government.
JUSTICE BREYER: It was a false claim.
That's there.
MR. OLSON: What -- Justice Breyer, what is
missing from your hypothetical is what went to the
government. Suppose the prime contractor decided that
the paint was off-white instead of white, and that was
satisfactory.
Suppose the subcontractor said to the
government: This is a major project; this is
a billion-dollar project; there are all these little
things that are out of specifications and could be
called false or fraudulent or misleading; we're going to
disclose all of these things to the government. The
government has a complete opportunity to test them, look
at them, and decide whether it's satisfied. Then the
government isn't deceived.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, it doesn't say that.
It says it was a false claim, which it was. It's false,
and it is a claim to the general. And was it paid by
the government? Yes. It was paid by the government,
even though everything you said is true, because the
money to pay it came from government funds. So that's
why I'm having a problem. I can read those words "paid
by the government" either way.
MR. OLSON: Well, I think you are taking the
words and isolating them.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's true.
MR. OLSON: It is knowingly making a false
record or a false statement to get a false claim paid.
If the government didn't pay a false claim, then (a)(2)
doesn't provide for liability.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, that's not strictly
correct. I mean, it "paid or approved."
MR. OLSON: Yes, I should have said --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- which means there is a
third way, and the third way of reading it is if the sub
makes the false statement to the general contractor in
order ultimately to get a false claim, i.e., the
ultimate contractor's claim for conforming work,
approved or this particular claim approved by the
government when the government makes the ultimate
decision to pay the general contractor, that would be
covered by (2).
MR. OLSON: Well, if -- I should have said
the word "approved" because I -- I was shortening it up.
But it does say "paid or approved." But what has to be
done is that the government has to -- what has to be
submitted is something to cause the government to pay or
to approve a false claim to the government.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that can simply be done
by the false claim to the general contractor, who either
accepts it as true or, for that matter, knowingly
understands that it is false, and ultimately submits the
same claim, i.e., as an element of its ultimate bill for
the whole project.
MR. OLSON: Well, what I might say in
addition to what I have said, Justice Souter, is that
there is no stopping point for that theory. The
government says as long as the project involved Federal
money, as long as the project used Federal funds, as
long as the project might endanger the Federal fisc, as
long as the program is financed in part by Federal
money, there would be liability under this statute.
Given the tens of thousands of government
contracts, government funds, government financing of
States, localities, universities, and so forth, there is
no limiting point. And what --
JUSTICE SOUTER: With respect, I think there
is a limiting point. You are certainly right when you
talk about the thousands of contracts that the
government ultimately makes or finances for the benefit
of lower units of government. But it does not follow
from the government's theory that if the United States
makes grants to a sub-unit of government, not for the
purpose of a given contract or a given project, it
simply makes grants, revenue-sharing sorts of things, it
doesn't follow from the government's position that when
one of those sub-units of government then makes a
contract spending part of that money, that it's covered
by this statute.
This statute would cover the myriad of
grants made for particular contracts. It would not
cover every subset of funds in a lower government unit,
some of which had been contributed by the national
government.
MR. OLSON: I don't -- I don't think, with
respect, that that's a fair reading of what the
government said either in the Tanner case, think making
essentially the same arguments which were rejected
unanimously by this Court, or what it says in its brief
to the Court today.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, perhaps we should
ask the government to explain what its position is. But
one of the points that has been raised in opposition to
your argument is that your interpretation would cut out
claims that today are regarded as properly presented
under the False Claims Act.
And the one that was featured was false
claims for Medicare or Medicaid reimbursement, because
those are presented not to the government but to an
intermediary.
MR. OLSON: In -- with respect to that, the
government filed a brief in a case called Atkins versus
McInteer in the Eleventh circuit, and I have the brief
here -- it is not part of the material that is before
you -- in which the government said that even if the
District -- D.C. Circuit decision that's involved in
this case, the Totten case, was correctly decided, those
Medicare-Medicaid cases would be substantially covered
under the statute even under that construction because
the provider's claim is passed on by the insurer to the
Medicare agency or entity.
Now, I don't know, Justice Ginsburg, the
facts of that case or the facts of all of those
circumstances. But the fact is that if you take this
statute as it was enacted in 1863, all of this used to
be a part of one section that talked in the first case,
the first instance, one sentence which discussed in the
first instance a presentation of a claim to the
government and which was the liability to be imposed
upon the claimant.
The second part of the sentence said -- it
was intended to cover the people aiding the fraud, those
people that provided with records or statements in order
to get the payment made.
And then the third provision was the
conspiracy provision.
Those were broken out into the subsections
you see today. In 1982, Congress specifically said: We
are simply codifying the statute; we're not changing the
statute. We are making no substantive changes in the
statute.
If you read that provision in the context of
the Marcus versus Hess case, which was in the early
'40s, in which the government -- in which the Court
specifically said there's liability for an intermediary
causing a -- Federal Government to pay the claim. But
in that case, the invoices were passed on, and the --
and the government entity in that case, the Public Works
Administration, had the opportunity to review and
approve --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So the whole
difference -- the whole difference, then, is if the --
the invoices are passed on, as opposed to the government
having the right, if it so chooses, to inspect the books
and records?
MR. OLSON: I think I may not have heard
your question. In the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The difference is if the
government gets the invoices from the contractor, then
there's a claim under the False Claims Act. But if,
instead, the subcontractor is required to make its books
and records available on request to the government,
that's not enough?
MR. OLSON: Well, I -- I think -- it's
certainly not this case, because the -- although the
government had an opportunity to do these things, we
don't know what happened.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it made -- I thought
you said that it is this case that the government had
the right --
MR. OLSON: If --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- to audit the --
MR. OLSON: The problem is, as this Court
said in the -- unanimously in the Tanner case, given --
forgive me for doing this, but it's important -- given
the immense variety of ways the Federal Government
provides Federal financial assistance, always
accompanied by some restrictions or conditions on its
use, the inability of the substantial supervision
language which the government was advancing then, which
it's sort of advancing now, does not provide any test
for any real guidance or --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the Tanner case didn't
confront the statute which has the definition of claims
that Justice Breyer is putting to you.
MR. OLSON: Yes --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: This statute that we're
looking at, in effect, defines what a fraud against the
government is.
MR. OLSON: Yes, but it -- but when it
was -- when it added that section, it specifically added
in the words "by the government," which those words were
added after the legislative history that both the
Respondents and the government cite. And it did not
change, Justice Kennedy, the definition of "liability."
It simply defined "claim." If the Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Am I correct in this that
without the claim definition, the statute would not
cover a fraudulent submission by the subcontractor to
the contractor which is known to be passed on to the
government ultimately?
MR. OLSON: No, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Without that definition,
the claim would be made against the contractor, not
against the government.
MR. OLSON: I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And, therefore, wouldn't be
a claim.
MR. OLSON: I think under both the -- if the
claim by the subcontractor to the contractor is intended
to be passed on, that the -- that the contractor is an
intermediary, then under Marcus versus Hess, which is
the situation there, there could be liability.
I'd like if I could, Mr. Chief Justice, to
reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Olson.
Mr. Stewart.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MALCOLM L. STEWART,
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE RESPONDENTS
MR. STEWART: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I'd like to begin with the same point that
Mr. Olson began with, namely, does the False Claims
Act -- is the False Claims Act directed solely at
schemes to defraud the government or does it encompass
schemes to defraud people who receive Federal money?
And we're in agreement with Petitioners that the False
Claims Act is directed at schemes to defraud the Federal
Government.
Our theory in this case is not that the
subcontractors are potentially liable because they may
have attempted to defraud the prime contractors. Our
theory is that the subcontractors are potentially liable
because they are alleged to have used false
representations made to the prime contractors but with
the ultimate purpose of defrauding the United States.
And I think if you imagine what would have
happened if the allegations in this case are true and if
the fraudulent scheme had been carried to completion,
it's very clear that the government, rather than the
prime contractors, would have been the injured party.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Stewart, I don't
understand that point. Let's say Allison Engine is
defrauding Bath, but Bath makes ships for a lot of
people, boats, whatever they make. Allison Engine is
defrauding, saying these engines, you know, work this
way and, in fact, they don't.
It doesn't know Bath is going to use some of
them in a government ship as opposed to a private ship.
So you're saying in that context, since there's no
intent to defraud the government, there's no liability?
MR. STEWART: Well, we would say certainly
in the context where Allison knows that the engines are
to be used for private work, that the False Claims
Act would not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It just sells them
engines. It doesn't know what Bath is going to do with
them. They are going to put some in private boats and
some in the government boats.
MR. STEWART: I think you could still have a
FCA claim, if in fact the work was being done for the
government contract. But whatever the correct answer to
that question in the circumstance where the
subcontractor really doesn't know what the ultimate
project is for, that's not the case here. The
subcontractor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I have another question.
Suppose the subcontractor -- the fraud consists of
inflating the hours spent in a cost-plus contract. So
the subcontractor submits and receives payment for
$10,000 more than the subcontractor deserved. All
right?
But that all comes out of the hide of the
contractor. The contractor gets the same amount of
money from the Federal Government and the fraud only
harms the contractor.
MR. STEWART: Our view is that that would
not be covered.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That would not be --
MR. STEWART: That would not be covered. It
would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why?
MR. STEWART: Because the statute -- if you
look at page 2 of the blue brief, that reproduces the
relevant provisions of the statute. And the one that
we're principally -- the two that we're relying on here
are subsection 2, which says: "Knowingly makes, uses or
causes to be made or used a false record or statement to
get a false or fraudulent claim paid or approved by the
government."
And we would say that the reference to false
or fraudulent claim paid or approved by the government
should be taken as limited to a claim that is false as
to the government. That is, it's false in a respect
that the government cares about.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- injured by it because
it, in effect, gets less than it paid for?
MR. STEWART: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If it were a cost-plus
contract, the government would pay an extra 10,000 and
it would lose.
MR. STEWART: That's right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: If they -- if they simply
supplied defective parts, the government would get less
of a machine than it paid for. But in the -- in
Justice Scalia's example, the government ultimately ends
up with exactly what it bargained for, and the person
who's out is the person who paid for too much labor,
which is general -- is that your --
MR. STEWART: That's correct. And in that
circumstance, I think the scheme could fairly be
characterized as one to defraud the prime contractor,
because the prime contractor would bear the loss
associated with the scheme. And we would agree that
that's not covered. Here --
JUSTICE BREYER: What you are saying is
covered, I take it -- and this is -- I want to know how
this has worked out -- what is covered is -- imagine
government grant programs. And suppose there are vast
numbers of grant programs now that go to all kinds of
entities throughout the country, and a large portion of
which are just grants. They're paid and the government
is not going to get a penny back.
Now, there are instances of frauds in such
situations of subs against the person who gets the
grant. And in -- I can't imagine a case -- maybe
imagine, but it would be imaginary -- where the
Government couldn't say: But we got less than the grant
was supposed to pay for.
And you're saying all those are covered. Is
that right?
MR. STEWART: I mean, I think our test would
be, is the effect of the fraud to cause the money
provided by the Federal Government to be diverted to
purposes --
JUSTICE BREYER: To get less than it was
supposed to get.
MR. STEWART: I --
JUSTICE BREYER: And so this is what
surprises me on your side. It's 20 years later. And if
all those things are covered, given the vast extent of
government grant programs in the United States, has your
interpretation worked to bring within this statute, and
lots of qui tam cases against municipal frauds of all
kinds, things that they just never thought of at the
time of the Civil War? Do you see what the question is?
MR. STEWART: I mean, I think -- I think it
has basically worked. I don't think it has worked
perfectly. But I don't think --
JUSTICE BREYER: Have there been a lot of
such cases?
MR. STEWART: I think there are a lot of
cases -- I mean, Medicare and Medicaid fraud is an
example that we would deal with differently textually,
but those are programs in which the Federal Government
provides money. Persons other than Federal officials
decide whether the claims should be paid, but ultimately
there's reimbursement by the Federal Government. Now,
our answer to the question --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Olson said on the
Medicare that the providers, that the intermediary does
present the --
MR. STEWART: And our view is that those
would be covered even if there is a presentment
requirement, because subsection (a)(1) of the statute
refers to a person who knowingly causes a false claim to
be presented to a Federal official.
So because there's the reimbursement
mechanism we think that would be covered. But a big
part of our argument here is that the applicability of
the FCA should not depend on these sorts of quirks of
timing. That is, to take the school hypothetical that
was discussed in the first part of the argument, you
have provision of government money for -- Federal money
for construction of a school, and the contractors who
deal with the State agency defraud the State agency and
they produce a shoddy product.
Now, if the way that the funding program
works is that the State agency pays first and then
presents a claim for reimbursement to the Federal
Government, that would be covered even with the
presentment requirement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, how far down
the line? I mean, let's take that hypothetical. The
government gives money to the State to build a school.
The school has to be painted as part of that, so the
school contractor, the prime contractor, takes some of
the money from the Federal Government and pays the
painter. The painter needs to buy paint. So the
painter takes some of the Federal money and pays the
paint company. The paint company has to get the
chemicals from somebody. So the paint company takes
some of the money and pays the chemical company. And at
that point, the chemical companies fraudulently added,
you know, a dollar on to the cost of the chemicals. So
that dollar goes all the way through. So the Government
ends up paying a dollar more because of the fraud five,
six, seven times down the line.
Can an uninterested person bring a qui tam
action against the chemical manufacturer because of that
fraud?
MR. STEWART: I think our answer would
probably be yes. A court might read a de minimis
limitation into the statute, but part of our point would
be that be that that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A hundred dollars more a
can.
(Laughter.)
MR. STEWART: Well, the answer to that
hypothetical -- and the answer to that hypothetical
really has nothing to do with whether the statute
imposes a presentment requirement, because the
hypothetical --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not a
presentment requirement. That's in (a)(1. It's that
the claim be paid, the fault claim, be paid by the
government. And what you're saying is when the
government pays the State, that pays the school, that
pays the contractor, that pays the paint -- blah, blah,
blah -- that that is payment by the government of a
false claim because the chemical manufacturer six or
seven steps down the line commits fraud.
MR. STEWART: It could be an (a)(2)
question, but my point was that the same type of issue
could arise even with the presentment requirement,
because if the chemical manufacturer presents his own
bill to the paint company, who presents his bill to the
contractor who does the painting work, who presents his
bill, et cetera, et cetera --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He has to know that. He
has to know that his bill is going to be sent up the
line to the government. "Knowingly makes, uses or
causes to be made or used a false record to get a false
or fraudulent --
MR. STEWART: I guess I would say --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And if he knows it, serve
him right. But this other guy thinks he's just honestly
cheating the guy who's buying the chemicals.
(Laughter.)
MR. STEWART: Again, whatever -- whatever
the answer -- the point I was trying to make about the
timing is -- again assume away these issues about how
much might be de minimis. You have substantial fraud by
the contractor directed at the State agency. If the
State -- if the way the funding program works is that
the State agency then presents its own bill to the
Federal Government, we're going to have a good (a)(1)
case regardless of whether presentment is required,
because we're going to say the subcontractor, the person
who did the work, caused the State agency to submit a
false claim to the Federal Government and we can recover
on that theory.
MR. STEWART: But -- but if the government
provides the money up front, gives it to the State
agency and says, use it for the defined purposes, you'll
still have presentment of a claim by the State agency,
--
namely the request for funding, but there will be no way
to say that that difference --
JUSTICE BREYER: The difference is that
government money today is in everything. So if it's in
everything, then everything is going to become subject
to this False Claims Act. And of course I exaggerate by
using the word "everything," but only a little.
(Laughter.)
MR. STEWART: But the point about timing --
but the point about timing is if the State's claim is
submitted to the Federal Government at a time when the
fraud has not yet occurred, the State's claim can't be
denominated false, assuming that the State intends it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't know that that
accords with the definition of "claim" in (c).
MR. STEWART: Well, the definition of
"claim" in (c) says it's a request or a demand --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It says the government
will reimburse.
MR. STEWART: Will reimburse, but it also
says "if the United States Government provides any
portion of the money or property which is requested or
demanded, or if the government will reimburse." And so
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I meant provide. It
has provided it already.
MR. STEWART: That's correct. And my -- my
point is the definition of "claim" indicates that
Congress didn't want liability to turn on this quirk of
timing, whether the fraud occurs before the claim is
submitted to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So in your own school
hypothetical, there's liability.
MR. STEWART: There's liability if the
Federal Government reimburses a claim for expenses that
have already been incurred, but under Petitioner's
theory, if the Federal Government pays the money up
front, the State has submitted a claim but it's not a
false claim. And then if the contractor defrauds the
school -- the State, by producing a shoddy school, the
contractor can't be charged with having caused a false
claim to be submitted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't shock me. I
don't know. It doesn't shock me at all. If indeed the
object of this is to prevent fraud upon the government
and if the government has not been deceived at all, get
yourself a new statute.
MR. STEWART: But our point is that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This statute doesn't have
to cover every ill in the world.
MR. STEWART: That's correct. But fraud --
fraud against the government can occur whether -- the
whole point of the definition of (c) is that fraud
against the government can occur if Federal money is
diverted away from its intended purposes, whether the
deceit is practiced directly upon a Federal official or
a contractor or a grantee.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Before -- before you
finish, the major objection is the one that Justice
Breyer just voiced, that your position is vastly
overbroad and every time there's government money there
will be -- one of these qui tam people can come in.
What are the limiting principles that you say attach to
this statute?
MR. STEWART: There are two principal
limiting principles. The first is that the bill has to
be submitted to the contractor or grantee in his
capacity as such. That is, there has to be a nexus
between the provision of Federal funds and the request
that's made. So if a subcontractor defrauds Boeing on
work that Boeing is doing for a private airline, there's
no FCA violation. Even though Boeing literally is a
government contractor, it's not being defrauded in its
capacity as such.
And the second is that the fraud has to be
of a nature that if successfully carried to completion
could be expected to injure the Federal Government. So
in the hypothetical of the cost-plus contract between
the prime contractor and the sub and the sub presents an
inflated bill, if the loss false on the prime contractor
and is not passed along to the government, the claim
would not lie under the FCA
JUSTICE SCALIA: But if injuring the Federal
Government would -- it would suffice to injure the
Federal Government that the schools are shoddy and the
roofs are leaking? That would be enough?
MR. STEWART: That would be enough.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even though the Federal
Government is not out of pocket any more, but the
program that it -- that it was desirous of encouraging
is simply not as good as it would have been otherwise.
MR. STEWART: That's -- that's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And you would still -- your
theory would still cover the case of the -- of the
agency that gets 10 percent of its budget by -- through
a general grant from the United States, no matter what
it spent its money on, regardless of the fact that the
United States has no connection with particular
contracts. If in fact a fraudulent claim was presented
to that agency, it would fall within the qui tam
statute?
MR. STEWART: We would still be asking was
the -- whether the fraud was of a sort that the Federal
Government cared about. That is, if the Federal
Government made a grant with no strings attached, use it
as you want.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right, no strings attached.
MR. STEWART: Then there would be no FCA
liability.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why wouldn't there be?
MR. STEWART: Because the fraud would not --
in that -- in that hypothetical, you would have
something akin to a fraudulent car repair bill passed
along, given to me. I happen to be a Department of
Justice employee and I might use my Federal salary to
pay the fraudulent claim. But we wouldn't say that's an
FCA violation.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but when your salary is
paid, in effect the government's interest stops when it
pays for your labor. In the -- in the hypothetical in
which the government funds 10 percent of a sub-agency's
operating budget, presumably its intent generalized goes
to everything that agency does.
MR. STEWART: Well, we would still ask
whether the government has -- the Federal Government has
placed meaningful limitations on the way in which the
money may be spent and whether the nature of the fraud
is to prevent those limitations from being honored.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Stewart.
Mr. Helmer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES B. HELMER, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. HELMER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please this Court:
Electricity is the critical component in a
modern warship that allows it to fight, to defend
itself, and to carry out its mission. Because of that,
the Navy imposed rigid requirements on all who work on
its generator sets in manufacturing those generator
sets.
Those rigid requirements were passed down
from the Navy to Bath. Bath was ordered by the Navy to
pass those down in writing to each of its subcontractors
who were going to work on these Gen-Sets, and Bath did
that. Each of the subcontractors in this case knew they
were working on the DDG-51 project, which is the Arleigh
Burke-class destroyers. They knew that military
requirements were called out in their paperwork that had
to be met; and they did not satisfy those military
requirements and yet submitted both claims for payment
and, as Justice Ginsburg has pointed out, certificates
of compliance.
If you look at the Sixth Circuit's joint
appendix at page 620, you're going to see, at paragraph
.1 in the contract between Bath Iron Works and Allison,
the subcontractor, that Allison was required, when it
delivered the Gen-Sets to the shipyard to give a
certificate of conformance that all of these rigid
requirements had been satisfied, and that certificate of
conformance had to be given to the United States Navy.
And third, until that certificate of
conformance was given to the United States Navy, no
money; no money was going to be paid to Allison.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Whose certificate is it?
Is it the contractor's certificate that everything that
the subs have done or the certificate of conformance
that Allison provided, that SOFCO provided?
MR. HELMER: Yes, ma'am. There are two
certificates of conformance, you're absolutely correct.
What I'm speaking of is the certificate of conformance
from the defendant in this case. They have to take and
give that to the shipyard that says: We have met all
the requirements, the Navy requirements; and we have to
give that to the U.S. Navy. The U.S. Navy then takes
that certificate and releases the Gen-Set. It's under
lock and key. It releases the Gen-Set --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought --
MR. HELMER: -- to be installed in the ship.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought it was not
established that anything from this defendant got to the
Navy.
MR. HELMER: You were told that earlier this
morning, Your Honor. I don't believe that's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, where in the record
is there some indication that some -- some paper from --
with a fraudulent representation made it up to the Navy?
MR. HELMER: If you'll look at the joint
appendix, the Sixth Circuit joint appendix, at page 620;
it's clause 6.1 -- talks about the certificates. The
certificates are in the record starting at joint
appendix, Sixth Circuit joint appendix 515 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I know what
certificates are, I mean, you know, their general
content. But was there anything in the record that a
certificate from Allison went to the Navy with Allison's
signature on it?
MR. HELMER: Yes, Your Honor. The contract
with Bath required the Navy to receive that for Allison
to be paid. There was evidence in this case that
Allison was, in fact, paid for delivering these
Gen-Sets. That's circumstantial evidence that they did
submit their certificates of conformance --
JUSTICE ALITO: What about the statement
that Mr. Olson quoted during his argument, when counsel
for plaintiffs said to the jury: You haven't seen
anything that was submitted to the Navy and you're not
going to see anything that was submitted to the Navy?
MR. HELMER: No, Your Honor. That -- I made
that statement, and that was not my statement.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what was your
statement?
MR. HELMER: My statement was: You are not
going to see the invoices from Allison -- the invoices,
not the certificates of conformance, not the invoices
from Bath to the Navy. You're not going to see those.
But the invoices from Allison to Bath were all admitted
into the record in this case. They're all summarized.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then there's less to
this case than we had thought. My goodness, even under
the Petitioner's theory, you win. If indeed a
fraudulent document was given to Bath and Bath passed
that on, I think the Petitioners would have conceded --
MR. HELMER: Your Honor, this case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that there's a cause of
action. What is all this fuss about, then?
MR. HELMER: This case is not a outlier on
the ends of this statute. It is squarely in the middle
of (a)(2).
JUSTICE SCALIA: I wish you had said that in
your brief because we could have saved ourselves a lot
of reading.
(Laughter.)
MR. HELMER: Your Honor, anything that I can
do to help the Court. I apologize if I didn't write the
brief better than I could have.
But I do have another point that I -- that I
would like to make in addition to what's in the record
in this case. If you go back and look at the 1863
version of the False Claims Act, which continues on in
43, the statute talks about in the second clause --
and the second clause is what is now known as (a)(2) --
it talks about a false record or statement being made
for the purpose of obtaining or aiding to obtain
payment. It does not say, and it never said, that there
has to actually be payment, there has to actually be
payment.
Now the statute reads today "to get a false
or fraudulent claim paid or approved by the government."
My point is -- and the Rainwater case, Justice Scalia,
that I think you may have been referring to says that --
the government does not have to have a monetary loss for
there to be a False Claims Act violation. However, for
there to be a violation of (a)(2), the false record or
statement that's presented, the false record or
statement that's made, has to be made with the purpose
of reaching Federal funds. That's what the statute
originally said. That language was taken out in 1982.
We all seem to agree that the '82 recodification did not
change any of the meaning or purpose of the statute --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your argument --
your understanding of the scope of the statute is
exactly the same if the words "by the government" were
replaced by "with Federal funds"? You think those
are -- you think the statute is exactly the same if it
said "with Federal funds" instead of "by the
government"?
MR. HELMER: Yes, Your Honor. I think
that's correct. I think that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So when the
government -- when the phrase "by the government" was
added -- was it in '86?
MR. HELMER: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: There were a lot of
statutes that said "with Federal funds," right?
MR. HELMER: There were.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So why did the
Congress add the phrase "by the government" instead of
"with Federal funds" if it meant the same thing?
MR. HELMER: The legislative history is dark
on that subject. But I have two answers for you,
Mr. Chief Justice. First, if you look at the '82
version of the statute, there were six liability
provisions set out. A seventh was added in '86, (a)(7).
But of the first six that were added in '82, when they
broke this long sentence down into parts, every one of
those provisions except for (a)(2} dealt with either "by
the government" or "defrauding the government." (A)(7)
likewise has such similar language.
My first point to you is that I believe that
when Congress amended this statute in '86 it wanted all
provisions to be consistent with each other in that
sense that we're talking about fraud on the government,
not fraud against private parties, fraud on the
government.
The second response I would make to you,
Mr. Chief Justice, is that we don't read "by the
government" as meaning presented to the government or
even paid by the government. We read "by the
government" as indicating that this is a limitation on
(a)(2), because without that language on (a)(2), if you
read the definition of "claim," then any claim or
private funds could be -- could have been covered by
(a)(2). By adding the words "by the government," the
Congress has limited this to directing to Federal funds.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. So I guess I
get back -- you read "by the government" as if it said
"with Federal funds"?
MR. HELMER: I do, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Suppose -- you just said to
Justice Scalia -- if you have one minute; I rather
missed that -- that your point was if you lose on that
point you just made and it isn't "with Federal funds"
and it is that the government has to pay the claim, you
still win. That was your point to Justice Scalia, I
guess.
MR. HELMER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what was that
argument? Because you said it wasn't in the brief, and
what is it? How do you still win?
MR. HELMER: Well, I believe they -- that
was the first point that I was making to Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. HELMER: And my point there is that
(a)(2) covers making a false record or statement to get
a false claim paid or approved by the government.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. HELMER: In this case, they were
required -- Allison was required by its contract with
Bath and the Navy to submit a certificate of conformance
to Bath and the Navy to release the Gen-Set for
installation into the destroyer. Without that
certificate of conformance -- and we spent 5 weeks in
front of a jury talking about why they were false, why
each of those were false -- without that certificate of
conformance, the Gen-Set could not have been released to
be installed in the ship and Allison could not have been
paid. That's what section 6.1 of the contract provides.
JUSTICE ALITO: The the certificate of
performance made its way to the Navy. That was required
by contract. Why did you not introduce direct evidence
of that in your case?
MR. HELMER: We did put all the certificates
of conformance that were given to Bath in the record of
this case.
And all of those by the terms of Allison's
contract with Bath had to be shown to the U.S. Navy
employee on site at the shipyard. And that contract was
also admitted into evidence.
But we did not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that was only the
contract. You didn't show that in fact that had
happened, that the certificates of conformance actually
were shown to a naval officer?
MR. HELMER: No, ma'am, we did not have a
witness who testified that this certificate was given to
Ensign So-and-So. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And whose -- whose contract
required this? It's a strange provision to be in the
contract between Allison and Bath.
MR. HELMER: It -- you are correct, Your
Honor. It was the contract between Bath and Allison
that I'm speaking about now that flowed -- that also
flowed down the U.S. Navy's requirements that these
Gen-Sets be -- be built rigidly to the specifications
set out by the Navy.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that contract between
Allison and Bath said that this certificate from Allison
had to be presented to the Navy?
MR. HELMER: Yes, Your Honor. It had -- it
had to be shown to the Navy. If you want to get paid,
you have to show it to the Navy, and then the Navy will
release the Gen-Set. See they build these ships around
the Gen-Sets. They are so huge that you don't install
them on a destroyer; you build the destroyer up around
it. So before you can release those to the shipyard for
construction, you had to have the certificates of
conformance.
JUSTICE SOUTER: In the contract between the
Navy and Bath, was there a provision that Allison's
invoices would be shown to the Navy? In other words,
was the parallel provision in the contract with the --
with the general the same as the provision between the
general and the sub?
MR. HELMER: Justice Souter, it was
different. There is a provision I believe
Justice Ginsburg was referring to. You will find it at
page 415 of the Sixth Circuit's joint appendix. That
provision required that when Allison made a certificate
to get paid to the Navy -- I'm sorry, strike that --
when Bath made a certificate to the Navy to get paid, it
had to have available for the U.S. Navy all of the
underlying documentation. All of the bills, the
invoices, and certifications had to be available to show
the Navy.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Available but not
necessarily transmitted.
MR. HELMER: Not necessarily stapled to the
invoice and given to the Navy, but they had to be
available.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the contract between
Bath and Allison says: You give those to us, and we
give them to the Navy. It was specific in saying they
go -- your invoices, your -- your certificates, go to
the Navy?
MR. HELMER: It was specific in saying your
certificate of conformance goes to the Navy.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. HELMER: It did not say in the provision
that I have cited to the Court, your invoice.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I understand that.
MR. HELMER: And that was why I said,
Justice Alito, to the trial court, not to the jury, that
the invoices are irrelevant. And I -- I didn't make
that up. That comes out of the Bornstein opinion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And Bath would have been in
breach of its contract with Allison unless it passed
these things on to the Navy? That's why I say it's a
strange provision to be in the contract between Bath and
Allison.
MR. HELMER: The certificate was required.
Your Honor, yes, that was required. The invoices had to
be available --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Allison could sue Bath for
not passing the certificate on to the Navy?
MR. HELMER: Well, I believe the way it
reads, Allison is supposed to hand the certificate to
the Navy employee at the shipyard.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if in fact, as
you suggest, Allison submitted the certificate to the
Navy person at the shipyard, then the question presented
in this case is not in fact presented here? Because the
question presented assumes that there had not been a
submission to the Federal Government of the false --
false claim.
MR. HELMER: I think that's fair to say,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did you make this point in
response to the petition for cert?
MR. HELMER: We opposed the petition for
cert on other grounds. I did not cite the Court to the
joint appendix, the Sixth Circuit joint appendix at page
0.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you know, usually we
take a case to decide the question presented; and if
this question is really not before us you should have
told us that.
MR. HELMER: Well, my understanding, Justice
Scalia, is under your Rule 26.2 I am permitted to bring
to the Court's attention additional information that was
in the joint appendix below. And that was what I was
attempting to do in response to Justice Ginsburg's
initial question that started the presentation today.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There has been a
statement, in opposition to your position, that the way
you read (a)(2) would render (a)(1) useless, That
everything would fall within (a)(2).
Is there a distinction between what comes
under (a)(1) and (a)(2), in your view?
MR. HELMER: Yes, ma'am. That is pointed
out in the solicitor's brief at pages 18 and 19, the
silver brief, the distinction between (a)(1) and (a)(2).
(A)(1) can be a claim that just says, pay me; there's
nothing false on its face, but it is impliedly false
because it -- it's not entitled to be paid because the
requirements haven't been met.
(A)(2) would require a specific false
statement in that record or statement that's used.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Helmer.
MR. HELMER: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, Mr. Olson, four
minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. OLSON: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Let me address the -- what seems to be a
controversy as to what was submitted to the Navy.
In the first place, the invoices were not
submitted to the Navy. We know that. That's the
provision that I quoted before.
The Plaintiffs in this case did not call a
single Navy witness. They did not call the prime
contractor as a witness. So we don't know what the Navy
received, or what the Navy did not receive.
With respect to the so-called certification,
that is addressed on pages 57a through 59a of the cert
petition appendix. This is a district court decision,
three pages of discussion.
This was an argument that the relators came
up with relatively late when they couldn't explain why
they didn't have the invoices or what actually went to
the Navy, and they argued that Bath submitted a false
implied certification.
Then the district court goes through the
evidence on pages 57a to 59a and concludes at the top of
a there is no evidence of a requiring -- of a
required, continuing certification with respect to
quality, which is the issue tried in this case.
I don't have time to go through all of that
or all of the evidence, but that is backing and filling.
There -- and the question presented is a
correct question presented. As the relators put it to
the -- to the district court, we don't have to do that.
We are not going to show you --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask you this
question: Suppose they had submitted the qualification
certificate, but not a claim? Would they have had a
case, under your view?
MR. OLSON: If it was -- if the
qualification -- if a -- if a --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What I am really asking
is: Do they still need a claim?
MR. OLSON: I -- they -- there has to be --
no. Under (a)(2), Justice Stevens, you could submit a
statement intending to get a false claim approved or
paid by the government.
Now, the government can't approve anything
if it's not actually submitted to it, or not intended to
be submitted to it. That's in the same section of -- of
the statute.
Let me -- let me turn to the -- this is a
penal statute. There is a punitive statute, as you
pointed out, in the Vermont versus Stevens case.
There is no meaningful limitation on what
the government and the Respondents want in this case.
The government has now come up with this limitation:
Well, it must be really a government project.
Well, that isn't in the statute. That's
basically the same thing you unanimously rejected in the
Tanner case.
The government said in its brief if the
government is the ultimate source of the funds. That
goes back to the example that the Chief Justice was
making. There might be 15 different layers, the way
this government works. Money is fungible. It's
impossible to trace.
This statute is intended to address claims
made, or statements made in connection with claims made,
to -- to commit to defraud the government, and defraud
the government irrespective of the definition of
"claim," which could have been put in section (a), but
was not put in section (a), the liability section.
The Congress knows how to put those words in
statutes. They were in the major fraud statute, the --
the case that this Court distinguished in Dixon, in --
in Tanner. The Dixon case was money given -- paid to or
on behalf of the government. There is language like
that throughout the congressional statutes.
We don't know in this case whether the
government was defrauded, or was intended to be
defrauded, because there is this big space between what
went on between the subcontractors and the shipbuilders
and what went on between the shipbuilders and the
government.
There could have been all kinds of dialogue.
There could have been disclosures. There might be
deviations from the specifications in any kind of
government contract. But this statute has to have a
limitation point.
And if you look at it from 1863 up to the
present, it is intended just as the Tanner case said.
And in Marcus versus Hess you said that the criminal
false claim statutes have to be construed identically
with the civil false claims provisions if they contain
identical language. 371 has the same language as the
False Claims Act's, and the Tanner case is dispositive.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Olson.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:09 a.m., the case in the
