IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
BRENT TAYLOR, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-371
ROBERT A. STURGELL, ACTING :
ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL :
AVIATION ADMINISTATION, :
ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, April 16, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:26 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ADINA H. ROSENBAUM, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ., Assistant to the
Solicitor General, Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; on behalf of the Respondent.
CATHERINE E. STETSON, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Respondent, The Fairchild Corporation.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ADINA H. ROSENBAUM, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 27
CATHERINE E. STETSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 45
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ADINA H. ROSENBAUM, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:26 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 07-371, Taylor versus Sturgell.
Ms. Rosenbaum.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ADINA ROSENBAUM
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. ROSENBAUM: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
It is the basic principle of American law
that a lawsuit does not decide the rights of
non-parties. That basic principle has a few narrow
exceptions, none of which applies here.
Taylor had no involvement in the prior case.
He had no legal relationship with any parties to that
case. And no party to that case had the legal authority
to represent him.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When you have a
situation where it is an associational standing case,
and an individual is the one that's relied upon give the
association standing, in that case is the individual,
even though he's not bringing the suit, is he barred by
the association's case?
MS. ROSENBAUM: I think that would depend on
whether the association in that case had the authority
to bring that case on behalf of that individual.
In order for a person to be bound on the
basis of representation in the prior case, the party to
the prior case had to have the authority to bring the
case on behalf of that other person. It had to be a
representational relationship where the party for the
first case is exercising the authority to represent the
later case. And there has to be a relationship that
exists at the time of the first litigation.
Someone can't retroactively be represented
during the first litigation.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What if you had a case and
there's a suspicion of something like that that's here,
although the courts below did not so find? What if you
had a case in -- like this in which the first litigant
said to the second, I brought my case and I lost. I
want you to try again for me? And if you do and you
win, I will give you a job making use of the fruits of
the litigation?
Would there be an estoppel in that case?
MS. ROSENBAUM: No, not just on those facts.
And I do want to emphasize --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why.
MS. ROSENBAUM: -- first that is a big shift
from what was decided blow. What the court held below
was that Herrick represented Taylor in the previous
case. It did not hold that Taylor was somehow
representing Herrick in this case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: It held, as I recall,
specifically, I think, that there was no collusion
found. And the suggestion was that if collusion had
been found -- and I was giving you an example of
something that I would call collusion at least -- that
the result might have been different.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Collusion is sort of a
pejorative way of saying an agreement. An agreement can
be -- can lead to preclusion under a certain
circumstances instances, but for --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why wouldn't my example
have done so? In my example the agreement was I lost;
please try again for me. And if you win, I'm going to
give you a job making use of the fruits of the lawsuit.
Would that agreement not have been enough
to -- to sustain a collusion here?
MS. ROSENBAUM: No, not without the party to
the first case controlling the second case. But this
Court does not --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why should that -- why
should that matter?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Because what's being
protected here is the person's right to the opportunity
to be heard on their claim. And in that case --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But --
MS. ROSENBAUM: -- second claim.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The claim that
Justice Souter has posited is not one that the second
person would have been -- he was soliciting. He was
solicited to be a plaintiff in that second case. That
is not the case that is involved here. As far as we
know --
MS. ROSENBAUM: Exactly.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: As far as we know, Taylor
didn't even know about the first case. He brings the
second case. There is no indication that it was
solicited by Herrick. So I don't know why you're even
reaching the case where someone -- someone is -- you say
has to be controlled, but why are we getting into the
details of such a situation when we have no
solicitation?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Exactly. This Court does
not need to decide what sort of solicitation or
recruitment or agreement would reasonably --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right. But if we adopted
-- as I understand it, if we adopted your theory across
the board, it would preclude -- it would preclude a
preclusion in the case of my hypothetical, and that's
what I want to get at.
Should we, by adopting your theory,
eliminate the possibility of preclusion in the case that
I put to you?
And you're saying, I guess: Well, if --
even there, there should be no preclusion unless the
first party controlled the case in the -- controlled the
second case.
And my question is: Why?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, again, that's a
question of whether that second party is acting as an
agent for the first party and really just trying to
relitigate that first party's opportunity to be heard.
And if the second party is an agent, then the second
party can be precluded.
But, again, exactly what would constitute
that agency is not something that this Court needs to
decide, because the facts here do not demonstrate that
Taylor was representing Herrick in this case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, do you think that the
collusion point was perhaps just ill-phrased here?
There was no collusion, certainly, in the sense that
there was any kind of secret dealing going on.
The second lawsuit, the people involved in
it, couldn't Taylor -- couldn't have been more candid, I
guess, about what was going on. And so there was no
collusion in the sense of concealment or
underhandedness.
Do you think that is perhaps the reason that
the court of appeals found that there was no collusion;
and that, therefore, we ought to discount that finding?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, I think the court of
appeals found that there was no collusion because the
facts that are in the record about the relationship
between Taylor and Herrick do not demonstrate that there
was any collusion.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, didn't the court of
appeals actually say there was no collusion, or did it
say, we don't need to reach that question?
MS. ROSENBAUM: It said that the facts were
ambiguous, and it did not need to decide it. But it
also specifically said that on the facts before it, that
Taylor could have brought an entirely separate,
independent case, separate from Herrick. So --
JUSTICE ALITO: So these facts do not
necessarily show collusion to avoid the preclusive
effects of Herrick?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: We do not need to determine
whether they count as tactical maneuvering. They did
find -- they did say there was a close working
relationship relative to the successive cases. Didn't
they say that?
MS. ROSENBAUM: They did say that. But,
again, that just brings up the question of what sort of
relationship is necessary for the -- there to be
preclusion.
And many people have close relationships but
that does not necessarily mean that those people are
bound, or expect to be bound, by decisions in each
others' cases, particularly --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But here the close
relationship seems to boil down to this, and you correct
me if I'm wrong here because I may be missing some fact.
But it is inconceivable to me that any
reason for Taylor's participation or Taylor's bringing
this lawsuit could be found except the reason of trying
to relitigate Herrick's lawsuit so that Taylor would
then either get the job or have an easier time
fulfilling the job of fixing up the airplane.
I can't think of any other reason on the
facts as I understand them from the briefs.
Is there a -- on the facts of case, any
other possible reason?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes. First, I just want to
point out that there was no agreement, or the record
does not show and there was no agreement between them to
actually work on the plane.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. But why else would
he be doing -- why else would he have been doing this?
What does the record show as another possible
explanation?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Taylor is the executive
director of the Antique Aircraft Association, and he is
someone who is interested in antique aircraft and in
aviation generally. And after reading Herrick's
decision -- his explanation in the motion for discovery
for filing his FOIA request is that he read the decision
in Herrick, and that he understood it to mean that he
was legally entitled to the records. And so --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't need a reason to
file a FOIA request anyway, right? Just the naked
curiosity justifies your obtaining the documents, right?
I mean this is a lawsuit that does not require a reason
except I want the documents. You've got them. I'm
entitled to them.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes. It requires the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean somebody could have
walked in off the street and filed this same lawsuit,
right?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Anyone who was interested in
the record could file a FOIA request for them.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if somebody walked in
off the street and began this lawsuit and had absolutely
no connection with Herrick, and so on, the issue of
preclusion wouldn't come up, or at least it wouldn't
come up in the context that it comes up here.
But this isn't somebody who walked in off
the street, and the claim is there is a preclusion
doctrine because of the relationship between party one
and party two. And the fact that anybody who comes in
off the street could have asked -- could have made the
same request, in effect, is not an answer to the
collusion claim; is it?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, it shows that the
problem, if it exists, of there being repeated
litigation over the same records is not one that would
be solved through preclusion. And Respondents have not
shown there actually is a problem with repeated
litigation over the same records. And the Department of
Justice represents the defendants in all FOIA cases, so
they would be able to know if that was a problem that
came up again and again.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about if it is
the executive director of the association, and the suit
is brought in the name the association, and they lose.
Can he bring suit as, you know, I'm just Joe Blow, but I
happen to be the executive director, but I'm bringing
this in my own name?
MS. ROSENBAUM: The question -- that would
then come down to whether or not he controlled the first
case, because one of the categories in which people are
bound by prior litigation in which they were not
themselves parties, is if they had control over the
first case and had the full and fair opportunity to
litigate in that case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, let's say that
it is somebody above him, you know, the president of the
association, who decides what lawsuits are brought, and
he's just the executive director?
MS. ROSENBAUM: But he was not in control of
the first case and did not get his opportunity to be
heard in that case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But he recommended
to the president, said we ought to file this lawsuit.
The president said okay, and they did, and then they
lost. Can he go ahead as an individual?
MS. ROSENBAUM: If he was not in control of
that first case, yes, he could go ahead as an individual
if he was not -- if he is not representing the
association in the second case, but is, instead,
representing himself.
JUSTICE ALITO: And could he continue to
solicit other members of the association to file FOIA
suits all over the country until they finally got a
favorable decision?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, that would come down
to what the definition of "solicit" was and whether
those people were acting as agents of that person who is
doing the soliciting.
But, again, this Court does not need to
decide exactly what sort of solicitation would create
that agency relationship, because the facts in the
record here do not show that that is what happened here.
And also FOIA is set up to allow there to be
repeated litigation over the same records. Under FOIA,
every requester has -- every person has the right to
request records. And once they have requested those
records and been denied them, they have suffered a
concrete and particular injury; and they have the right
to seek judicial review of that injury.
So that makes this case different from the
taxpayer standing in -- cases cited --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that means
your statement implicates very serious questions of
standing under Article III, whether Congress can say
create the injury by saying you've been denied records
and, therefore, you have standing. I think that's -- I
wouldn't go ahead assuming that that was correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Although it is not really
just your argument; it is also FOIA; isn't it?
MS. ROSENBAUM: That is the way Congress set
up FOIA is to -- to give people that statutory
entitlement to the records.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And it does cover idle
curiosity. I mean, I suppose if anyone in the courtroom
were to file a request for the same information, there
could be no argument that there would be any kind of
preclusion just because it's been heard before.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Exactly. And if there were
some problem with people -- with there being multiple
requests for the same records, that would be a problem
for Congress to solve. And Congress has all sorts of
creative ways of solving problems when it thinks that
they are, in fact, problems.
It can channel all litigation into one court
or into one court of appeals like it does for patent
cases to more easily create precedent, or it didn't have
to create FOIA to create this statutory, individual
entitlement to begin with.
It could have sent up FOIA more like a qui
tam case in which one person did represent the whole
public or the government in requesting records.
But that's not what Congress did. Congress
did give every person the right to records and the right
to seek judicial review when they were denied records.
And we can disagree about whether that was something
Congress should have done, but that is what Congress did
and Congress's chosen scheme should not be altered
through the back door of preclusion doctrine.
The amorphous factors used by the lower courts to hold
Taylor bound also have their problems in terms of
judicial efficiency and people coming into court. Those
factors do not give guidance either to lower courts or
to litigants themselves about who can be bound.
I mean, a -- in a threshold area like res
judicata, it is particularly important to have clear
rules about who can be bound, to move on quickly to the
merits of the case, without having to go through a lot
of collateral litigation; but the factors used by the
court of appeals do not provide those clear rules. And
they also don't provide clear rules to litigants about
when they will, in fact, be bound by -- when, in fact,
they will be bound by a case.
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: What are your clear rules?
Give me -- set it forth clearly, what you think it
takes. Number one, do -- do you have to know you're
going to be bound at the time the first suit is brought?
That isn't the requirement, is it?
MS. ROSENBAUM: No. There are certain legal
relationships that would not require someone to be -- to
know even of the case at the first suit. For example, a
successor in interest to property can buy the property
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. ROSENBAUM: -- after the first suit, yet
is nonetheless bound by the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So what are your tests?
How many? Five? Four? It is not a totality of the
circumstances, test though, right?
MS. ROSENBAUM: No, it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have some criteria.
What are they?
MS. ROSENBAUM: There are an --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Agency?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, agency would fall into
a larger category of, that there are certain Legal
relationships that treat people as the same person for
res judicata purposes and often for other purposes; and
those are substantive relationships created by
underlying substantive law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MS. ROSENBAUM: People can also be bound
when they have -- have had their full and fair
opportunity to litigate in the prior case, through some
involvement in that case. So for example, in Montana
versus United States this Court held that the government
was bound because it had controlled the contractor who
brought the prior case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MS. ROSENBAUM: And then people can be bound
when they were represented in the prior case. And in
that case, they did have their opportunity to be heard
in the prior case just through a representative.
JUSTICE SCALIA: A representative that they
agreed to?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Exactly. Someone who had
the authority --
JUSTICE SCALIA: As in a class action, where
they have the -- the ability to bow out if they want,
right?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, a class action is a
very good example of that representational relationship,
and the court of appeals in this case used language that
is very similar to the rationales used for class
actions, talking about identity of interests and
adequacy of representation, but it did not include any
of the protections that are inherent in class actions:
the factors that need to be looked at to make sure that
class treatment is appropriate. The specification of
who is and is not in the class.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. I mean, and the
individual's ability to withdraw from the class, if he
doesn't want to be bound by this suit, right?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That is crucial.
MS. ROSENBAUM: That is crucial in class
actions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the judge's
obligation to look out for the trial to see, for
example, any settlement has to be approved by the judge
to make sure it is fair to the absent class members.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes. That was absent here
also. In this situation, no one understood that first
case to be litigating the rights of anyone but
Mr. Herrick. Mr. Herrick did not understand that that's
what was happening. The Tenth Circuit did not
understand that was what was happening, and Taylor did
not understand what was happening.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If this case had been one
in which were notice, before the suit was filed -- or at
the outset of the suit, and some encouragement to go
ahead with the suit, would that have fit your, I guess,
second category of adequate representation, adequate
opportunity to have your -- a case heard?
MS. ROSENBAUM: The category of having the
full and fair opportunity --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
MS. ROSENBAUM: To litigate to the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: From a fair --
MS. ROSENBAUM: Case -- no. And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that is because?
MS. ROSENBAUM: That is because that would
basically be setting up a system of mandatory voluntary
intervention.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But why doesn't that fit
at least the semantic version of the category you gave
us?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Because that person still is
not receiving -- is not fully and fairly litigating that
case. They are not involved in that case, under that
hypothetical. And they're not in control of that case.
Merely knowing about a case, knowing that
one could voluntarily intervene is not enough.
And this Court has stated --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Your list of factors is
cumulative? They are not independent categories? Your
category number 2 then is not a stand-alone category for
barring -- for barring the second plaintiff?
MS. ROSENBAUM: It can be in certain
circumstances. Just because a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The word that we use is
privity. If you are in privity with somebody else, you
can -- that's a pre-existing legal relationship.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: As the beneficiary and
the trustee.
MS. ROSENBAUM: But --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but that's not
what -- that's not what your second category was. I
understand privity, but you didn't -- you weren't just
trying to restate the concept of privity in your second
category, were you?
MS. ROSENBAUM: The category talking
about --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Full and fair litigation?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Right. Otherwise you
would have just said privity.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, the problem with the
term "privity" is that privity is often used as somewhat
at the conclusion --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Right.
MS. ROSENBAUM: -- to mean that someone is
bound by the prior case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Right.
MS. ROSENBAUM: What is generally meant by
the privity, or often -- the way the word is often used
to mean that a substantive legal relationship, but lower
courts have sometimes put the control cases in the
category of privity. They have sometimes put the
adequate representation cases in the category of
privity. So just talking about privity, it -- doesn't
really give the bounds of who would be bound by --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We can use it accurately,
bring it back to what it really means --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can we?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if you have a
situation where a client has retained a law firm to do
something and the law firm as part of its normal
activity files a FOIA request? They think something
useful is going to come up there, and it's denied, and
the law firm on its own, and not as the -- not as
retained by the company files a FOIA suit?
In that case, is the company bound by the
determination in the case? Or can they then file
another action?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Who would -- if the company
filed its own FOIA case, we request on behalf --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, the law firm --
the law firm files its own FOIA request, and it is
denied, and they litigate that, and then they lose, and
the company brings a FOIA action.
MS. ROSENBAUM: And the law firm brought it
on behalf of the law firm --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MS. ROSENBAUM: But the company is bringing
it on behalf of the company?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Then they are separate
requestors who each have -- who have their own
opportunity to be heard on their own FOIA claim.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even if company is
represented by the same law firm?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes. Even if they're
represented by the same law firm.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Which is the case here.
It is the statement lawyer that's involved?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes. But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But in the case of the
Chief's hypothetical, of course, it would never come up,
if the client sends another lawyer to bring this. But
there's no automatic preclusion in that relationship as
there is in the traditional relationship.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, people are not
generally precluded because of their lawyers' actions in
prior cases. And this Court --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But -- I guess to be
fair to my hypothetical, it was the company that was
paying for what the law firm was doing. It just wasn't
the -- the filing of the suit. The law firm went off on
it own. Maybe it does it all the time when they have a
case, they think this might be helpful and they are
filing a FOIA request.
MS. ROSENBAUM: The question there would
come down to whether the company was representing the --
whether the law firm in that instance was representing
the company with the authority to be representing the
company. In that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is it purely a
formal inquiry? In other words, let's say the company
is paying the law firm to represent, but the law firm
just filed in its own name? Does that make a
difference?
MS. ROSENBAUM: I think it would go to the
underlying agreement between the law firm and the
company and whether the company had somehow given the
law firm authority to be filing this FOIA request and
then filing the lawsuit.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why isn't that not like
Montana, where the government was not a party to the
case but it was in control of what the contractor was
doing?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Right. Again, if the
company was in control, and I think there would have to
be that sort of agreement that it was represented --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you'd also say that
if the company paid for the suit. The company just --
"I don't want to be in control of it. I don't want you
to sue in my name, but I think this is a good thing for
you to do, so I'll pay for it."
MS. ROSENBAUM: I think that could be an
indicator that the company was -- that the law firm was
representing the company.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. No. The company says,
"absolutely I do not want you to represent me." That is
in -- in a letter. Okay?
So it's clear that the law firm is not
representing the company, but the company thinks that
it's a good idea to have this lawsuit and yeah, I'll
bankroll it.
MS. ROSENBAUM: If the law firm does not
have the authority to represent the company, then it's
hard to see how the company could be bound by a
decision --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You don't think that
somebody who finances -- who solicits a litigation,
recruits someone to bring the case, pays for it, and
then says, "I recruited a very good law firm, so I can
stay out of it. I'm not going to try to -- I don't know
anything about the law, I'm not going to try to manage
this case." But someone who recruits the firm and pays
for it wouldn't be bound.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you've got to give
that one away.
(Laughter.)
MS. ROSENBAUM: I think that that's a harder
instance. And that really goes back to why it means
to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it's a company
--
MS. ROSENBAUM: -- control a case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Let's say some
group, say, Public Citizen Litigation Group sends a
fundraising thing around saying we think all our members
ought to contribute to a special fund so that we can
bring a lawsuit under FOIA. Are all of those individual
contributors then bound by the result?
MS. ROSENBAUM: No.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it make as
difference if it's one company as opposed to 40 donors?
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, again it comes back to
whether those people have given the person bringing the
case the authority to represent them in that lawsuit.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then in the
previous hypothetical there was no authority to
represent. They just said, "I think this is a good
idea, here's the money. Here."
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes, and I still think in
that situation there also would not be preclusion.
But the questions of when someone controls a
prior case are very different from what happened here
where there was no notice of that prior litigation, but
--
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, controls. So
there are three companies, and they each have -- you
know, they can vote. They each have 33-percent control.
Are they each bound, or because they didn't control it
none of them are bound?
MS. ROSENBAUM: If they had not given the
law firm the authority to represent them in that
particular case, then they are not bound.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they said,
yes, you can represent us, and we're three different
companies, and, you know, it's a majority vote as to
what you can do.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Well, then that is sort of
standard representation by a law firm of a company, and
those people would be legally represented in that
lawsuit, have had their day in court and would be bound
by that decision.
Unless there are further questions, I would
like to reserve the rest of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
Mr. Hallward-Driemeier.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Although the precise formulation adopted by
the court of appeals may be somewhat novel, its holding
of a finding of privity here is consistent with
well-established principles of res judicata. Where
multiple persons engage in coordinated successive
litigation to vindicate a joint interest with respect to
which a judgment in favor of any of them will benefit
all, then a judgment in the first litigation in which
that interest is adequately represented finds the others
as well.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would you explain to me
how that could possibly work?
I can understand that you're making an
argument that the second case, there was a recruitment,
there was collusion or whatever. But for all we know
from this record, how could Taylor possibly be bound
when Herrick's suit is over? Because as far as we know,
Taylor never heard of that first case. How can somebody
be bound by a litigation in which they had no notice, no
opportunity to be heard?
So if we freeze the situation at the of case
one, how could Taylor possibly be bound?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, I think it's
important to start by recognizing that even Petitioner
acknowledges that there can be circumstances in which
Taylor would be bound, even though at the time, at the
end of Herrick's litigation, he had no notice, he had
not participated. And that is, on their view and ours
as well, that if Herrick had thereafter created an
agency relationship with Taylor, and Taylor then as
agent went and brought the second FOIA suit --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because he's asking for
Herrick who is bound by the first case.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: That's right.
And -- but all of that can exist or be created after the
first litigation is over. And so the absence of notice
in the first case --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because what you're
saying is the person who is really in the second case is
the same person who was in the first case, and Taylor is
simply acting as an agent to give Herrick another
chance?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: That's -- that's
right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we're talking about
binding Taylor.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well -- but Taylor
in the second suit that he brings as agent to advance
the interests of Herrick would be bound. Taylor would
be barred. His suit would be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was no finding of
that. There was no finding here of agency relationship.
There was no finding of collusion. That would be a
different case.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, I don't --
the court certainly did not find that there was no
collusion. I agree that the court didn't reach --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No. It said it wasn't
reaching that question.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: It didn't reach the
question of what they called "tactical maneuvering."
I think that there is a -- a strong argument
could be made that Taylor was Herrick's agent; but I
don't think that it's critical to find that he was his
agent in the very technical sense of the Restatement of
Agency.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If he -- if he was his
agent -- and this goes to Justice Ginsburg's line of
inquiry -- suppose in the second case Herrick tells him
I want you to bring a suit on my behalf. He says fine,
I'll do that. He brings that suit. And then Taylor
says, you know, I also want to bring a suit on my own.
And he brings another suit, not as agent for Herrick.
I suppose he could do that, couldn't he?
The first would be thrown out because it's Herrick's
second suit. But the -- Taylor's own suit would remain
Taylor's own suit, wouldn't it?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: No. No, Taylor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So long as there's no more
collusion or anything else, he's --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: If Taylor brought
the second suit in his own name and it was found to be
barred by res judicata, a third suit in Taylor's own
name would likewise be barred.
And there's a case that I think illustrates
this point perhaps better than any of those we cited on
our brief, unfortunately. But I think it's helpful --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I hope so.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: -- because --
(Laughter.)
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, Your Honor, I
think that it proves the point that has been the sort of
underlying concern of many of the questions: What
happens when you're just shy of a true agency
relationship?
And the case is United States versus Des
Moines Valley Railroad. It's an Eighth Circuit case, 84
F.40 from 1897. But importantly, this Court quoted it
at length in the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific
Railroad versus Schendel case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did you make your
friend on the other side aware that you'd be --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Yes. Yes, I did,
Your Honor.
The Schendel case is 270 U.S. 611. And they
discuss Des Moines Valley at page 619.
And what had happened in Des Moines Valley
was that the United States had granted some land to the
State of Iowa, which in turn passed to the railroad,
which in turn sold to one claimant. There was another
person who claimed directly from the United States as a
homesteader. There had been litigation between the
person claiming via the railroad and the homesteader as
to who had title to the land. And the judgment in State
court was adverse to the homesteader.
And what happened later, about 10 years
later, was that the United States brought suit to have
declared invalid the title of the person claiming via
the railroad. And the district court actually initially
questioned whether the United States had standing to
bring the case at all. They viewed it as Fairchild's
case. That was the homeowner -- the homesteader, a
little coincidence with this case, which also has a
Fairchild.
But the court of appeals specifically said
it wasn't deciding whether the United States had
standing to bring the case in its own name -- the case
was litigated by the United States attorney -- they
looked to the purpose that the United States sought to
vindicate. They said that the United States does not
seek to obtain title to this property for itself again.
They are, in a sense, lending their name to allow
Fairchild a second bite at the apple.
Now, there was no control that Fairchild had
over the United States. Fairchild didn't direct the
United States attorney who was representing the United
States. But the United States had taken up the interest
of Fairchild, taking advantage of the fact that it had
standing to sue itself --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a -- it's a standard
privity case. It is privity in reverse. I suppose a
subsequent owner of real estate is in privity with, and
therefore, bound by a judgment concerning the real
estate rendered against the prior owner.
But it's probably also true that when
there's a suit by a later owner, the prior owner cannot
then bring in court a claim based upon the same -- the
same matters that the subsequent owner relied on.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's up privity instead of
down privity. Wouldn't that --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: I think what Your
Honor is reacting to is the reality of the situation
seems to be that there's a sufficient relationship
between these two that they ought to be barred. But
there is no section of the Restatement (Second) that
specifically governs this case. And Petitioner's view,
which is that somehow the Restatement (Second) has
become codification of res judicata law would not permit
it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There is in the -- in the
Restatement of Judgment, as far as I know, all of the
examples involve a representational relationship that
existed at the time of the first litigation. There's
nothing in the Restatement that suggests that preclusion
would be proper here.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, Your Honor, I
agree that the Restatement (Second) does not, for
example, state the law which we all know and which
Petitioner concedes is the case, and that is that the
agent who brings the second lawsuit is bound, even if
the agency relationship arose --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but here --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: -- after the first
relation was concluded.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you agree with me
about the facts that we're dealing with here? As far as
the first case is concerned, no evidence that Taylor
even knew that Herrick was -- Herrick was bringing that
suit?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: What the evidence
shows is that Herrick made Taylor aware of the -- of the
outcome of the litigation, but we don't have --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But -- and while the
litigation is ongoing, Taylor doesn't know about it,
right?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: There's no evidence
of that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Okay. And is there any
evidence that Herrick asked Taylor to file a FOIA
request --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- after Herrick lost his
case?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The evidence is
that Herrick asked Taylor to help him fix the plane, the
plane and its restoration being the object of Herrick's
own FOIA case. Taylor, in order to get those documents,
which were essential --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that wasn't my
question.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: -- to the
restoration of the plane --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: My question,
Mr. Hallward-Driemeier, is: Did Herrick ask Taylor to
file that FOIA suit? And I think your answer is no.
There's no evidence of that.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: There is no
evidence that Herrick asked Taylor specifically to file
the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there any evidence
that Herrick financed the litigation?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: The -- there is no
specific evidence of that. The counsel on the other
side --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there any evidence
that Herrick called any of the shots in that litigation?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, counsel on
the other side filed an affidavit that said -- it was
very carefully crafted, I think -- that there was no
attorney-client relationship with Herrick with respect
to this --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In any case, the decision
that we're reviewing didn't find any of those things.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: No, that's right.
What the court of appeals relied on was the fact that
Taylor had made Herrick's interest his own and brought
the suit in order to vindicate the exact same interests
that Herrick, himself, had already litigated and lost.
And that was to get the documents to restore Herrick's
plane.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if another member of
the club, let's say another member of the aviation
association who's interested in antique planes, just
files a FOIA request, would that person be precluded who
is -- who knows that Herrick brought a suit and lost?
He's just a member of the club. He doesn't want to help
Herrick restore the plane.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: No, that person is
not barred. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if he's the
individual that brought the case with club standing,
associational standing?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: I think in -- Your
Honor's first question to opposing counsel was such
that, yes, I think that if that was the individual whose
interest was relied upon to give an association
standing, that it would bind the individual whose name
and interest was relied on. And this is in some ways
the reverse situation where --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But my question was just
a member of the association, whether --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: No, the court of
appeals was clear that just a common membership in an
association or just a common interest would not be
enough. They -- they distinguished the situation of a
common interest in a -- in the same objective --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But why does there have
to be any interest? Going back to a question I think
Justice Scalia asked, we're dealing with a most unusual
statute. You don't have to have any reason for a FOIA
request.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: That -- that's
true. We think that that, in fact, makes FOIA even more
susceptible to this kind of vexatious litigation that
Petitioner seems to think is entirely permissible. And
the courts have held that the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask a general
question here. Why isn't the defense of stare decisis
adequate to take care of all your problems?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, because FOIA
allows --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Repeated requests --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: -- a number of
defendants --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- but if they're all the
same, wouldn't they say, well, that's the same case we
had last week?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, FOIA allows
the case to be brought in a number of different venues.
It can be brought in the venue of the -- where the
requestor lives, where the documents are located, or in
the District of Columbia.
JUSTICE STEVENS: All right.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: And so a person
such as Herrick could ask for assistance on his project,
the project of rebuilding the plane, of people scattered
throughout the country.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Correct, and he's the one
who raised the suit.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: And they could
maintain it throughout the country.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But did any -- defeat the
suit by claiming there was preclusion because of a suit
in another jurisdiction, rather than stare decisis?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, Your Honor,
the fact is that in FOIA, especially an exemption 4
case, there are special burdens on the government. The
government has the burden of proving that the exemption
is warranted. So the plaintiff can just sort of lob
anything in there. The government -- there is the
burden of persuading the court in each case that the
exemption is warranted.
Fairchild, a private party that wants to
protect its own property interests in the trade secret,
is forced to go around the country litigating this over
and over and over again as well. And the courts that
have considered the question recognize that the
public-right nature of the interest is one that makes
application of the rule particularly appropriate because
both the interests of the individual litigant, the
plaintiff, is reduced, but also the opportunity for
vexatious relitigation is increased multiple times
because of the almost infinite number of potential
plaintiffs.
This case was decided by the lower court on
the basis of the relationship between Herrick and
Taylor. It was the fact that Taylor had taken up
Herrick's own interest. There was the interest in the
project. The project was the restoration of the plane.
Herrick owned the plane. Herrick had brought suit based
on that interest and lost. He asked Taylor to help him
in that project. Taylor then brings the suit to get the
same documents for the same purpose.
And we think that the U.S. versus Des Moines
Valley Railroad case is an example where, just shy
perhaps of an actual agency relationship, because
there's no control in Des Moines Valley, that still the
fact that the second litigant has volunteered to take
their name to, in a sense, take advantage of the fact
they have independent standing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, you have described
for us a thousand-headed monster of litigation, and your
proposal for a solution is to cut off one eyebrow.
You're going to solve just the case of, you
know, two people building an airplane. You agree,
anybody else in the association can file a lawsuit.
Anybody else in the United States can file a lawsuit,
even if they're not in the association.
It seems to me that, you know, in order to
cut off an eyebrow, I'm not willing to make a whole lot
of incursion upon our traditional rules of who's bound
by a lawsuit.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why should we stretch for
that?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: We are not
advocating a broad rule. We, in fact --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: -- think that's one
of the virtues of our argument: That where there is a
document that is of true public interest such that
multiple individuals on entirely independent grounds
might well seek it, they would not be barred.
But where a document has commercial value
like this one does to Mr. Herrick, so that he can
restore his plane without going to the incredible
expense of developing another manner to prove to the FAA
the airworthiness of that plane, there is that
commercial value that gives him the incentive to try to
relitigate over and over again. And on Petitioner's
view, as long as he stops just shy of an agency
relationship, he can do that throughout the country.
And this is --
JUSTICE BREYER: That sounds like --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is this an approach
that only applies in FOIA cases? I would assume in
every other case you have the normal Article III
requirements of injury, which limits exactly who can
sue.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, the rule is a
broader rule. And we've pointed out that it has in
common with the rule with respect to co-beneficiaries
that existed since the 1800s at the very latest, the
rule as stated in section 48 of the Restatement, which
is an example, a counter-example, Justice Ginsburg, to
your question about whether it always had to be a
pre-existing legal relationship, because section 48
deals with a particular situation where there are
multiple individuals who can claim for personal injury
of one of them. And the section is stated in terms of
another person, not a family member. And the commentary
to this section makes clear that although most
situations where it would apply would be family members,
it also applies to -- and I want to quote it: "A de
facto connection may sometimes suffice as well as a
formally valid one."
So the law of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm not sure what the
hypothetical is. I mean it is certainly not the case
that -- let's say you have a whole busload of people who
get injured in the same accident. Plaintiff one sues
and loses. Two sues and loses. Three is not precluded.
Four is not precluded.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: But it recognizes
there could be a close-enough relationship between the
two such that the purposes of the rule would be
satisfied, but there is no legal, familial relationship.
And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And if all that has been
proved, the problem is that the D.C. Circuit said:
We're not going to look into what they call strategic
whatever.
We're going to take it just as it is, with
none of -- no showing that these two are in cahoots.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: They didn't need to
because of the fact that Taylor had voluntarily taken up
Herrick's interests to get a second bite at the
litigatory apple, as the First Circuit put it.
And it is not the fact, as Petitioner would
argue, that every time another person has an individual,
standing right to sue under a statute, that it means
that that person necessarily gets to relitigate where a
person with whom they have a close relationship such as
this has already litigated and lost.
And so, getting back to Your Honor's
question --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is sort of a
totality-of-the-circumstances test in every case, right.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We look at the whole thing,
and we say, you know, close enough relationship. It is
not close enough; close enough. You need a better rule
than that for something that, you know, is a threshold
issue in a case.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: Well, Your Honor,
it is interesting that the restatement with respect to
the third category in the reply brief -- they called it
the third category of control perhaps. It is described
in the restatement in comment to section 62 as where the
person falls short of becoming a party but which justly
should result in his being denied an opportunity to
relitigate.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's just as bad. You're
absolutely right. That's just as bad.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER: That is the nature
-- that is the nature of res judicata principles. That
it is not: Can you avoid this by avoiding the legal
technicalities? It is the substance of the relationship
that counts.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Stetson.
ORAL ARGUMENT CATHERINE E. STETSON
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. STETSON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Justice Scalia, I'd like to begin with the
question that you posed earlier regarding privity and
what it really means, because that's what has given
rise, I think, to all of these vexing hypotheticals and
to your concern about this being nothing more than a
completely freewheeling, totality-of-the circumstances
test.
The problem, I think, that you're
confronting is that you don't have the usual place that
you point your foot whenever you try to develop a
categorical rule. You don't have a statutory text. You
don't have a constitutional text.
This is a Federal common-law issue; and, as
this Court unanimously acknowledged in 1996, what our
notions are of privity are changing, and they continue
to change.
In 1942, when the first restatement was
issued, "privity" was defined as control, or successor
in interest, or representation.
In 1982, when the second restatement was
issued, "privity" was defined generally as
representation, legal relationships, or that section 62
category that Mr. Hallward-Driemeier just mentioned,
which we can call "shenanigans."
The notion of privity is underpinned in
every single one of those contexts by a couple of basic
inquiries, and this is what makes it something much more
confined than a freewheeling,
totality-of-the-circumstances test.
The inquiries are: What are the
relationships between these two litigants, these two
serial litigants, and how have they conducted themselves
in this litigation?
And this in turn, I think, gets to the
dialogue that, Justice Souter, you were having with my
colleagues. Your first question was -- posited the
situation where one plaintiff sues and loses and comes
to another and says: Please try again for me.
That is precisely this case. And we don't
have to get into --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was no showing that
Herrick ever asked Taylor -- well, there is a showing
that they're interested in rebuilding this plane or
restoring the plane. But we don't have -- and the D.C.
Circuit said it was not relevant to its analysis. Yes,
I would totally agree with you if we have a recruiting
situation, if we have a financing situation. But the
D.C. Circuit said: Well, that's irrelevant.
MS. STETSON: I agree with you the D.C.
Circuit didn't find collusion, looking at Petitioner's
appendix 17-A at two things: The timing of the suit and
the sharing of discovery. But we don't need to get into
the evidence of collusion because what the D.C. Circuit
concluded as a predicate finding for its close-
relationship holding was that there was a request from
Mr. Herrick to Mr. Taylor to assist in the repair of his
plane.
And you can see this play out very tellingly
at joint appendix 31 to 32. If you look there, this is
the motion to allow discovery. Joint appendix 31 is
where Mr. Taylor relays at length the Tenth Circuit
argument and the Tenth Circuit ruling.
The first full paragraph on joint appendix
32 begins: "Mr. Herrick has now requested Mr. Taylor to
assist in the repair of his plane."
Now, Mr. Herrick, you can see from the first
exhibit to Fairchild's summary judgment motion in
district court, page 161, Mr. Herrick has six full-time
mechanics. He lives in Jackson Hole. His mechanics
work in Minneapolis. He doesn't need Mr. Taylor, who
lives in Iowa, to actually, physically assist with the
repair of his plane.
What he needs is someone with whom he
doesn't have an extant employment relationship, who
lives in a different circuit, to get those documents.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Look, I concede we can all
see where you're going, but isn't the problem this: In
effect, you're asking us to infer a finding of fact, and
we're not the trial court.
You've raised a good circumstantial
suspicion case; but, either because it wasn't raised by
your predecessor counsel as well or because the -- for
some reason the district court just would not buy it,
that's the -- the conclusion that you want us to draw
isn't before us. And I don't see that we're the
appropriate court to draw it.
MS. STETSON: Two responses, Your Honor:
The first is that conclusion was precisely the
conclusion that was drawn by the D.C. Circuit on the
close-relationship point.
If you look at joint appendix 17-A, the
conclusion on close relationship was predicated on,
among other things, the critical fact of the request
from Mr. Herrick to Mr. Taylor to repair the plane.
That is what made --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay. But at no point did
the D.C. Circuit or the district court, as I understand
it, say that request, in effect, was a request to
relitigate this matter so that we both, the owner of the
plane and the repairer of the plane, would have what I
was seeking in my first lawsuit.
They never actually crossed the line and
drew that conclusion; did they?
MS. STETSON: The district court, in fact,
held precisely that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: What did it --
MS. STETSON: In joint appendix 35-A -- in
Petitioner's appendix 35-A the district court concluded
as a factual finding that there was deliberate
maneuvering based on two things.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's out of the case
because the court of appeals said: We do not need to
determine whether they count as tactical maneuvering.
We do not do so.
MS. STETSON: Well, I'm going to resist you
slightly, Justice Ginsburg. I'm not sure that that is
the case. It is very curious.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It could be remanded. It
could be remanded with instructions that the collusion
question is still open. Prove it. It hasn't been
proved.
MS. STETSON: What the district court found
constituted collusion was identical interests and the
request. What the D.C. circuit found did not constitute
collusion was the timing of the FOIA action and the
sharing of discovery.
So they're operating on the collusion front
on two completely parallel paths. But on the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what the opinion
said is to review the bidding. There is record evidence
that: One, Taylor and Herrick had identical interests;
two, Taylor's interest was adequately represented in
Herrick; three, Herrick and Taylor had a close working
relationship relative to these successive cases.
And that's enough. That's enough to show
collusion.
MS. STETSON: The discussion that precedes
the reviewing of the bidding references with respect to
the close-relationship finding the request from
Mr. Herrick to Mr. Taylor to assist in the repair of his
plane, the request that is featured in joint appendix 32
as the preceding factor to the filing of the FOIA
action.
And I grant you, that does make this case
quite unique. It does make it quite similar to the 1897
case from the the Eighth Circuit, and I think it is
quite telling that we haven't found another analogue.
That doesn't mean that this doesn't fall
well within the wheelhouse of privity cases that this
Court is quite comfortable with.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what about the
associational cases: The association brings a suit in
the interests of the members? Are those members bound?
MS. STETSON: Well, it depends on -- it
depends on a couple of things, Mr. Chief Justice, but
the first thing it depends on is a finding that the
interests of the association and of the members is
identical. Not just common, not just --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Association standing
cases we talk about germane, right?
MS. STETSON: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that enough?
MS. STETSON: I think -- I think the
interests need to -- to be identical. I'm not sure that
it's enough just to have a common cause.
The interests were found in this case to be
identical because one was literally factually derivative
of the other. And I want to make a point clear about
the difference between FOIA standing such as it is, and
the interest that's being represented in this case.
The fact that Mr. Taylor, after learning of
Mr. Herrick's defeat, decided to perfect his FOIA rights
and sue in Federal court gave him standing. That was
all it gave him. What it did not do is give him a free
pass from a res judicata inquiry. And Justice Scalia
and Justice Ginsburg, to your points about FOIA not
requiring a motive, that's absolutely right at the
agency level.
But at the point where a disappointed FOIA
requestor comes into court and asks to be heard on the
same claim representing somebody else's interest, on its
face, at joint appendix 32, that's the point where the
judicial doctrine of res judicata kicks in.
That's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Anyone --anyone in this
audience, and anyone in the association would be a
proper FOIA plaintiff; is that right?
MS. STETSON: That is right. That is
absolutely right. The reason that Mr. Taylor is barred
is not just because he's asking for these same
documents. These are incredibly unusual documents; they
don't have great public appeal; but the reason he's
barred is because Mr. Herrick requested his assistance
in the repair of the airplane. Mr. Taylor sought the
same documents for exactly the same reason to be used to
exactly the same end purpose. That should -- I think --
give the Petitioner a great deal of comfort in this
regard.
We are not advocating nor is the government,
a privity rule that is going to result in the widespread
preclusion of FOIA plaintiffs who seeks the same
documents for independent reasons; but when someone
comes to the Court pressing someone else's interests,
that is a square privity issue, and he should be barred.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Ms. Stetson.
Ms. Rosenbaum, four minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ADINA H. ROSENBAUM,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. ROSENBAUM: Thank you.
First, I want to address the two cases
brought up by the government. In Des Moines Valley
Railroad that was someone who had the right to the land
because of a grant from the government. In that case,
specifically, the Court pointed out that the
government -- that Congress had passed a law that had
the government give up all interest, that showed that
the government had given up all interests in the land.
And in the Rock Island Railroad case, that had to do
with a beneficiary and the administrator of an estate.
These are legal relationships that give rise
to privity, and that's exactly the point. There are
relationships that do give rise to privity, but the
relationship between Taylor and Herrick is not one of
them.
The government also pointed out that FOIA
requestors can bring suit in different venues, and that
is the case. They can bring it in the District of
Columbia, where the records are, or where they are. But
as they pointed out, that is the way that FOIA is set
up. Congress allowed requestors to bring suits in
different places, and that's not the way Congress needed
to establish FOIA. It could have made one place the
sole venue for bringing suit under FOIA but it did not.
And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if two people
get together who want the same documents for the same
purpose, which is they think they're going to make money
off of it. And they say which ever gets it we'll share
with the other and we'll split the money we're going to
get?
MS. ROSENBAUM: So they bring --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Separate -- separate
suits, separate requests, separate suits. They just
want to double their chances of getting the documents,
but they agree to split. They think they're going to
make a hundred dollars off of this and agree to split it
50-50, regardless of who wins.
MS. ROSENBAUM: I think what would have to
be looked at there is control or representation. But
again, the facts here do not show that there is any
agreement between Taylor and Herrick to -- there's no
agreement either to repair the plane; but more
specifically, there are no agreements to bring this
lawsuit.
So this Court does not need to reach the
question of exactly what sort of agreement would lead to
preclusion, and the problem with the lower court's
decision here is that they did just look at a grab bag
of amorphous factors to hold Taylor bound. They talk
about a close relationship without it being the sort of
relationship under which one party is representing the
other or under which they have a legal relationship.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Ms. Stetson said that the
district court unlike the court of appeals, did find
collusion, and she referred to a page that I didn't
check.
MS. ROSENBAUM: The district court did think
that there was tactical maneuvering happening here. But
the court of appeals specifically said that the district
court had erred in concluding that there had been an
agreement between them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you think we need
to remand this for consideration of whether or not there
was an agreement, if we conclude that what we see from
the court of appeals opinion isn't enough?
As I understand, the court of appeals didn't
think an agreement was necessary. So regardless of what
the district court said, al thought that was an issue
that was litigated, it was not passed on by the court of
appeals.
MS. ROSENBAUM: Yes. The court could remand
it and then the district court would have the discretion
to allow the case to go forward as it saw fit.
And the problem - the problem with the
factors looked at by the lower courts, with -- basing
privity on just amorphous facts and basically just
having courts check their gut about whether or not that
relationship is sufficient, is that it ends up with
people being found in privity when they did not actually
have their right to be heard, the way Taylor did not
here. Instead, privity should be based on underlaying
rationales that protect the litigant's right to be heard
and ensure that they do have their day in court.
Unless there are any further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Ms. Rosenbaum. The case is submitted.
(Whereupon at 12:26 p.m., the case in the
