IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
WALTER A. ROTHGERY,               :
Petitioner            :
v.                         :  No. 07-440
GILLESPIE COUNTY, TEXAS.          :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, March 17, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:06 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DANIELLE SPINELLI, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the Petitioner.
GREGORY S. COLEMAN, ESQ., Austin, Tex.; on behalf of
the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF                                  PAGE
DANIELLE SPINELLI, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner                       3
GREGORY S. COLEMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent                      27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DANIELLE SPINELLI, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner                      55
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:06 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We will now hear
argument in Case 07-440, Rothgery v. Gillespie County,
Texas.
Ms. Spinelli.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DANIELLE SPINELLI
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. SPINELLI:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In Brewer and Jackson, this Court held that
an initial appearance before a magistrate like the one
here marks the commencement of a criminal prosecution
under the Sixth Amendment.  This case demonstrates why
that holding makes eminent sense.
Rothgery was arrested on the erroneous
belief that he was a felon in possession of a firearm.
As required by the Texas Code, he was brought before a
magistrate, who informed him of the felony accusation
against him and required him to post bail or remain in
jail to ensure that he answered that accusation.
At that point, Rothgery acquired specific
rights under Texas law as the accused in a felony case,
including the right to have the prosecution against him
dismissed if an indictment or information were not filed
within a set period and the right to contest the
accusation against him prior to indictment in an
examining trial before the magistrate.  At that point,
Rothgery was no longer merely a suspect, but an accused
within the meaning of the Sixth Amendment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Counsel, how can
this -- how can this be part of an adversary proceeding
when there's no other adversary on the field?  The
prosecution's not present.  They don't even know
anything about this.
MS. SPINELLI:  Mr. Chief Justice, this Court
held in Jackson that the question whether a particular
--
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, in Jackson of
course the charges had already been filed by the
prosecutor, so there was an adversary on the field.
MS. SPINELLI:  What I was going to say was
that there is a clear distinction which is set forth in
this Court's opinion in Jackson between the question
whether a particular proceeding initiates a criminal
prosecution and whether that proceeding itself is
adversarial in the sense that it requires the presence
of defense counsel.
And, as to the first question, whether a
particular proceeding initiates a criminal prosecution,
this Court's cases have not held that prosecutorial
involvement is a relevant factor, and that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, I suppose -- I
suppose you could you have an adversarial proceeding
without the prosecutor present, but it would depend on
the nature of the proceeding.  And here the magistrate
simply advises the individual of the charges against
him, repeats the Miranda warnings, advises him that he
can have counsel if bail is denied or if he can't make
bail.  What about that is adversarial?
MS. SPINELLI:  That's correct, Mr. Chief
Justice, and we don't contend that it is adversarial.
In Jackson, this Court made clear that a
proceeding need not itself be adversarial in the sense
that would require defense counsel to be present to
counter the adversary presentation of the prosecutor in
order for that proceeding to initiate a criminal
prosecution.  Rather, it held that the initial
appearance itself, regardless of those other factors,
marked the commencement of a prosecution.
And it's worth noting that in Jackson
substantially the same arguments that Respondent raises
here were made by the State there.  The State there
contended this initial appearance is merely an
administrative ministerial proceeding.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, I guess I'll
get back to the point I raised earlier, that in Jackson
charges had already been filed by a prosecutor.  The
prosecutor was aware of this proceeding.  I think that's
a fairly significant distinction.
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, the Court in Jackson
placed no weight on that distinction.  That wasn't
something that was mentioned in Jackson.  And what
happened in Jackson was that warrants were obtained, the
defendants were arrested, and they were brought before a
magistrate for this initial proceeding.  There is no
indication that the prosecutor was present at that
initial proceeding.  The Jackson court -- the Jackson
court put no weight on that factor.  And none of this
Court's cases have ever stated that there is a
requirement that a prosecutor be involved.  And that
makes sense, because the consequences of the initial
appearance for the defendant are precisely the same
whether or not a prosecutor is involved.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But what we're looking for
here, at least one of the things we might look for in
this case, is a specific rule to give to the States so
the State knows when counsel has to be appointed.
In this case suppose the magistrate, the man
behind the little window, said:  We're going to give you
a ticket; keep in touch with us; don't change your
address until you notify us; you're free on your own
recognizance.  Would counsel have been required there?
MS. SPINELLI:  Had there been no way in
which the defendant was bound to reappear and answer the
charges, then we would not have the situation that we
have, and it would seem less likely that that would
initiate a criminal proceeding.  The factors that we
have here that make it clear that a prosecution was
initiated, just as it was in Jackson on identical facts
--
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Ms. Spinelli, there's
something confusing about your presentation of this,
because you say that at this initial appearance that's
called a magistration, you are not contending that there
was a right to counsel at that very proceeding.
MS. SPINELLI:  That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So when, at what point in
time, did this right to counsel attach?  If it didn't
attach during that magistration proceeding, when did it
attach?
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, first I should say I
believe that that question goes to Respondent's
alternative argument for affirmance.  The only question
that was addressed by the Fifth Circuit and the only
question presented in the petition was the question
whether a criminal prosecution commenced at Rothgery's
magistration.  And we are certainly not asking this
Court to direct the entry of judgment in our favor, but
merely --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But you are taking the
position that there was a right to counsel that attached
in this case.  And I'm asking you at what point in time
that right attached.
MS. SPINELLI:  We believe that -- well, this
Court's cases have made clear that the right to counsel
attaches at the time a criminal prosecution commences.
Now, the question whether counsel must then be appointed
immediately upon attachment is a separate question.
JUSTICE ALITO:  What does "attachment" mean?
MS. SPINELLI:  What "attachment" means under
this Court's cases is that since a criminal prosecution
has now begun, the explicit guarantees of the Sixth
Amendment are applicable, the State no longer -- the
State cannot interfere after that point with the
attorney-client relationship.  At that point the
defendant has the right to counsel to serve as an
intermediary --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well if Mr. Roth -- if your
client had shown up at the magistration with an
attorney, could the State of Texas have said, no, your
attorney may not be present during the magistration?
MS. SPINELLI:  No, I don't believe so,
because --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, does that mean that
the right attached prior to the magistration?
MS. SPINELLI:  We believe that the right
attached at the magistration.
JUSTICE ALITO:  At the beginning, at the
end?
MS. SPINELLI:  Upon the magistration.
JUSTICE ALITO:  What does that mean?
MS. SPINELLI:  So perhaps -- so at the
end -- I suppose I would say at the end, once --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Then why could Texas have
said your attorney -- why could Texas have not said,
although you came here with an attorney, your attorney
may not be present because you don't have a Sixth
Amendment right to counsel at the magistration?  Your
right hasn't attached yet.  It won't attach until the
end.
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, I believe that it would
attach at the time that the magistrate informed the
defendant of the accusation against him, at which point
he became a defendant in a criminal case and his right
to counsel attached.
Now, to get back to Justice Ginsburg's
question, whether -- whether counsel is required to be
appointed immediately upon attachment is a separate
issue, which is the subject of Respondent's alternative
ground for affirmance.  We are merely asking this Court
to resolve the threshold question, which is the
threshold question in every right to counsel case, did a
criminal prosecution commence at Rothgery's
magistration?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The two are kind of
related.  If in fact there's not a right to counsel upon
the magistration, but, as you said earlier to Justice
Alito, it attaches at the end of the magistration, it
seems to me like you're asking for counsel to be an
investigator rather than to participate in the trial
proceedings.
MS. SPINELLI:  No, I don't believe so, Your
Honor.  This Court has said that a defendant does not
have a right for a lawyer to act as a pre-charge private
investigator.  But our contention is that Rothgery was
charged at his magistration.  At that point he became an
accused, which is demonstrated by the structure of the
Texas Code itself.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  How is that different from
a traffic ticket?
MS. SPINELLI:  It's very different from a
traffic ticket, Justice Kennedy, because in that
situation -- I think that situation would be analogous
to a warrantless arrest, which, as we know, does not
commence adversary judicial proceedings.  Here, we have
an arrest.  We have a person who has been held for a
period of time --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So it's the warrant that
makes the difference?
MS. SPINELLI:  No, I don't believe so.  I
believe it's the magistration.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Or the incarceration.
Would your case be different if after the magistration
the -- your client was free to go?  The court said, you
know, this is what you've been arrested for and charged
with by the policeman who brought you in; we'll -- you
know, good-bye.  Whereas in this case, he was required
to make bail.  Suppose he hadn't been required to make
bail, supposing he was free to go?
MS. SPINELLI:  If he had not been required
to make bail or make any other binding promise to
appear, which is the function of bail, to ensure that
the defendant will answer the accusation --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.
MS. SPINELLI:  -- then we would be lacking
that piece of evidence that he had been accused.  There
still would remain other evidence under Texas law that
he was, in fact, an accused at that time.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So Texas -- assuming we
agree with that, Texas made one of two possible
constitutional violations.  Either it was
unconstitutional for Texas to require him to make bail,
or it was unconstitutional for Texas not to provide him
with an attorney.  Why should -- why should we find that
the latter was the problem rather than the former?
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, there is certainly
nothing unconstitutional about requiring bail, as we
know.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, there certainly is if
you're not charged.  I think it's a very strong point in
your favor that he was required to make bail, because I
don't think you can hold somebody without charging him,
just say, you know --
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, we -- I mean, we --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The fact -- the fact that
he was held suggests that he was charged with something.
MS. SPINELLI:  We agree, Justice Scalia.  In
fact, the Texas Code expressly recognizes that the
function of bail is to ensure that the --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Sure.
MS. SPINELLI:  -- accused will answer the
accusation against him.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So maybe, maybe Texas was
wrong about that, that it shouldn't have required bail.
Maybe that was what was unconstitutional, rather than
its failure to provide counsel.
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, what occurred here,
however, was that Texas did require Mr. Rothgery to post
bail.  And in addition, the magistration gave rise to
certain specific rights, which only accrued to
defendants in criminal prosecutions.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- that a magistrate is
required whenever bail is set -- pardon me, that an
attorney is required whenever bail is set?
MS. SPINELLI:  We're not contending that an
attorney was required.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  The rule is -- I want to
know, what do we tell Texas it has to do in all these
cases?  What do we tell jurisdictions that have to deal
with traffic tickets?  Does it make a difference that
you're held in custody or not held in custody?  I don't
understand the rule you want us to adopt.
MS. SPINELLI:  I think the rule -- we're
actually not asking the Court to adopt any new rule
today, but simply to reaffirm the rule it has already
announced in Brewer and Jackson, which is that an
initial appearance before a magistrate, which is a
proceeding that is common across jurisdictions and has a
common significance across jurisdictions, a proceeding
at which a magistrate informs the defendant officially
of the accusation against him and of his rights as a
criminal defendant --
JUSTICE ALITO:  But when do you say counsel
has to be appointed?  Is it before the magistration?  Is
it at the end, immediately upon the end of it?
MS. SPINELLI:  No, we believe --
JUSTICE ALITO:  What if -- what if an
attorney had been appointed here ten days after the
magistration?
MS. SPINELLI:  Our contention is that an
attorney was required to be appointed promptly after
Rothgery renewed his request for an attorney following
the magistration.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Okay, so the --
MS. SPINELLI:  And this Court --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  What is the -- so the point
of the magistration is that is the point at which a
reasonable time starts running within which Texas must
afford -- appoint counsel, isn't that your basic point?
MS. SPINELLI:  Correct, Justice Souter.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Okay.
MS. SPINELLI:  That's our contention.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  So there's no claim that
there was anything invalid about the magistration
proceeding --
MS. SPINELLI:  Not at all.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- itself because there was
no counsel there.
MS. SPINELLI:  No, not at all.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  There's no claim -- for
example, had there been a probable cause hearing, that
the attorney would have been required to participate in
the probable cause hearing under --
MS. SPINELLI:  No.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  There has simply got to be
one appointed within a reasonable time after the
magistration.  That's -- that's your argument?
MS. SPINELLI:  That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Is there any law on that?
Is there -- suppose there's an indictment and the
defendant finds out about it; he's never arrested;
nothing further happens; weeks pass.  Now, is there any
law that tells me -- it's an indictment, that's clear --
and is there any law that tells me, when he requests a
counsel be appointed, when they have to do it?
MS. SPINELLI:  Justice Breyer, this Court
has not been faced with the question --
JUSTICE BREYER:  So the answer is no.
MS. SPINELLI:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  What happens -- what
happens if -- the part that's worrying and I don't know
how people handle it -- a riot.  A big sit-in.  A big
demonstration, 500 people arrested, they are brought
down to the station, bail is posted the next day, the
U.S. attorney or the D.A. thinks:  I'm going to indict
the ringleaders, and the rest -- you know, the rest we
are just going to let go; they will forfeit their bond.
How is that handled?  How is it handled under your rule?
How is that handled generally?  How should it be
handled?
MS. SPINELLI:  How is it handled with
respect to the persons who were indicted?
JUSTICE BREYER:  No.  No.  That's easy.
MS. SPINELLI:  Or how is it --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I mean -- I'm talking about
the people who nobody ever intends to prosecute.  What's
going to happen, as I think happens quite often, they
are brought to the station, they are arrested, they are
released on bond, and then everybody forgets about it.
MS. SPINELLI:  If there are --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Or they're -- or the D.A.
says, you know, forfeit -- like a traffic ticket or
something -- forfeit your bond.  And I want to know how
that's handled under your rule, how is it handled now,
how is it handled in the -- discuss it, please.
MS. SPINELLI:  If a person is arrested,
brought to the station house, and then released prior to
the initial appearance, which is actually a --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, you see what I'm
doing.  I'm trying to make it comparable.  What happens
there is that these 500 people brought down to the
station, they are required to put up bail; they are
given a warning because people might question them; they
are given a warning; they are then released.  And
nothing further is heard.  Maybe three months later,
they come in and they agree that they'll forfeit their
bond.
Now, that's what I'm wondering.  That must
happen, because I think there are lots of
demonstrations; they occur sometimes.  I suspect it
happens.  How is it handled, if you know?
MS. SPINELLI:  It happens quite frequently,
Justice Breyer, that persons are arrested, brought to
the station house, and then released by the police
without undergoing an initial appearance.  And in that
circumstance, we don't contend that a prosecution would
have begun.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why not, if they
initiate charges against them?  You're saying, in
Justice Breyer's hypothetical, you're charged with, for
example, trespassing or conducting a demonstration on
the court grounds, and that's a crime.  You're charged
with that, but we are not going to hold you, so, you
know, come back in a month.
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, it -- it might depend
on the manner in which the charges are conveyed or
filed.  If all that happens is that the police tell you,
you know, we believe you've committed a crime, certainly
that doesn't commence a prosecution.  If there is a
formal -- you know, as happens in misdemeanor
prosecutions, if there is a formal complaint filed which
can be the basis for a conviction in a misdemeanor case,
then it may be that, by analogy to an indictment in a
felony case, a prosecution would commence at that point.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, what about my
traffic ticket?
MS. SPINELLI:  I don't believe --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I've never had one so I
don't know what they say.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Other members of the Court
can advise me about that.
MS. SPINELLI:  I believe -- I believe a
ticket or a citation of that nature would not commence
adversary judicial proceedings because it's analogous to
a warrantless arrest.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why doesn't it solve your
-- the problem that you're obviously wrestling with, if
-- if we simply said there is a right to counsel, but it
doesn't attach until there's a significant stage of the
prosecution which then follows?  I mean, if you have
some proceeding afterwards, yes, then you do need a
lawyer, but the mere fact that you've been brought to
the courthouse and made bail and let go does not require
500 counsel to be provided.  Only -- only when there is
some later proceeding, which is an essential part of the
prosecution, must you have counsel.
MS. SPINELLI:  Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why wouldn't that solve the
problem?
MS. SPINELLI:  First of all, we agree that a
prosecution commences upon a first appearance before a
judge --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's fine, but --
MS. SPINELLI:  Not merely --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But you only need counsel
at significant phases.
MS. SPINELLI:  Oh, right.  And we are not
contending that counsel must be present at that initial
appearance itself.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.
MS. SPINELLI:  So just to be clear about
that.  But to address your question, which, again, I
believe goes to Respondent's alternative ground for
affirmance --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes, but it's so wrapped up
with how we decide this case.  I mean, if I think that
counsel has to be appointed right away for -- for
Justice Breyer's 500 demonstrators, I'm going to give a
different answer to the first question.  But if I know
that counsel doesn't have to be appointed until the
prosecution proceeds to some significant phase where an
attorney would be -- would be really helpful, then --
then I can -- I can be quite more sympathetic to your --
to your argument.
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, were the Court to reach
that alternative argument, which is that -- despite the
fact that a criminal prosecution had commenced, and
Rothgery was an accused, by hypothesis he nevertheless
was not entitled to the assistance of counsel for his
defense because no critical stage had been reached -- we
would say, first of all, assuming that Respondent is
correct, that the right to counsel lies dormant
following its attachment on the commencement of a
criminal prosecution until some subsequent critical
stage is reached, if we assume that that is correct,
there was such a stage here because Mr. Rothgery was
faced with the decision whether or not to invoke his
right to an examining trial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But that was at the
magistration, and you -- you have said that there was no
right to counsel at the magistration.
MS. SPINELLI:  That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg, but his decision regarding the examining trial
was not one that needed to be made at the magistration.
Rather, this was a right that he possessed to contest
the accusation against him under Texas law, which could
only be exercised prior to indictment.  And, indeed, it
was a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Any time prior -- any
time prior to indictment?
MS. SPINELLI:  Correct.  And, indeed --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So you're saying that
that is the critical stage that he needed to have
counsel's advice about.
MS. SPINELLI:  To the extent that it's
necessary to have a critical stage, then we believe that
is a critical stage.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And that stage would arise
immediately as soon as the magistration was completed,
right?
MS. SPINELLI:  His right --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  He'd have to have counsel
appointed immediately --
MS. SPINELLI:  Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to advise him whether to
ask for this hearing or not.
MS. SPINELLI:  Not necessarily immediately,
but within some reasonable time after his request, and
after he had demonstrated --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Before he said no, I
don't want an examining trial.  As soon as he says that,
then he can have one, and you're saying he should have
had a lawyer before he said that?
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, I mean, had he said --
had he waived his right to an examining trial, which he
didn't do, then, you know, under -- then we would not
have --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But he could do it;
anyone else could do it.  And you would say, once he
does that, he's made it into a critical proceeding, and
so you have to have counsel before he gives up that
right?
MS. SPINELLI:  Yes.  We're contending that
in felony cases -- this is only an issue in felony cases
-- because Texas has provided this right, which is
precisely for defendants in Rothgery's situation, who
are innocent but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, then -- but
then you are saying that he has a right to counsel at
the magistration, because that's when the magistrate
says:  Look, you have an examining trial coming up, and
you can waive your right to that.
MS. SPINELLI:  No.  That's actually not
correct, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What does he say
about the examining --
MS. SPINELLI:  At a magistration --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What does he say
about an examining --
MS. SPINELLI:  Precisely what he said and
what appears on the warning form is:  In a felony case,
you have a right to an examining trial.  There is no
provision at the magistration for the defendant to
either invoke or waive that right.  And there's no
indication that any further explanation of that right is
given.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Do you know any other case
in which we've held that it's a critical stage of the
proceeding where nothing has happened, but something
could have happened if the defendant had asked for it?
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, we're not contending
that.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't -- I find it hard
to describe that as a critical stage of the proceeding.
MS. SPINELLI:  We're not contending that,
Justice Scalia.  Our contention is that the examining
trial, this Court has already held in Coleman, is a
critical stage.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  When the trial occurs, it
is a critical stage.
MS. SPINELLI:  Correct.  Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I have no doubt.
MS. SPINELLI:  And --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But you're claiming that
his decision of whether to ask for that or not is a
critical stage.  And I just don't know any precedent for
saying that something that hasn't happened is a critical
stage.
MS. SPINELLI:  I think the strongest
precedent for that is Estelle versus Smith, in which
this Court held that counsel -- counsel's assistance is
needed not only to conduct and prepare for critical
stages, but also to assist a defendant in deciding
whether to undergo them.
And more broadly, this Court has repeatedly
stated that one of the core purposes of the right to
counsel is to ensure that the defendant understands and
is able to invoke all of his rights.  And in this case,
this was the right that he possessed that could have
enabled him to demonstrate his innocence prior to being
indicted, rearrested, and incarcerated.  And he lost
that right because he didn't have counsel's help.
With the Court's permission, I'll reserve
the balance of my time.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I know -- when we were
talking about traffic tickets, you said, well, that was
a warrantless arrest.  This was a warrantless arrest.
MS. SPINELLI:  This was a warrantless
arrest, but following that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And then --
MS. SPINELLI:  But there was more, because
following that, there was -- the magistration occurred,
at which time the police officer filed an affidavit
setting forth the basis of the charges.  The magistrate
found probable cause, and the magistrate officially
informed Rothgery of the accusation against him.  And
that's why -- that's why -- in Kirby, this Court held
this a warrantless arrest does not commence adversary
judicial proceedings; in Jackson, on exactly these
facts, the Court held that it does.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, not exactly
these facts, because in Jackson the prosecutor had
already filed charges.
MS. SPINELLI:  Charges were filed in Jackson
in exactly the same sense that charges were filed here.
A document which contained basically simply a factual
statement of what had occurred --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But the prosecutor
wasn't involved here.  The prosecutor was involved in
Jackson.
MS. SPINELLI:  That's correct, but we don't
believe that should make any difference because the
effect on the Defendant of this proceeding is precisely
the same, whether or not a prosecutor is involved.  And
that's true in general and it's true under Texas law.
Either way he's faced with a need to negotiate criminal
law in order to contest the charges against him.  He has
a right to do so under Texas law, and he has a right to
have the prosecution against him dismissed if an
indictment isn't filed within a set period.  All of
which we believe demonstrate that he was accused and
that a prosecution had commenced.
May I reserve the balance of my time?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Yes.  Thank you,
counsel.
Mr. Coleman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY S. COLEMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. COLEMAN:  Good morning, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
The magistration that follows every Texas
arrest does not begin a criminal prosecution under the
Sixth Amendment.  When Rothgery was magistrated, no
formal charges had been filed against him; no one
attempted to elicit incriminating information from him;
no witnesses were presented --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Then how could they hold
them in jail?
MR. COLEMAN:  It is not uncommon -- in fact,
it's universal practice that when one is arrested on a
-- without a warrant, it is normally because a police
officer sees an individual in the commission of a crime.
It's not uncommon to go and to arrest that person, to
cease the crime that is taking place and perhaps to
prevent other crimes from taking place, and to present
them.  Gerstein makes clear that this happens all of the
time.
JUSTICE BREYER:  What happens in Texas?
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  He was held after he saw
the magistrate.  Suppose he had been held for three
months and you couldn't make bail, we don't need
counsel?
MR. COLEMAN:  Texas statute allows for
counsel under that situation.  But this is an issue that
is addressed primarily by the Fourth Amendment.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I am asking what the
constitutional rule is.
MR. COLEMAN:  The Fourth --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  We have here a proceeding
before a magistrate; this results in custody.  And my
question is, suppose this were weeks, would counsel be
required to be appointed?
MR. COLEMAN:  No, Your Honor.  The Fourth --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  What authority do you have
to hold somebody who's not been charged?  I mean I don't
understand that.  You say he hasn't been charged, but
we're going to hold you in jail.  That's very strange.
MR. COLEMAN:  We believe that this is an
issue that was addressed by the Court in Gerstein and
McLaughlin, that the Fourth Amendment prevents
unreasonable seizures and the Sixth Amendment speedy
trial rights kick in.  And so there is a limit on what
type of a seizure that can you have.
And the Fourth Amendment does prevent that,
as do other rights, and as the Court recognized in
Gouveia.  But the liberty interest that is at stake
there, as the Court said in Gouveia, is not one that
implicates the Sixth Amendment right to counsel.  If
there are other --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  What you're saying, in
answer to Justice Kennedy's question, that an individual
can be brought into court, held in jail for three weeks
without charge, and no right to counsel applies?  I
think that's your answer, but I want to make sure.  I'll
be candid to say I'm surprised.  But if that's your
position, I want to make sure I understand it.
MR. COLEMAN:  Gerstein says that there must
be --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  I want to know what your
answer is here.  Get to authority later, but I want to
know whether your position is that an individual may be
brought by a police officer before a magistrate, charged
with no crime, required to post bail, and if he doesn't
post bail, be held for three weeks without charge.
MR. COLEMAN:  That could not happen in
Texas.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  I'm not asking whether it
could happen; I'm asking whether it would be
constitutional without appointing counsel.
MR. COLEMAN:  It would be -- not be a
violation of the Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But it would be a
violation of some liberty interest beside the Sixth
Amendment.
MR. COLEMAN:  It might well be a violation
of the Fourth Amendment or other Sixth Amendment --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No counsel right would
attach?
No counsel right would attach?
MR. COLEMAN:  That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I think it's a problem even
if you appoint counsel.  You say you can keep people
without charging them so long as you give them counsel?
MR. COLEMAN:  It happens all the time,
Justice Scalia, where people are appointed counsel but,
for whatever reason, do not make bail and --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But they didn't -- they
don't --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Without charges filed?  In
other words, if the lawyer comes in and says, you know,
my client is sitting in jail, you've had him there for
three days now, and no complaint has been filed against
him, we don't know why he is being held -- your answer
-- the -- it's a constitutional answer to say, well, you
know, that's for us to know and you to find out?
(Laughter.)
MR. COLEMAN:  I think Gerstein would prevent
that, Justice Souter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I mean, the answer
-- your answer is that the Sixth Amendment is concerned
with the fair trial, not the detention of individuals,
and he has other constitutional rights that would be
implicated, but his right to a fair trial is not one of
them.
MR. COLEMAN:  That's absolutely true here.
JUSTICE BREYER:  What is the law here in
Texas in respect to this particular magistration
proceeding?  I noticed what happened is that the
magistrate tells the person arrested, he says precisely:
"I find probable cause to believe" that you -- "that
there was probable cause to arrest you."  That's what
they say, right?  It said:  "I have determined that
probable cause existed for the arrest of the individual
accused therein."
All right.  Now, what happens -- and I think
it would be helpful to know the answer to this -- in
what might be a rare instance, but the truth of the
matter is there was probable cause to arrest that
individual when he was arrested, but there isn't now.
So because he came in -- you know, he said here's 14
cousins, I was somewhere else at the time, they all
agree.  I mean, everybody agrees on a certain fact that
means there isn't now.  And what I'm driving at is does
the magistrate here -- is he required, does he have the
power to commit someone, even though he honestly
believes there is no longer probable cause, in which
case he is making the decision, the magistrate, not the
policeman?
MR. COLEMAN:  I don't know the answer to the
constitutional significance of the different --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I could -- I can think
there would be tremendous constitutional significance
and it would make a difference if all that's really
happening is a policeman is arresting someone, in which
case we might have liberty interests and others at
issue.  But what's happening in this proceeding is that
the magistrate is deciding that there is probable cause
to hold him, in which case it's more like, not
completely like, but more like what happens in an
indictment or an arraignment, et cetera.
MR. COLEMAN:  What is stated on the form --
certainly I can't say what was going through the
magistrate's mind.
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, no.  But I want to know
what's Texas law, if you know it, in respect to that
question?
MR. COLEMAN:  The answer I believe is that
you -- that you find that there is probable cause to
make the arrest.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So we have a magistrate who
has to find that there is -- no, to make the arrest or
to hold him now?  Do you see what I'm doing?
MR. COLEMAN:  I do see what you're doing.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Do you see why I'm doing
it?  So, what's the answer, if you know?
MR. COLEMAN:  I don't think that there is a
difference in this case.  I think --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, I know there may not
be, but what about in general.
MR. COLEMAN:  Magistrates have a great
amount of discretion, and I think if a magistrate was
convinced that probable cause existed at the time of
arrest and not now, it's quite likely the magistrate
would find --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  That's what I would
think.  In which case we have before us bringing this
person before a State official who himself has the power
to decide if there is probable cause to hold him, and he
is saying, yes, there is probable cause to hold him.
That's --  that's what's happening; is that right?
MR. COLEMAN:  I believe so.  That's exactly
what the Court required in Gerstein, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Thank you.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Mr. Coleman, may I just
ask this kind of simple question.  If the prosecutor had
participated in the magistration, then under Texas law
would the right to counsel have arisen?
MR. COLEMAN:  No, Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Whether the prosecutor
participates is not relevant?
MR. COLEMAN:  There is no role for a
prosecutor at a magistration under Article 1517 of the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, couldn't he
point out -- I mean, if this is a probable cause
determination and he knows a particular fact, couldn't
he say, well, Magistrate, you should know this, and the
magistrate would say, well, I didn't know that, so
there's no probable cause?
MR. COLEMAN:  That's possible.
And I would like to amend my answer to you,
Justice Stevens.  It's not at all uncommon -- once an
arrest takes place and an officer can go and present a
case to the county or district attorney, it's not
uncommon at all for charges then to be filed in the --
depending on what the crime, is in the district court or
county court, and for the magistration then to be moved
over and to take place in an official court.  And so at
that time, it could very well be.
And we would say -- we would say likely at
that point that, yes, that formal criminal judicial
proceedings had initiated, and it's not uncommon.  But
in this circumstance --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  What about the very
proceeding in this case?  Supposing instead of a
detective bringing in the affidavit, that the prosecutor
did it, had the detective's affidavit, and the
prosecutor said:  This is a case we intend to pursue
more seriously.  That's all he says to the judge.  Would
have that been sufficient?
MR. COLEMAN:  No, Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  It would not?
MR. COLEMAN:  An expression of subjective --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  I got the impression from
the briefs that the absence or presence of the
prosecutor made a difference.  But you're telling me I'm
wrong under that?
MR. COLEMAN:  Under the circumstances where
no formal charges have been brought, a statement by a
prosecutor that they are looking at it or that they
intend to bring some is not itself the initiation of
formal adversary judicial proceedings.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Mr. Coleman, what happens
in other jurisdictions?  I probably ought to know this,
but I don't.  Maybe you do.  When you don't have a
procedure called magistration, but someone is taken
before a magistrate and with the prosecutor present, is
the indictment at that point drawn up, or doesn't the --
doesn't the prosecutor have some time to decide what the
indictment ought to contain?  What -- what happens at
that point?
MR. COLEMAN:  An indictment does usually
take a little bit more time because it has to be taken
and presented to a grand jury.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So what happens in the
interim?  Is he -- is he charged in the interim, or is
he just held because he is going to be charged, which is
what's going on here.
MR. COLEMAN:  He is not charged during that
interim.  But you can have --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  You mean no complaint needs
to be filed by the police?  If the magistrate says,
what's this guy doing here, don't the police normally
have a complaint, in this case a -- what was it, a
possession of a gun by a felon, say, you know, we're
filing this complaint that charges him with possessing a
gun with a felony record?  And wasn't there such a
complaint displayed here?
MR. COLEMAN:  No, Justice Souter.  Texas
statutes do allow for the filing of a complaint in some
circumstances.  It's not frequently used.  But that's a
complaint that has to be filed in the district court or
in the justice of the peace court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  What was filed by the
police?  What was filed by the police --
MR. COLEMAN:  Nothing was filed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- to justify holding
this person?  You can't just say the police brought
someone in and they get locked up in jail.  The police
had to present something --
MR. COLEMAN:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- to show probable cause
and it was the burden of the State in the presence of
the police officer to prove probable cause.  So that had
to be based on something.  What was it based on?
MR. COLEMAN:  It was based on the officer's
affidavit of probable cause, which was presented at the
little glass window to the magistrate and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And then -- and then the
defendant was told or was given Miranda warnings.  What
was said to him precisely about right to counsel in the
warnings that the magistrate gave him?
MR. COLEMAN:  Well, the warnings go through.
They are very similar to Miranda warnings.  He is told
that he has a right to counsel under Texas statute for
this.  He is -- he is warned, as Ms. Spinelli said,
about examining trial.  There is a list of things --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Yes.  But if he is
told -- the defendant is listening to this.  And,
magistrate, you just told me I have a right to counsel.
Okay, I would like counsel.  And then the magistrate
says, no you're not entitled to counsel?
MR. COLEMAN:  I don't think that's what
would happen.  I think if he had insisted on counsel
being present for the bail portion of the 1517
magistration, I believe that they would have gotten
somebody to come and --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Would they have been
obligated to get somebody to come?
MR. COLEMAN:  Under Texas statute they
would.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Under the Sixth Amendment?
MR. COLEMAN:  No.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  No.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Suppose Texas law provided
that there had to be an examining trial within a certain
period of time after the magistration unless there was
an intervening indictment.  Then would you not agree
that under those circumstances the defendant would have
been entitled to the appointment of counsel shortly
after the magistration, at least in order to prepare for
the examining trial?
MR. COLEMAN:  We completely agree that if
that were the case, Coleman -- this Court's decisions
make absolutely clear he would have been entitled to
counsel for an examining trial and would have been -- we
would have been obligated and would have appointed
counsel at a reasonable time before that examining trial
so that the preparations could take place.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Why would the situation be
different simply because Texas law doesn't require the
examining trial, but gives the defendant the option of
demanding one?
MR. COLEMAN:  Because there is no prejudice
to your fair trial rights from not choosing to have an
examining trial.  We are unaware of any case that has
said that there is a Sixth Amendment right to consult
with counsel before deciding whether to ask for an
examining trial.  And in fact, in Texas they are very
rare because in the very unusual circumstances where
somebody asks for one, more often than not the
prosecutor will simply hurry up and do an indictment.
And so there will be no examining trial that takes
place.  And that's a put up or shut up procedure, but
it's not something that prejudices your fair trial
rights if no examining trial actually takes place.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  If we said that when a
defendant is ordered held in custody, that there is then
a right of counsel, would we be contradicting any of our
precedents as opposed, say, to extending them?
MR. COLEMAN:  I certainly do believe that
the court would.  I believe that a decision that the
right attaches, that there is an initiation of formal
judicial proceedings at the magistration, would
contradict not only Kirby, but also Gerstein and
Gouveia.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well -- no.  But my
assumption was assuming that the defendant is remanded
to custody.  I added that.
MR. COLEMAN:  It's not clear to me that that
makes a constitutional difference in our circumstances.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Suppose you were to say
that where the State arrests an individual, brings him
before a neutral official and intends and does impose a
significant restraint on his liberty for the purpose of
bringing that individual to trial, there is a
presumption that that -- forget the presumption.  If
that happens for the purpose, the primary purpose,
primary purpose of bringing the individual to trial, at
that point the Sixth Amendment right attaches.
Now, the State would not have to give him a
lawyer if there was some other purpose primary, for
example, as in Gouveia, keeping the prisons safe.
For example, it's quite clear under the
circumstances, there are 14 people accused, they
couldn't have all have done it, they want to investigate
further.  Or maybe there are other examples.  But, for
the primary purpose, then the right attaches.
So you pick up Gerstein and add to Gerstein
that additional requirement.  What about that?  What
harm would that cause?  What inconvenience would it
cause, what difficulties, et cetera?
MR. COLEMAN:  I -- I think the primary issue
with that, Justice Breyer, is that it contradicts what
the Court said in Gouveia.  The Court went through a
lengthy exegesis in Gouveia about what interests in
particular are protected and talked about this, this
expression of a concern about our liberty interests; and
that the purpose issue was not something that the Court
addressed there.
It simply said that our Fourth Amendment
precedents go to the liberty interests.  Our Sixth
Amendment speedy-trial and other precedents go to the
liberty interests.
The right to counsel is not specifically a
liberty-interest protection.  It is something, as Chief
Justice Roberts mentioned a few minutes ago as we set
out in our brief, something that protects your right to
a fair trial.  And there are -- there are proceedings
that take place along the way that the Court has held
are critical stages, and we need and want counsel to be
present for them, and so we have so dictated.  But
getting behind --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I thought you -- I
thought you recognized that if he had opted to have this
examining trial to determine whether there really was
probable cause, that he would be entitled to counsel at
that examining trial.  And, yet, that's detached from
the fair trial.  The whole purpose of it is that they
will never get to trial.
MR. COLEMAN:  No.  I -- I disagree with
that.  Coleman itself says that the reason we're
requiring counsel for a preliminary hearing or an
examining trial, as we call it in Texas, is precisely
because there will be witnesses, there will be arguments
made; and you could waive defenses if not made there;
that this is very important.  So we're going to define
even, this examining trial or preliminary hearing, even
though it comes before an indictment, we're going to
define that as an event of attachment solely because
your right to a fair trial could very much be prejudiced
there.
And that -- that doesn't exist in this case,
and that certainly the failure to ask for a examining
trial does not prejudice your right to a fair trial.
Justice Breyer, you asked a hypothetical
that I would like -- I would like to address because it
is something that happens all the time, and I think
should inform the Court's decision here.  And, that is,
it is not uncommon, and some statistics that I have seen
suggest that it may happen in half of the cases, where
an individual is arrested, magistrated, released, and no
charges are ever brought.  So the bulk of your 500
protesters are never brought.
Under Mr. Rothgery's view of the Sixth
Amendment, the county -- you know, let's say somebody is
protesting whitetail deer hunting in Gillespie County.
The county would be required to appoint counsel for all
of those individuals even though --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Only if they ask for them.
Only if they ask for the lawyer.
MR. COLEMAN:  If they ask for them.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  That's why I wondered --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  And that would be subject,
wouldn't it, to sort of a condition subsequent, because
if it turned out -- I mean we -- no counsel is required
if there's no incarceration.  So that even if the right
had attached, if it turned out later that there was no
incarceration or even attempt to incarcerate, then that
would relate back, and there wouldn't be a Sixth
Amendment violation.  Isn't that right?  Wouldn't that
be the answer to the -- a partial answer?
MR. COLEMAN:  If -- if the court were to
make a rule that depended solely on incarceration, that
is true.  I don't understand Mr. Rothgery to be making
that argument because he was released on bond.
JUSTICE BREYER:  And you couldn't -- you
couldn't because of the fact that bail -- if you're
going to insist on bail, that in effect is
incarceration.  But the reason I asked the question,
which I would ask you the same, is there are a lot of
States, we're told, that do have counsel attach in
circumstances similar to this.
So they must have some way of dealing with
the problem that I raised if it's really a problem.  And
I want to -- and that's -- and I want to -- if we're
going into this, I think I need to know how this is
dealt with.
MR. COLEMAN:  That amicus brief attempts to
suggest that Texas's statute is very different from
statutes that exist in other cases -- in other States,
and that's simply not true, Your Honor.
I do not understand what happens in each of
those -- in each of those States, but I have at least
seen decisions in some of those States that suggest that
they don't act that much differently than we do, and
that -- that they do apply a critical-stage-type
analysis in evaluating --
JUSTICE BREYER:  You see, you would have
given him a counsel.  I mean, in fact, if he had wanted
one, Texas would give him one.  So Texas must have -- it
must not be a problem.  The problem, I just --
MR. COLEMAN:  You mean at the magistration?
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
MR. COLEMAN:  If he would have asked for
one, he would have gotten one.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So the problem I raise
can't be a real problem.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Let me ask on Texas
procedure.  Supposing after the magistration he wanted
to have the charges dismissed.  Could he have hired a
lawyer to come in and ask the judge to dismiss the
charges?
MR. COLEMAN:  Absolutely not, Justice
Stevens.  There were no charges pending.  This -- this
magistration that occurs in the jail is simply --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Let's say he wanted to get
a release from bond and said he wanted to terminate his
custody.  Is there any procedure whatsoever available to
a defendant to say:  I want to get this monkey off my
back after this bond premium?
MR. COLEMAN:  A release from bond, it would
have theoretically been possible, yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  And could he have a lawyer
appear before the Court to ask for that?
MR. COLEMAN:  I don't --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Could the judge say:  You
got to appear yourself?
MR. COLEMAN:  I don't think the judge would
have said:  You have to appear yourself.  I think he
could have personally come forth --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  If the prosecutor said:
You are not entitled to a lawyer, wouldn't the judge
have said:  You're crazy; of course, he is entitled to a
lawyer to come in for this proceeding?
MR. COLEMAN:  Well, that's an issue that
doesn't come up because judges don't exclude --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  We are talking about
theoretical problems here, and the question is whether
he would he have had a right to a lawyer asking him to
get released from bond.  Twenty minutes after the first
proceeding ended his father hired a lawyer and brought
him in.  Would the lawyer have been allowed to appear?
MR. COLEMAN:  The difference between the
Sixth Amendment strict requirements and practicalities
is a significant one.  I don't think the Sixth Amendment
would necessarily have required it.  The -- I am aware
--
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Even though he is paying
for his own lawyer?
MR. COLEMAN:  It is the same as every other
--
JUSTICE STEVENS:  That's your answer?
MR. COLEMAN:  -- situation.
JUSTICE STEVENS:  He would not have had a
right under the Constitution to have a lawyer come in
and say:  I want to get released from this bond.  I find
that hard to believe.
MR. COLEMAN:  He would have -- he would have
the same rights as anybody else, whether retained or --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  It would not include the
right to be represented by counsel if I understand you
correctly.
MR. COLEMAN:  It would not be a Sixth
Amendment right to counsel.  There could be a right if
you otherwise have a lawyer; that the State cannot
exclude that lawyer from participating on your behalf.
But it would not be an "attachment," an "appointment"
issue, where you are entitled to appointment of counsel
to do that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Suppose that he is out on
bail, but he has a suspicion that this alleged felony --
that that wasn't cricket because it was expunged.  So he
says to the judge:  Judge, I want to contest my being
held to some kind of criminal process because there is
no basis for the charge.
So he is out on bail.  He has no lawyer, but
he wants to contest the State's right to hold him at
all, and he asks for a lawyer to help him do that.
MR. COLEMAN:  I think if -- if he were to
ask somebody, he would be told that you can ask for an
examining trial.  If you ask for that, we will appoint
you a lawyer; and you will have your examining trial
unless the State decides to indict before we actually
get to it.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Why is the --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Now -- no, please.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Why is the question of
whether the right attaches, which seems to mean
different things in different situations, a separate
question from what I would think would be the question
here:  Whether he had the right to have counsel
appointed for him.
Why isn't that the question, and
"attachment" is simply a label that is used to express
one of the conditions for having the right to appoint a
counsel?
MR. COLEMAN:  I have given this great
thought, Justice Alito.  In my mind, the only doctrinal
difference it really makes is the situation that this
Court has described in Michigan v. Jackson, which I have
previously addressed in the Cobb case which I argued.
But in most other circumstances we think
that the analysis is essentially the same, because the
Court has never said that there isn't a right -- there
is a right to have the assistance of counsel without
having a critical stage.
In fact, I believe Justice Brennan -- if you
will allow me 15 seconds -- Justice Brennan's decision
in Maine v. Moulton said:  "Recognizing that the right
to the assistance of counsel is shaped by the need for
the assistance of counsel, we have found that the right
attaches at earlier critical stages in the criminal
justice process where the results might well settle the
accused's fate and reduce the trial, itself, to a mere
formality."
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Is it then episodic?
That is, if the right is turned on when there is a
critical event, and then the critical event is over, and
no more right to counsel until the next critical event?
It's not -- you have no right to counsel in between
those critical events?
MR. COLEMAN:  Once -- once a case gets
going, I don't believe this Court has ever been
presented with a case where there has been attachment,
there have been some critical stages, and then the State
has decided to deny access.  And we don't think that the
Court would like --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So you only need this one
critical stage, and then you get appointed counsel at
that stage, and that counsel will continue thereafter.
You don't have to --
MR. COLEMAN:  That is the usual course of
things.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Can you give me -- can you
give me some idea, or some empirical assessment, or tell
me where I could go to find out, as we sit here, how
many people are being held in custody after a
probable-cause determination and do not have counsel
appointed for them and do not have the right to have
counsel appointed to them until some other critical
phase takes place?
MR. COLEMAN:  In Texas, because the Fair
Defense Act permits the appointment of counsel for those
who are held in custody, all persons who request counsel
are appointed counsel within one business day in the
large counties and within one -- within three business
days in the smaller counties.  And so that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So then there was just a
misapplication of the statute here when this man was
held for three days, and then he requested counsel?
MR. COLEMAN:  No.  Section 1.051(j)
authorized the counties who went -- to not appoint
counsel when an individual is released on bail, and to
await -- to await the first critical stage or the
initiation of adversary judicial proceedings; whichever
occurs first, it says.  And so once this gentleman was
indicted, that would disappear; and he would be entitled
to counsel, as he was appointed counsel immediately upon
indictment.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, I'm talking about
the first phase before there was an indictment, just the
probable-cause phase.  You say even then there is --
under this Texas statute there is a right to have
counsel in one day?
MR. COLEMAN:  The Texas statute authorizes
appointment.  Gillespie County is a smaller county, so
it's three business days, Your Honor.  Upon --
JUSTICE STEVENS:  Then I am not sure why we
are having this discussion.
MR. COLEMAN:  Well, because Mr. Rothgery was
released on bail, and so the county was authorized not
to appoint counsel.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  If Mr. Rothgery had,
immediately upon being admitted to bail, said:  I want a
-- I was going to say a probable-cause hearing.  You
have a different term for it.
MR. COLEMAN:  "Examining trial."
JUSTICE SOUTER:  "Examining trial."
MR. COLEMAN:  Right.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  At that point, under Texas
law, the right to counsel within one or three business
days would have attached?
MR. COLEMAN:  Once -- once an examining
trial is scheduled, I'm not sure there are one or two
days, but requests -- I think that's what would have
happened.  The Constitution requires appointment of
counsel for an examining trial a reasonable time before
the examining trial to allow for preparation.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Now, at the -- may I?  At
the examining trial, is there a charge filed?
MR. COLEMAN:  No.  The examining trial,
itself --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  What are they finding
probable cause for if they don't know what the charge
is?
MR. COLEMAN:  This Court in Coleman said
that the examining trial, because of the potential harm
to a fair trial in the future, would define it as a --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  No, but I realize if the --
if somebody is going to demonstrate probable cause, the
probable cause has got to be probable cause to hold
someone to answer for a particular charge.  So why
hasn't there, as a matter of definition, got to be a
charge, even on your reasoning, by the time the
examining trial is held?
MR. COLEMAN:  An examining trial is an
extended version of a probable-cause determination.  It
is not holding on a charge --
JUSTICE SOUTER:  That is right.  It is a
probable-cause determination, and you've got to have an
answer:  Probable cause for what?
MR. COLEMAN:  Probable cause that -- that a
crime has been committed.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  So -- so, in other words,
you determine whether a crime has been committed without
charging the individual with the crime.
MR. COLEMAN:  If -- if that were the law,
Gerstein would have to be reversed.
JUSTICE SOUTER:  Well, I'm just asking what
you do.  Is that the case?  Is no charge filed?  Then,
at the end of the probable cause hearing you say:  Well,
we -- the judge says:  Well, you've got probable cause
to hold this person for possessing a gun after having
been convicted of a felony, but there doesn't happen to
be any charge to that effect here.  Is that the state of
the law, in fact?
MR. COLEMAN:  That is what preliminary
hearings and examining trials have always been about.
Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, Counsel.
Ms. Spinelli, you have three minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DANIELLE SPINELLI
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  It seems to me that our
precedents do say, Gerstein versus Pugh, that the
probable-cause hearing is not an adversary proceeding
where counsel is required; and if we are going to give
you relief, we have to go beyond what Gerstein says.
MS. SPINELLI:  I don't believe so, Justice
Kennedy.  It's correct that Gerstein says that the
probable-cause determination made under Gerstein is not,
itself, a critical stage, and we are not contending
otherwise.
The Gerstein determination is something
separate from the initial appearance that occurred here.
A Gerstein determination is made for the purpose of
determining whether there was probable cause for an
arrest.  It can be made ex parte.  It's essentially the
equivalent of what happens prior to arrest when a
magistrate decides whether there is probable cause to
issue a warrant.
What happened here, by contrast, was after
arrest and after the police had decided to --
Mr. Rothgery, he was brought before a magistrate.  He
was officially informed of the accusation against him,
and at that time he acquired the right to contest the
accusation against him in an examining trial, which we
believe shows that he was accused within the meaning of
the Sixth Amendment, and a prosecution had begun.
And we are not contending that that initial
proceeding was, itself, a critical stage where counsel
was required; and it's not necessary to contend that in
order to prevail on the point that that was when a
prosecution commenced, which is the only question that
we believe is properly before this Court and the only
one we are asking it to resolve.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So Texas would be
better off if they didn't have a magistration proceeding
at all, if they didn't have a proceeding to alert the
individual of the charges against him; they did not have
a proceeding to read him his rights; they did not have a
determination of probable cause.  They would be better
off if they didn't do any of that?
MS. SPINELLI:  Well, I mean I think you are
suggesting, Mr. Chief Justice, that reaffirming the rule
adopted in Jackson would create, you know, a perverse
incentive for States to do away with this proceeding.  I
don't believe that that's the case because, as Justice
Breyer observed, 45 jurisdictions already follow the
rule of appointing counsel at, or immediately following,
the initial appearance, which the -- any CDL brief lays
out and which neither Respondent nor its State amici
have contested.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, what's in it
for the State to provide this additional layer?
Because, of course, the person gets Miranda warnings
when he is arrested.  And so why -- why should the State
do this?
MS. SPINELLI:  The initial appearance serves
a specific, substantive purpose which I think is well
described in the Seventh Circuit's decision in Armstrong
cited on page 15 of our reply brief, which is this is
the proceeding at which the defendant is informed:  You
are now a criminal defendant.  This is the accusation
against you, and these are your rights as a defendant in
a criminal proceeding.
And for that reason, as the Armstrong
decision says, it is commonly recognized across
jurisdictions as the inception of a formal prosecution,
and we believe that's the rule that this Court has
already laid out in Brewer and Jackson and should
reaffirm today.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why don't you take
an extra minute?  We have eaten up your rebuttal time.
MS. SPINELLI:  Of course, absolutely.  I
mean, just to respond to one other question that arose
during the course of Respondent's argument, I think it
is important to understand that in Texas, as in other
jurisdictions, there are two phases in a felony
prosecution.
There is an initial phase that commences in
a magistrate court where a document setting out the
charges will be filed either by the police or by a
prosecutor, and the magistrate at that point has
jurisdiction over that criminal case.  It is only later
that an indictment or information will be filed in the
general trial court with jurisdiction to enter final
judgment.
But this Court has repeatedly rejected the
notion that a prosecution begins only in that second
phase.  It rejected it expressly in Moore.  It rejected
it in Coleman, in Brewer, in Jackson, and in statements
in Kirby and McNeil.  So that can't be the rule.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, Counsel.
MS. SPINELLI:  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:09 p.m., the case in the
