IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
PENN PLAZA LLC, ET AL. :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 07-581
STEVEN PYETT, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, December 1, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:00 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
PAUL SALVATORE, ESQ., New York, N.Y.; on behalf of the
Petitioners.
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondents.
CURTIS E. GANNON, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
PAUL SALVATORE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 24
CURTIS E. GANNON, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Respondents 42
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
PAUL SALVATORE, ESQ. 53
On behalf of the Petitioners
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:00 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 07-581, 14 Penn Plaza LLC v. Pyett.
Mr. Salvatore.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL SALVATORE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SALVATORE: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
There are three reasons why this Court
should reverse the Second Circuit's blanket ban on
collectively bargained, arbitral forum -- forum
selection clauses.
First, the Second Circuit ignored section
(a) of the National Labor Relations Act, by which
Congress empowered unions to bargain on behalf of their
employees over anything germane to the working
environment, including methods of workplace dispute
resolution.
The forum in which an ADEA claim is heard
falls squarely in that authority. Indeed, forbidding
unions from bargaining about the procedural right to an
arbitral forum will carve a judicial exception into the
labor law permitting employers to bypass the union and
deal directly with their employees, defeating Congress's
national labor policy.
Second, the Second Circuit failed to
consider Congress's strong endorsement of workplace
arbitration contained in both the FAA and section 301.
Third, the Second Circuit erroneously and
exclusively relied on Alexander versus Gardner-Denver.
Gardner-Denver is a case about claim preclusion, not
about enforcing an agreement to arbitrate a statutory
claim.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Salvatore, you take the
position that the only thing that is at stake here is
simply, in effect, a selection of the arbitral forum.
What do you -- what do you say to the
argument that, in fact, the -- under -- under the
collective bargaining agreement the employee is subject
not merely to the right of the union to choose the
arbitral forum, but, in fact, to -- to assert any claim
at all? What -- what is your answer to that?
MR. SALVATORE: Your Honor, in -- in our
collective bargaining agreement, the collective
bargaining agreement here, the -- the union -- the
employee tenders the claim to the union. And in the
majority of cases the -- the employee and the union's
interests will be aligned, and the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But here it wasn't.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes. What -- what --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Here we are dealing with
claims that the union said: Sorry, we are not going to
process these claims because we have some tension since
the younger workers that replaced you, we also represent
them.
So you are proposing, as far as I understand
it, a situation where these workers would have no
individual right at all if the union says: We -- we
won't represent you.
MR. SALVATORE: No, Your Honor. The -- the
clause requires all claims to be arbitrated, and "all
claims" means that the individuals then have to go to
arbitration with their private counsel in this case and
-- and have their claims heard in the arbitral forum.
So that no one is denying --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where does -- where does
the contract say anything about the -- the individual
succeeding to whatever arrangement there is between the
union and the employer?
MR. SALVATORE: Your Honor, I'm looking at
the petition appendix.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that only --
only the union can invoke the arbitration clause, not an
individual.
MR. SALVATORE: No, Your Honor. That's --
that's not the -- the way the contract reads. I'm
looking at the petition appendix page 48a, which is the
"no discrimination" clause.
And just -- just as a quick prelude to --
before I -- I go through that language, I just want to
-- to note that this argument that these employees were
not bound to go individually to arbitration was never
raised below.
The Second Circuit did not consider it.
Indeed, the Second Circuit found that the clause covered
these employees, and -- and this only came up in the
Respondents' brief in this Court after cert was granted,
the red brief.
So that this -- this argument is one that
the factual premises for were never considered below in
the district court or in -- in the court of appeals.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just so I'm clear --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't -- I don't wish to
delay your reading, but -- but as -- as part of the
decision we have to make, don't we have to have in the
background the consideration of the -- that the -- the
potentiality that the union might do just what it did
here, and that would help, it seems to me, inform our
decision on the question that you are presenting.
Now, whether or not it's properly raised
here, I do agree with you it comes rather late. But
isn't it a factor that we must necessarily consider?
MR. SALVATORE: Yes, Your Honor. And --
and, indeed, the collective bargaining agreements --and
we'll look at the language in one second -- are -- are,
as this Court has recognized, a little more complicated
to understand than -- than average contracts. You have
to look at the practice and the custom.
The practice here for this union has been to
turn over claims to the individuals. We've had this
clause in place for nine years. The New York courts
have enforced it repeatedly and -- and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is this included in the
question presented anyway?
MR. SALVATORE: It was -- it was not, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does it have anything to do
with the way the Second Circuit resolved this case?
MR. SALVATORE: It does not, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Second Circuit simply
said you could not deprive an individual of the right to
a court trial.
MR. SALVATORE: Absolutely, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the issue is whether --
now, if -- if we held that you can require the
individual to go to arbitration, in some later case we
could confront the question of whether, if the union is
in exclusive control of the arbitration and the -- the
individual will -- will not get a fair arbitrated deal,
that would invalidate it.
But it has nothing to do with the question
presented: Is an arbitration clause which clearly and
unmistakably waives the union member's right to a
judicial forum enforceable.
MR. SALVATORE: Absolutely, Justice Scalia.
That is my argument with respect to why this does not
need to be taken up now.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I hate to get into
this, you know, 9 years history of dealings between the
union and -- and the employees.
MR. SALVATORE: There is no factual record,
Your Honor, for it in the record at all. And --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, there is at least
some. The collective bargaining agreement is in here.
And if we are deciding anything at all, we are going to
decide whether in this case the -- the Second Circuit
was correct.
The question is posed in generalities, but
we are not going to decide the general question in total
ignorance of this case. And in this case we've got the
particular collective bargaining agreement in front of
us, and you started to answer the question that -- that
I and Justice Ginsburg posed by referring to the "no
discrimination" clause.
MR. SALVATORE: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And will -- will you go on
to that?
MR. SALVATORE: I will. The clause is -- I
am looking at petition appendix 48a, the "no
discrimination" clause. This is the -- the clause at
issue in this case. It covers any present or future
employee. It goes on to state the -- the types of
protected characteristics that are covered by this
clause as well as the -- the relevant statutes
incorporating statutory law, public law, in the -- in
the clause.
And then in the second-to-last sentence five
lines up from the bottom it states: "All such claims
shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration
procedure, Articles 5 and 6, as the sole and exclusive
remedy for violations."
JUSTICE SCALIA: What does that mean? Does
that mean that they must go to arbitration even if the
union decides that, you know, this claim is -- is so
insignificant we don't want to take it to arbitration?
MR. SALVATORE: What this means, Justice
Scalia, is that these individuals cannot go to court.
They have to go either through the union, as has been
the practice here, or the union will turn the claim over
to them and let them go by themselves.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Where did we get this
phrase -- where do we get the language "or the union
will turn over to them"? The only thing that I can see
in here that addresses that is on page 46a. And the --
the clause there reads: "All union claims are brought
by the union alone, and no individual shall have the
right to compromise or settle any claim without the
written permission of the union."
There is -- there is a lot of gray area in
that, but the one thing that seems clear is that the
union has total control over any claim, including an
arbitration claim.
And that seems to lend some substance to the
-- to the point made by the other side that if we accept
your position here, we are accepting a position not
nearly as far -- that the designation -- a procedural
designation of a forum should be enforced but that, in
fact, total control over the assertion of a statutory
Federal right is also being ceded. Now, why doesn't
that language from section 46 support that?
MR. SALVATORE: Your Honor, it does not
support it for the -- for the following reason. The --
the section 30 clause on page 48a. The "no
discrimination" clause, was added in 1999. It was added
after the Court's decision in Wright. It was added to
comply with Wright. That's an undisputed fact.
It -- it was added as a separate section
with a separate arbitration promise because "all claims"
is broader than "union claims." "Union claims" was
something that goes back for 75 years, but before we put
in section 30 --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, then, "all such
claims" -- "such claims" refers among other things to
the statutory right.
MR. SALVATORE: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And if the statutory right
is the appropriate section of an arbitration agreement
and the union has ultimate control of the arbitration
agreement, then it follows that the union has got
ultimate control over the assertion of the statutory
right.
MR. SALVATORE: No, Your Honor, not unless
-- not if the union turns that over. The employee's
reading --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Where -- where is the
guarantee that the -- if the union says, we don't want
to touch this, as in this case, that the employee has
the right either to arbitrate or, for that matter, to
sue? Where do you find that?
MR. SALVATORE: Your Honor, that -- that
right is -- is described from this language, "all such
claims." There is another route. What Articles 4, 5,
and 6 describe is that -- that the -- you must go to the
office of the contract arbitrator, and it doesn't
specify whether you go with the union or you go by
yourself.
JUSTICE ALITO: Has any court decided this
issue of the interpretation of the collective bargaining
agreement in this particular.
MR. SALVATORE: No court has decided this
very issue like this, Justice Alito. But what the New
York courts have said is in interpreting this clause
over the last nine years, that they compel the
individual union member to go to arbitration when they
have brought claims in court in violation of this
clause.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Salvatore, I -- I
didn't think we took this case to -- to determine the
specific meaning as to this issue of this -- of this
particular contract, which is not an issue of national
importance. Why -- why must we decide the case here?
Could we not simply decide that the Second
Circuit was either correct, in which case the case would
be over, or incorrect to say that you -- that you -- you
cannot -- you cannot in a collective bargaining
agreement have the union responsible for arbitration of
Title VII claims? Why couldn't we just decide that?
And then if there is any issue of whether
such concession to the union deprives an individual of
even the right to arbitration, that can -- that can be
decided on remand by the Second Circuit, couldn't it?
MR. SALVATORE: Absolutely, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the Second Circuit
could look into all of these details.
MR. SALVATORE: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And inquire into the New
York law that you're talking about now and that I don't
recall being in any of the briefing.
MR. SALVATORE: Justice Scalia, as cited in
our briefing, there is a long footnote listing the
cases. But -- but you're right, the -- the issue here
really is can the union agree to this? And that goes to
Congress's giving the union the power under section 9(a)
of the National Labor Relations Act to be the exclusive
bargaining representative --
JUSTICE BREYER: I ask you -- let me ask you
a naive question possibly that may -- may reflect a
misunderstanding. But my understanding is that suppose
you are -- you are an employee. You believe your
employer discriminated against you, say, on gender
grounds. You have to go to the EEOC.
Now, the EEOC looks into it and very often
what they do is they don't really resolve it. They just
give you a letter that gives you a right to sue.
So here Congress was so worried about this
kind of thing that they said our specialized agency, you
know, won't be the bottom line. People will go there
and then they have a right to sue later.
Now, that's how Congress felt about this
particular statute. Why would they want the union to be
the bottom line when, in fact, the employee himself
hasn't agreed? I mean, the employee might agree in the
first place. He might say I'm going to take that
letter, I'm not going to bring my suit. That's up to
him or her. But here the employee wants to bring her
suit, just like the EEOC letter.
MR. SALVATORE: Well, Justice Breyer, the
ADEA provides not only a right to go to court after
you've gotten your right-to-sue letter or waited 60
days, but -- but it also provides multiple, as this
court recognized in Gilmer, multiple avenues that
Congress wants to use: Conciliation, persuasion,
conference --
JUSTICE BREYER: Exactly. That's my point,
is that the statute as a whole reflects a considerable
effort not to let this employee get cut off at the pass
and an employee who is reasonably determined to get to
court probably can do it. It's not definite. The EEOC
doesn't have to give them a letter giving them a right
to sue, but probably can do it.
And if that's a situation where you have
this whole expert thing cut in, it seems to me there is
a parallel here that Congress then wouldn't want the
union and the employer together to be able to cut that
right to sue off, at least not very easily.
MR. SALVATORE: Justice Breyer, you have
competing policies here because you have the policies of
the labor laws which say that unions should have a -- a
broad portfolio of -- of topics to bargain about. This
Court has said that anything germane to the working
environment, dispute resolution mechanisms --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the union could not
bargain about these anti-discrimination rights. These
are rights given to individuals by Congress. The union
couldn't bargain about them the way it bargains about
collective rights, the way it bargains about wages and
hours and -- and other things. This is, this is not a
bargainable right. This is a right Congress says you as
an individual have a right not to be discriminated
against. This is nothing that the union can bargain
about.
MR. SALVATORE: Justice Ginsburg, I agree to
the degree we're talking about -- you're talking about
substantive rights. What we are talking about here is a
procedural switch. As this Court has approved in
Gilmer, what we are talking about is moving the forum
from the judicial one to the -- to the arbitral one.
And here in the -- the scheme of a collective bargaining
agreement where arbitration is the preferred remedy and
has been used for many, many years very successfully in
the -- in the -- by those parties.
It's -- it's taking employment arbitration
and putting it in the collective bargaining context.
And -- and there is, unions do this in many different
ways. Unions bargain about substantive rights. We are
not talking about substantive rights here, though. We
are talking about procedural rights. And the policies
of the labor laws are served and the policies of the
ADEA and the anti-discrimination statutes are not
disserved in any way.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Salvatore, would you --
would you object to or oppose a ruling that said -- that
says yes, the -- the right can be subjected to union
arbitration, but if the union chooses not to arbitrate
it the individual must have the right to arbitrate it on
his own?
MR. SALVATORE: That's -- that's the
practice under this agreement, Your Honor. We would --
we would wholeheartedly endorse that -- that rule
because, that's the practice here. And there is -- when
you're talking about statutory rights, why would the
union want to interfere with the ability of the employee
to get a forum if their interests are not aligned? This
goes to the tension that this Court has -- has
recognized in its prior cases.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that -- that means
that if there is z totally frivolous claim and the
employer -- pardon me, the union says we are not going
to arbitrate, the -- the employee still has the right to
then proceed? The employer hasn't gotten very much.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He has got an arbitration
instead of a lawsuit.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If you would -- if you
would answer the question. The employer hasn't gotten
very --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- very much for the
bargain.
MR. SALVATORE: Justice Kennedy, the
employer has gotten arbitration and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In the hard cases.
MR. SALVATORE: Well, in --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it hasn't got the
ability to have the union help them weed out frivolous
claims.
MR. SALVATORE: Well that's true. The
union -- the union wouldn't play that function, except
that we have in this industry, the real estate industry
in New York City, a longstanding relationship that --
that goes back decades. And -- and -- so it's a mature
collective bargaining arrange -- arrangement.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm -- I'm -- I'm
not sure that employers nationwide would -- would --
would accept -- would accept that view.
MR. SALVATORE: Well, I think that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And again, maybe that's --
that's a reason for us not to reach it in this case.
MR. SALVATORE: Well, one of the issues
that -- that Congress allows the bargaining parties to
figure out is what the scope of their collective
bargaining arrangement should be. That's one of the
hallmarks of the NRLA. So, yes, some collective
bargaining parties may make that choice, Justice
Kennedy; others may make a different choice.
What is the alternative here? The
alternative is that employers can bypass the union.
They can just go around the union and -- and have
individual Gilmer agreements signed up. That's what the
D.C. Circuit said en banc in -- in -- in the ALPA Pilots
case.
And indeed, the -- the union in that case
was arguing the position that we are arguing here, that
this is a mandatory subject of bargaining, and this is
right in the union's portfolio of -- of what they should
be using to -- to bargain with the employer because it's
a procedural right and there are no substantive outcomes
that are diminished in any way whatsoever.
Unions are deemed trustworthy enough to
bring lawsuits in the federal courts on behalf of their
members. Under principles of associational standing,
associational standing, the members are bound by
their -- their union's actions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And nonmembers, too?
What about the people who -- who are not members of the
union, but they have to pay an equivalent amount for the
union's services in collective bargaining? They would
be bound as well? They couldn't --
MR. SALVATORE: Absolutely, Justice
Ginsburg. The -- the -- the -- and this type of service
is one of the core functions that an agency payer would
have to pay for. The LM2 that 32B, the local, filed
here on behalf of 80,000 employees has two agency fee
payers out of 80,000. So it's not really an issue in
this case.
But that's what unions are for. When
Congress makes them the exclusive bargaining
representative you're -- you're in for it one way or the
other. You're -- you're -- either you're in or you're
out. And if you're in, then you have to go along with
the -- the -- the entire collective bargaining deal that
is made --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You said -- the -- fine.
I -- I grasp your answer to that. But you
said that the employee would have the absolute right if
the union says, "sorry, for whatever reason we can't
represent you," absolute right to that arbitral forum.
What -- who pays then?
I mean, if the union is in it, then the
union and the employer are going to split -- split the
cost. But what happens when the union drops out and you
have the individual and the employer in this arbitral
forum?
MR. SALVATORE: In -- in this situation the
employer pays. That's the only -- the Office of the
Contract Arbitrator is an -- essentially a mini-
American Arbitration Association that these parties have
set up, and the -- the RAB, which is the multi- employer
organization that represents all the real estate
employers in -- in New York, they pay for the
arbitration, because the union in this case has said we
are not going to pay.
As you point out rightly, if the union is
not involved, they -- they shouldn't pay. So there is
no cost to the employee for that arbitration and -- and
as Justice Edwards said in the D.C. Circuit Kohl case,
that -- that that procedure is -- is a fair one, to have
the employer pick up the -- the costs given -- given the
-- the balance between the -- the two of them.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Salvatore, are you
going to get to your explanation about Gardner-Denver
before you're all through?
MR. SALVATORE: Yes -- yes, Your Honor,
Justice Stevens. Gardner-Denver is -- is a case, as
this Court has described, that -- that didn't involve
the enforceability of an agreement to arbitrate. The
Gardner-Denver line of cases, McDonald and Barrentine
and Gardner-Denver, had the quite different issue as
this Court said in Gilmer, of whether a contract-based
claim precludes subsequent judicial resolution of a
statutory claim; and so that distinguishes the rule.
But factually these cases are very different as -- as
well.
Mr. Alexander in Alexander v.
Gardner-Denver, the contract there, the collective
bargaining agreement, had a plain vanilla arbitration
clause. It didn't have a clause like the one we looked
at page, petition appendix 48a, that incorporated all
the -- the statutes and gave the arbitrator the power to
sit and -- and to apply those statutes and apply the law
under those statutes and apply the remedies that derive
from those statutes. In that case, the arbitrator sat
as the proctor of the bargain between the collective
bargaining parties, and didn't have that broad
authority, as this Court has -- has recognized.
And -- and we agree that arbitration that --
that resolves just a collective bargaining agreement
claim should not be dispositive of a statutory claim.
They're fish and fowl. So that Gardner-Denver is
correctly decided. Gardner-Denver puts out the rule for
-- for that situation. This is a different situation
that we are talking about.
And -- and here, unlike in Gardner-Denver,
where Mr. Alexander would have had no access to the --
to have his Title VII claim heard if this Court had
affirmed the Tenth Circuit, he -- the door to the
courthouse would have been shut in that case for
Mr. Alexander -- here we are trying to move to compel
arbitration so that there is a forum, and -- and that
these individuals -- these employees --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But not a judicial -- not
a judicial forum.
MR. SALVATORE: An arbitral forum, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Salvatore, would you
just clarify something for me? I thought that the union
ceded its rights to the employees and said that they
could use this collective bargaining agreement's
arbitral regime so long as they paid for it. But you
tell me they don't have to pay anything; the employer
pays everything.
MR. SALVATORE: That's -- that's correct.
That's the union counsel's affidavit. He was saying he
doesn't -- the union doesn't want to pick up the costs,
Justice Ginsburg, but the collective bargaining
agreement says there is two payers in the Office of the
Contract Arbitrator, the RAB and the union. If the
union is not paying, then the RAB has to pay.
Mr. Chief Justice, I'd like to reserve the
rest of my time for rebuttal, please.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Frederick.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID C. FREDERICK
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. FREDERICK: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
The Second Circuit's judgment should be
affirmed for three reasons. First, a collective
bargaining agreement gives the union exclusive control
over workers' grievances. Second, unions have inherent
conflicts of interest with respect to individual
statutory anti-discrimination rights; and third, unions
lack authority to serve as gatekeepers of individual
workers' substantive ADEA rights.
With respect to the first point, a
collective bargaining agreement generally gives the
union exclusive control over whether to bring grievances
on behalf of workers and how such grievances are
pursued. In such circumstances -- which is this case,
the workers have not advanced the requisite agreement to
arbitrate, and control over the arbitral forum to
satisfy this Court's standards in Gilmer for effectively
vindicating the workers' statutory anti-discrimination
rights.
JUSTICE ALITO: Under your first point, are
you saying it's impossible for there to be a collective
bargaining agreement that reads the way Mr. Salvatore
reads this collective bargaining agreement; a collective
bargaining agreement which says that the union's -- that
the grievance must be arbitrated, and it will be done
either by the union, or if the union declines to pursue
it, by the individual employee?
MR. FREDERICK: Justice Alito, I've looked
comprehensively through the cases. We've never found a
collective bargaining agreement that gives the kind of
interpretation that Mr. Salvatore offered in this case.
Now, is it theoretically possible that a collective
bargaining agreement would confer on individuals the
rights this Court said in Gilmer are necessary to
vindicate that? I would acknowledge it's theoretically
possible, but it has to be done within the confines of
whether there is actual consent by the individual to the
arbitration, whether the individual has control over the
mechanisms of arbitration, and whether or not the
structure of the arbitral forum effectively vindicates
the individual's substantive rights.
JUSTICE ALITO: But there is nothing in
Federal labor law that would preclude the negotiation of
a collective bargaining agreement like that.
MR. FREDERICK: Nothing except this Court's
case in Magnavox where the Court said that the union may
not bargain away an individual's rights where there
would be a conflict between the union's interests and
the individual's. Here, because this is a
discrimination claim, unions are often brought as
defendants in such claims, particularly in circumstances
as here, where the union agreed to the conditions that
gave rise to the discrimination on the basis of age by
these workers.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Even in a case in which you
don't have -- assume -- just assume for the sake of
argument that we don't have the discrimination issue or
the conflict issue. I understood you elsewhere to be
arguing that there had to be the kind of knowing,
intelligent and individual waiver, which I would suppose
a collective bargaining agreement will never include.
So I thought it was the -- ultimately the implication of
your argument that in any -- in any case in which
arbitration is claimed, there would have to be -- or a
right to go to arbitration is claimed by the employer --
there would have to be, not merely the collective
bargaining agreement, but a specific waiver by the
employee to -- to go ahead and do that. Is that right?
MR. FREDERICK: That -- that's correct. And
that's why I think the Gilmer point is -- is essential
here, Justice Souter and Justice Alito. Because in
Gilmer there was individual consent; there needs to be
such individual consent under the ADEA waiver itself,
and knowing and individual waiver is necessary before
the person can waive the substantive ADEA rights. That
would need to be part of the hypothetical collective
bargaining agreement that I was positing with Justice
Alito.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: Would that mean --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Go ahead.
JUSTICE ALITO: Would that mean that the
employer could not unilaterally impose an arbitration
requirement on employees?
MR. FREDERICK: I think that would follow,
as that would be a condition of employment that could
not be imposed. The airline --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It wouldn't be
unilaterally imposing, right? He would say if you're
going to work for me, you've got to arbitrate, and that
could be negotiated theoretically, and with individual
employee. And -- I mean, the whole point, the whole
benefit of collective bargaining is that that doesn't
happen. You say, well, the employer has a lot of
leverage if he wants to insist upon that, but it would
not -- it would be a matter for negotiation between the
individual and the company.
MR. FREDERICK: That's correct, Mr. Chief
Justice, but there are two different points at which the
condition of employment arose. I understood the
questions on this side to be after the agreement had
taken place and the worker was already on the work site.
Under your hypothetical, if an employee gains entrance
to the work force and is asked, "will you sign this,"
there is individual consent in that circumstance. That
is the fact situation in the Air Line Pilots case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the one thing that's
uniform throughout in your answer is that the collective
bargaining agreement alone can never subject the
employee to -- to mandatory arbitration?
MR. FREDERICK: That's -- that's how we read
this Court's statutory --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is also true -- is that
also true with an ordinary tort or any other kind of
suit?
MR. FREDERICK: Sorry. With an ordinary --
JUSTICE BREYER: A tort suit. It says, some
-- the union -- the same thing here, but we are not
concerned with discrimination; we are concerned with
workplace safety. Somebody is hurt as a result of
machine improperly functioning, or there isn't adequate
notice or so forth. Is your view the same there?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, I think that those
category of cases do stand in a different position
because there is less of an inherent conflict of
interest. The union there --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, the union is not going
to be the Defendant typically in a tort case where the
employer is responsible.
JUSTICE BREYER: Doesn't this allow
discrimination -- doesn't this refer to discrimination
by the employer?
MR. FREDERICK: It refers to discrimination,
and as we cite on page 27 of our brief, there are
provisions in the anti-discrimination laws that are
specifically directed at union discrimination. The
legislative history of these statutes indicates that
discrimination by unions was one of the concerns
animating Congress --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, you say section 30
doesn't say anything about union discrimination
particularly; it just talks about discrimination.
MR. FREDERICK: Yes. In fact --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. So you think
sometimes unions do discriminate?
MR. FREDERICK: And that's why --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. And sometimes
unions also would rather have the more effective machine
or sometimes unions feel their workers are stupid not to
read the machine label properly or -- I mean, I can
replicate anything you might think. We can think of
tort suits, the two of us, which could put unions and
employees on opposite shores, just as we can think of
discrimination suits. Most unions don't want
discrimination. I mean, most of the time. And most
unions don't want dangerous machines most of the time.
So if I decide for you in this case, am I
also saying that they can't arbitrate ordinary tort
suits or contract suits or just whether or not the
workplace which is made of wood is filled with termites?
I mean, you know?
MR. FREDERICK: I think, Justice Breyer,
that the discrimination cases do stand in a different
category because of the inherent conflict of the --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's the only reason?
Because, in other words, if I think I see no more reason
why a union today, whatever was true 40 years ago, that
I see no more reason today why a union would like
discrimination, then I can see a reason why they would
like a dangerous machine?
MR. FREDERICK: I don't think Congress --
JUSTICE BREYER: If I think that, then I
should decide against you?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, no, because there are
two other reasons: The exclusive control over the
machinery and the union serving as the gatekeeper.
I'm not aware of tort suits being subjects
of collective bargaining, Justice Breyer. Nor am I
aware of cases in which the unions have given up
individuals' tort claims in situations, principally
because unions are not the persons against whom such
tort suits are brought.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but those -- I'm
sorry.
Those examples are examples. You're getting
down to individual cases. I thought you drew the global
line in answer -- which would answer Justice Breyer's
question by saying the -- in the cases that we're
talking about here, Congress has passed a statute giving
a specific individual right and that individual right
cannot in effect be compromised except in -- except in
violation of that statute, and that's where we draw the
global line so that when you got to torts, you'd look at
the individual situation rather than draw a categorical
line.
MR. FREDERICK: Yes, you would, but the
principles this Court has applied in looking at that
broad line, I'm trying to suggest that there might be
situations in which those principles, where the union is
serving as the gatekeeper, thereby not allowing a person
to vindicate his individual rights in the tort context,
to be not --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I agree with you, but I
think -- I don't want to put words in Justice Breyer's
mouth --
JUSTICE BREYER: Very helpful of you.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I thought what he was
getting at is, if I hold for you here, am I going to
have to hold for you in every case in which somebody has
in effect a tort claim which is subject to an
arbitration clause?
MR. FREDERICK: And the answer is no. I
thought --
JUSTICE BREYER: Then I replicate my
question because what I'm thinking is simply that there
are thousands, maybe tens of thousands, kinds of claims
that people go to arbitration over. And what I'm
wondering here is if you win here, what is the set of
such claims that I have now said that a union, through a
collective bargaining contract, can force the employee
against his will to go to arbitration over? I don't
have a feeling for that from the briefs. I don't have a
feeling that you want to say that discrimination claims
are special in that regard, that there's no line in that
regard, or that there's some other line.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, Justice Breyer, I
think that your question really is getting at the theory
behind collective bargaining agreements and what extent
the union can exercise control over the individual
rights and circumstances of employment. That question
is a very complex question over which many, many --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, can you give me a
hint as to the principle?
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK: I -- well, I think that
there are limits, of course, on the union's authority
that have been recognized in this Court's decisions, and
I don't think that ruling in the workers' favor in this
circumstance opens up any kind of Pandora's box at all,
because all we are arguing for is that the
Gardner-Denver line, which was written by this Court
unanimously more 30 years ago, continue to be the law of
the land, as the Court has reaffirmed --
JUSTICE ALITO: What if a collective
bargaining agreement requires the arbitration of
discrimination claims that are not based on Federal law?
Maybe they are based on -- they are based on State law
that goes further than Federal law, or maybe they are
based on a type of discrimination that's prohibited
neither by Federal or State law. Maybe it's
discrimination against young people under 40. Could
those be -- those would still be discrimination claims
with the same potential for -- with a potential for a
conflict of interest. Could they be subjected to
mandatory arbitration?
MR. FREDERICK: I -- I think that is a
harder case, Justice Alito, but I think that the answer
under this Court's decisions in Gardner-Denver points
the way here, in footnote 19 of the decision. Where the
union controls that process and where the union is a
potential defendant in that circumstance, the workers'
individual rights cannot be subordinated --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about --
MR. FREDERICK: -- to the union's control.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- if it's not a
statutory right; it's just a wrongful discharge? One
practical problem is so often these are overlapping
claims. You can say, "I was discriminated against
before because of my age. I was arbitrarily
discriminated against. It was a wrongful discharge. It
was a discharge without just cause." Usually, there's
multiple claims that can be made, and some of them would
be bargainable, I mean, would come under the union -- I
mean if it was just a question of the worker says, "I
was discharged without just cause," no Title 7 or
anything else, that would come under the arbitration
clause, wouldn't it?
MR. FREDERICK: Yes, and I think that there
have been conditions of employment and discharge that
have been arbitrable, and I don't see that there is a --
an issue there where -- except where that intersection
with the statutory discrimination rights occurs. And
Congress has made a different policy judgment with
respect to individual waivers of such rights in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why has it? Why has it? I
mean, let's assume that my gripe with my employer is
that he hasn't paid me my salary for the last two
months. Now, you can't take away my right to that
unless I voluntarily waived it. What is sacrosanct
about the fact that my grievance here has some
discrimination attached to it?
Your briefing talks as though it is
something totally apart from a mere economic right.
Ninety-nine percent of the time, you're talking about
economics. "I was fired because of discrimination." "I
wasn't promoted because of discrimination and therefore
I lost this -- this amount of money or that amount of
money."
Why is it unthinkable that the -- that the
employee would have to go through the union-prescribed
arbitration for the fact that he wasn't paid for the
last three months but does not have to do it for an
economic injury that occurs because of discrimination?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, I'm not sure actually
in answering your hypothetical that they would
necessarily have to go through the union on the
nonpayment because of the Fair Labor Standards Act case.
This Court in Barrentine said that, where an FSLA claim
is at issue, the worker does not -- is not confined or
precluded after arbitrating at the union grievance
process from bringing an FLSA suit in court.
So I want to reserve, accepting all of your
hypothetical, Justice Scalia, but in further answer to
the point, I think it's important to keep in mind that
in the discrimination context, you're talking about more
than just money. Here my clients are older workers who
are forced into more physically strenuous positions that
they had gotten away from by virtue of their growth in
seniority at the building.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, isn't that
kind of conflict always present whenever you have
collective action? I mean, you may be a particularly
good worker and could demand a higher wage than the
union has negotiated, but you're still bound by the
collective bargaining agreement. That happens in every
situation where you have collective action.
MR. FREDERICK: Certainly, Mr. Chief
Justice, but where Congress has made a choice that
individual claims for individual anti-discrimination
rights need to be vindicated in particular ways, and
where this Court's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they don't
have to be vindicated in particular ways. The
individuals can agree to arbitrate these claims, and
they would be -- the arbitration would be binding.
MR. FREDERICK: Certainly, but there is
individual consent in that circumstance. I would like
to make a couple of other points before closing.
One is that on pages 4 to 5 in the brief in opposition
to cert we specifically raise the issue that the union
controls the arbitration, and there is no opportunity
for individual arbitration under this collective
bargaining agreement.
There is nothing in the provision set out in
the petition appendix that gives individual rights, the
individuals the right to arbitrate under this collective
bargaining agreement. The payment provision calls for
percent by the employer and 50 percent by the
employee with the employer having the sole right to
terminate the arbitrator for any or no reason at all.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You did raise that issue,
but you didn't say that the consequence of that issue
was that you win. You said the consequence of the fact
that that issue was involved in this case was a good
reason not to -- for us to accept cert. And we didn't
take your advice on that.
MR. FREDERICK: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it's a totally
different issue whether because of that question you --
you should -- you should win the case.
MR. FREDERICK: Certainly, the
interpretation of the collective bargaining agreement is
fairly included within the question presented. And as
this Court found in Wright in a situation where it
granted certiorari on the very same question here but
then looked at the specific provisions of the collective
bargaining agreement to determine that, in fact, under
the facts there a different rule applied for a clear and
unambiguous waiver.
All we are saying here is that under this
provision there is no opportunity for the individual to
arbitrate, and that raises a -- a problem analogous to
the one that is in Wright. We think that is fairly
included within the question presented, and that the
Court can affirm on that basis, certainly where the
Second Circuit had relied on precedent that said that
where the individual doesn't have a right, that it is
union control of arbitration. That is consistent with
Gardner-Denver.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't have to be
within the question presented. You -- you can sustain
the judgment below on any ground.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The only question is
whether we will -- we will agree that we should inquire
into new ground. That's all.
MR. FREDERICK: My only point is that this
is one of these fuzzy areas where we are not making
independent, alternate ground of affirmance. I think
our argument is fairly included within the question
presented and can be affirmed on the basis of that
argument.
If the court has no further questions --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the argument
that you are -- if you win this case, you are subjecting
the employee to a worse situation because the employer
will simply say: Fine, I don't have to bargain anything
with the union. If you want to work in this workplace,
you sign an arbitration agreement that says you have no
access to the court, and you have to -- just like in
Gilmer, just like in Circuit City.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
guess I would answer that question by saying we will pay
our money and take our chances in the sense that the
unions here are supporting the workers where the unions
are acknowledging that there is this kind of conflict of
interest, and the question of whether or not imposing
arbitration on the individual workers would be a
condition of employment. That is a question that you
can safely leave for another day.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they may go
the other way. They may say: Look, we don't like to
arbitrate. In fact, the arbitration is of great benefit
to workers, but it is very expensive to bring these
claims, even with the prospect of recovering fees.
Most of them like the idea that the union is
going to stand up for them and take it to management,
but they could say: Look, we don't want it. If -- if
you are discriminated against, you know, sue us.
MR. FREDERICK: Mr. Chief Justice, in fact,
empirically that is not correct. There is a study that
is cited in a footnote in one of the amicus briefs that
arbitration is more expensive than bringing civil
litigation. And it is because the -- under -- under
their provision if you pay 50 percent of the
arbitrator's costs, you can run up quite a big tab that
you would not have to pay --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But under my
scenario, the employer wouldn't have to pay for
arbitration. There would be -- there would be no
arbitration at all.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, under your scenario, I
think where the employer would control the arbitral
process, the arbitrator knows who is buttering his
bread.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. There is no
arbitration. The employer says: Look, I don't think I
discriminate. I've got a good record. I'm not going to
agree to arbitrate claims. I'm going to make people go
to court because there will be fewer claims brought.
MR. FREDERICK: And -- and that has been the
law for 30 years, and we think it should continue to be
the law, Mr. Chief Justice.
If the marketplace is going to help weed out
those claims, that's certainly the province of lawyers
taking these cases and clients deciding whether or not
to tell everybody to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the point is
there are benefits to employees from arbitration as
well.
MR. FREDERICK: Certainly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The employer may not
agree to it. If he doesn't have any protection, if it
doesn't buy him anything, if employees can still go to
court, what's the -- what's the point?
MR. FREDERICK: That's why this Court has
always said that individual consent and agreement is a
fundamental precept of arbitration. Where that
agreement is absent, a worker should not be forced.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Frederick.
Mr. Gannon.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CURTIS E. GANNON
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE RESPONDENTS
MR. GANNON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court: Respondents' fundamental right to a
workplace free of invidious, class-based discrimination
is something their union has no power to barter away in
collective bargaining, and the union --
JUSTICE BREYER: I -- I just want to be sure
that at some point you answer this question, if you can.
I -- I -- the -- the issue in front of us,
as I see it, is just what you said: When can a union
require the worker to accept arbitration rather than a
court case in an instance where the union member has not
signed a special waiver? That's the question, right?
Okay.
And what I think some of us were struggling
for here is: If we say yes to you they can force them,
or no to you they can't, what's the principle?
Now, the easiest kind of case where you tend
to think they can force the worker into arbitration is
where the right grows out of the collective bargaining
agreement, period.
Then we have what we were talking about with
Justice Souter, a common law tort claim. Then we might
--
have a State law giving a claim. Then we might have a
Federal law like this one giving a claim.
And we just heard -- I would assume if
Justice Scalia thought of such a case, then the response
was, which was the FSLA: Oh, well, maybe we can't, you
know, force the worker to give that one up either.
So what is the line here that we are drawing
with this case? Is it a line that says discrimination
laws, Federal or special? Federal laws are special?
State laws are special? Common law is special?
Collective bargaining, too? What is the principle?
MR. GANNON: Yes, Justice Breyer. This
Court's cases have not yet described a specific law, and
JUSTICE BREYER: That's why I am asking you
for the principle.
MR. GANNON: I think that the -- the best
line that we have is -- is stated in both Gardner-Denver
and Barrentine as contrasting statutory rights that are
related to collective activity, and especially economic
activity, are the kinds of things that are normally
delegated to the union. Those are the sorts of things
that the union can actually engage in collective
bargaining about. And when the union negotiates the
underlying right, then it makes perfect sense that the
labor arbitration framework that's set forth here would
continue to resolve disputes that are arising under --
out of that specific right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why doesn't this
come within that?
MR. GANNON: Because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why don't many of these
cases, if not most of them, come within that? The union
negotiates the salaries for various levels, and then the
person says: I should be at this level. The only
reason I didn't get it was that I was discriminated
against.
MR. GANNON: Well, I -- I think, Justice
Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you call it a
non-economic theory. Phooey, it's an economic case.
MR. GANNON: But I think what's important,
Justice Scalia, is -- is, though -- is the line that the
Court stated in Barrentine: That if a statute is
designed to give specific, minimum protection to
individual workers, then that's the sort of thing that
the union doesn't have the power to engage in collective
bargaining over.
And so your salary may well be something
that the union can normally bargain about. But if you
want to assert that the -- that the employer or the
union -- because both are the types -- the types of
entities that can be charged with discrimination under
Title VII or the ADA or these other statutes -- the
reason that they gave you a lower salary was on the
basis of something for which you had a Federal statutory
protection, then -- then you have an independent
statutory right that the union's majoritarian
decisionmaking processes should not be in the process of
controlling --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is not taking away the
right. The -- the union is not taking away the right.
It's just saying to vindicate it, you have to go to
arbitration instead of to the courts.
MR. GANNON: Yes. And the difference is
that the union is making the decision about where the
claim will be vindicated. And in this case in
particular, the union is going to control whether the
claim will actually be able to be officially vindicated.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have -- you have
focused on the fact that Congress has given individual
rights. But for the many matters that you say are the
subject of collective bargaining, you don't need a
statute. I don't need a statute to negotiate with
someone whether I get paid $20 an hour or $15 an hour
for a particular job. And, yet, that is something that
you give up when you join the union, and you are subject
to collective bargaining.
MR. GANNON: Absolutely, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why isn't it
-- why isn't it the same with these statutory rights?
Why aren't they subject to collective bargaining as
well?
MR. GANNON: Well, I -- even the employer
here is not claiming that the underlying statutory right
is subject to collective bargaining. They are just
saying --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. No. I am --
the -- the forum for asserting the right.
MR. GANNON: Well, in this instance Congress
gave individual employees the right to bring a civil
action in a judicial forum as a means of enforcing their
antidiscrimination claims. And although arbitration may
always provide an alternative forum for that, this Court
has repeatedly made clear that arbitration is always a
matter of contract. And it does not impose on the
employer any more than on the employee a requirement
that they arbitrate a claim when they --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why would any
employer want to agree to arbitration under this system?
He gets nothing from it. You said you get the ben -- to
arbitrate except when you don't arbitrate.
MR. GANNON: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, I
don't think that that's true. Since 1974, this has been
the law of the land, and it's been even after Gilmer in
every circuit --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That just begs the
question that your interpretation of Gardner-Denver is
correct.
MR. GANNON: Well, it -- it is the
prevailing interpretation in every circuit that has
considered the question since Gilmer except the Fourth
Circuit. And if you look at the empirical data that's
mentioned in some of amicus briefs, including the
particular amicus brief of the National Academy of
Arbitrators, it is true that even when there is just a
labor arbitration machinery that was invalid under the
terms of Gardner-Denver and would not be binding on the
employee if the employee happens to lose in that
arbitration, in most of those cases when the employee
loses that arbitration, he does not go on to file an
independent case in federal court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your position -- so
their position is going to hurt most employees, because
assuming that the employer wants to arbitrate, the union
gets something in return for agreeing to that. I don't
know what it is, another 50 cents an hour, if you agree
to arbitrate all these claims. Well, you don't get that
anymore, because and employer is not going to agree to
arbitrate if it -- if the employees don't have to
arbitrate.
MR. GANNON: Well, we don't think that there
is any reason why the employees will not be able to make
a grievance with the employers, as was made possible in
Gilmer. And so that the point is that it just can't be
a vicarious agreement to arbitration on behalf of the
individual.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the employees
have no -- no leverage. I mean, if the -- if the
employer wants to say, look, if you want to work here,
look, you got to arbitrate -- I mean, the employees
don't have bargaining leverage. That's the whole reason
you have a union.
MR. GANNON: Well, there was an argument in
Gilmer that they didn't have leverage, either. And the
Court stressed that as long as the employee has actually
agreed to it, that -- and -- and as long as the arbitral
forum is going to be adequate to provide for effective
vindication of the underlying statutory rights, then --
then the arbitral forum would be adequate.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the employer did
have the practice that the Chief Justice suggested, it
tells each employee you have to sign an arbitration
form, could the union in its collective bargaining
negotiations say that you will withdraw this forum and
that you shall not impose this obligation?
MR. GANNON: Well, that's -- as
Mr. Frederick mentioned and is as discussed in several
of the briefs, that's an undecided question of labor
law. The National Labor Relations Board --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm asking in your view if
it came up to it, how would that be decided --
MR. GANNON: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because I'm concerned it's
the same thing as the Chief Justice mentioned, I just
don't think the employer is going to get very much under
this interpretation. And that may, ultimately, hurt the
employee.
MR. GANNON: We think that as long as the
employee have been -- have been able to indicate exactly
the same level of individual agreements that was upheld
in Gilmer and that the arbitral forum itself is going to
be adequate, that that takes care of that half of the
question.
The National Labor Relations Board which
has -- which would be entitled to deference on this
question and which has never spoken to the labor law
question of what role the unions might be able to play
in helping facilitate the agreements negotiated between
the employers and the individual employees, it could
come out in at least three different ways.
One of them is the arrangement outlined in
the Abbott D.C. Circuit decision that -- that
Petitioners rely upon. But, of course, that's an
instance where there were two completely separate
agreements that the employment arbitration was agreed to
by the employees before they are even represented by the
union. It was at the outset of the establishment of the
employment relationship, which Mr. Frederick discusses.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But doesn't it boil down --
doesn't your argument really boil down to this: That
the only case in which it's really going to matter is
the case in which the arbitration agreement contains a
clause that gives the union plenary authority over the
disposition of the claim? And I say that for this
reason. If -- if this is outside the subject of
mandatory bargaining, then the employer can impose it;
in effect, as a matter of individual contract.
If it's within the subject of mandatory
bargaining but it's not effective unless the employee
also signs at the time of the incident or at the time he
is hired an individual waiver, then, in fact, the only
case in which it's going to make any difference as to
whether you win or he wins is the case in which the
agreement has got a clause in there that gives the union
plenary authority to dispose of the claim.
Isn't that correct?
MR. GANNON: Well, not necessarily, Justice
Souter, because there are all sorts of other attributes
of the arbitral forum that might -- might well be
relevant to the question of whether it's sufficient to
effectively been -- rights. In Gilmer itself, the Court
specifically considered whether the employee,
Mr. Gilmer, would have an opportunity to play a role in
selecting the arbitrator.
In this instance, even under Petitioner's
view of the CBA, which we don't think is supported by
the text of the CBA, this -- these employees are still
stuck with an arbitrator who has been chosen by the
employer and by the union. And those are the two
entities that have already decided that their claim is
meritless.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- more variables of Justice
Souter's question, if those variables are satisfied,
what's -- what is your answer to his question?
MR. GANNON: If the variables are --
JUSTICE ALITO: You're saying that this
might -- this might not be true and that may not be
true, but suppose all of those other requirements are
satisfied?
MR. GANNON: We think that there needs to be
individual agreement in order to comply with Gilmer
because of the underlying inherent tension between the
collective interest of the union and the individual
interests of the employees, especially in
anti-discrimination statutes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Salvatore, you have four minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL SALVATORE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SALVATORE: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice. A couple of quick points in response.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Salvatore, would you
straighten out this business it seems about who pays?
Mr. Frederick said that 50 percent would have to be paid
by the employee. If the union bows out and there is
just the employer and the employee in the arbitration,
that employee would have to pick up 50 percent. I think
I understood him to say that.
MR. SALVATORE: And I refer you, Justice
Ginsburg, to page 47a of the joint -- of the petition
appendix, which contains the main frame arbitration
Article 6 of this collective bargaining agreement, the
last paragraph --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What page did you -- did
you reference?
MR. SALVATORE: 47a of the petition
appendix, the last paragraph on that page.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Article 7, no.
MR. SALVATORE: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE SCALIA: You said Article 6. Isn't
it Article 7, if it's on 47a?
MR. SALVATORE: Article 6 starts on 43a. It
goes all the way over to 47a of the petition appendix,
right after the ellipses at the bottom of the page.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I see. Okay, so you
are on 6. I got you.
MR. SALVATORE: The cost of the office of
the contract arbitrator shall be shared equally in a
manner determined by the union and the RAB. The way
that the parties -- the bargaining parties have
determined that these costs be shared is that if -- if
the union is not involved in a case, the employer pays.
And -- and so, that's -- I mean, that's right from the
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where does that appear?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is that written down
somewhere?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where does that appear?
MR. SALVATORE: That's -- that's the -- the
agreement between the collective bargaining parties.
It's not -- it's not written down beyond that -- that --
that place. The office -- that place in the contract.
The office of the contract arbitrator is -- is -- is a
place. It's an arbitration forum. It's like going to
the American Arbitration Association.
It has hearing rooms. It -- it -- there --
it has administrators who assign the arbitrators. The
arbitrators aren't picked out of -- you know, by one
side or the other. Yes, they are put on the panel by --
by the bargaining parties, but they are picked by a case
administrator.
There's 700 arbitrations that go on in this
industry every year and that's why instead of going to
the American Arbitration Association, these parties a
long time ago set up their own. A couple --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If the -- if the idea is
that the union sees this right to the worker, then
doesn't have to -- doesn't the burden go with the right
as well? I mean, the -- if the union would pay, you're
saying that the employer will just accept that the
employer picks up the entire tab?
MR. SALVATORE: Yes, Justice Ginsburg. And
there are -- are several points. First, there is no
conflict here in this case. The union did the right
thing. It turned the claim over to the individual
employees with their private counsel and let them go
arbitrate it themselves. They refused. This isn't a
Magnavox situation. The union is not --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I mean, they didn't turn it
over, did they, until the action had been brought in the
Federal court? I mean, they didn't -- maybe I'm wrong
in this, but I didn't think that on day one they -- they
said, oh, well, because the union doesn't want to
proceed with this, you're welcome to chug ahead by
yourself.
MR. SALVATORE: Let me explain that time
frame, Justice Souter. What happened here was the claim
was originally tendered by these employees to the union
to bring an arbitration. The union decided after the
first hearing day with the arbitrator that they couldn't
go forward for whatever reasons -- it's not in the
record -- and then they, several months went by, these
employees filed with their counsel at the EEOC under
Waffle House, we did nothing and waited and the --
representing the employers, and then the -- the lawsuit
was filed.
At that point the record is clear that
demand was made on -- on the employee's counsel,
Mr. Kreisberg -- it's in his affidavit -- that -- that
he returned to Arbitrator Pfeiffer to the pending
arbitration and continue in that forum, and he refused
to. That was the basis of the motion to compel.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
MR. SALVATORE: Thank you.
(Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the case in the
