IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ANTHONY HEDGPETH, :
WARDEN, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-544
MICHAEL ROBERT PULIDO. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 15, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JEREMY FRIEDLANDER, ESQ., Deputy Attorney General, San
Francisco, Cal.; on behalf of the Petitioner.
PRATIK A. SHAH, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioner.
J. BRADLEY O'CONNELL, ESQ., San Francisco, Cal., on
behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JEREMY FRIEDLANDER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
PRATIK A. SHAH, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus 17
curiae, supporting the Petitioner
J. BRADLEY O'CONNELL, ESQ. 27
On behalf of the Respondent
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JEREMY FRIEDLANDER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 39
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 07-544, Hedgpeth versus Pulido.
Mr. Friedlander.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEREMY FRIEDLANDER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Respondent has agreed with us that the ninth
circuit was wrong when it said that the error here and
the one in Stromberg were structural defects.
The remaining question is whether Respondent
can salvage the Stromberg rule by making it part of a
proper harmless error test as he attempted to do.
His harmless error test is wrong for several
reasons, but the Stromberg part of it was wrong for
basically one reason. He makes the Stromberg rule into
a rule of harmless error, and it is not even a correct
rule of error.
This Court has defined "instructional error"
to require not merely a mistake in instruction, but a
reasonable likelihood that the jury misapplied the law.
So when Respondent says, invoking Stromberg, that to
instruct the jury on valid and invalid theories is
harmless error if the jury adopted a valid theory, what
Respondent is saying is nothing more than that no error
occurred in the first place. Because the jury found
everything it needed to find in order to convict and,
therefore, did not misapply the law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do that again, will you?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: We need to have a
reasonable likelihood that the jury misapplied the law.
That's how we get to error. Respondent invokes
Stromberg to say if the jury is instructed a right way
and a wrong way and they went the right way, we have
harmless error.
No. What we really have is no error at all.
Because there is the -- the jury did not misapply the
law. Moreover, Stromberg is not even a correct rule of
error. Because under Stromberg you have error if the
jury could have misapplied the law.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Can I interrupt you? You
are saying no error occurred, and on page 11 of your
brief you say, "An unconstitutional instructional error
occurred in this case because there was a reasonable
likelihood the jury found," and so forth and so on.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes. I agree that error
occurred in this case. What I'm trying to argue here is
that Respondent is entirely off base in importing the
Stromberg rule into a harmless error determination.
Stromberg is, at most, a rule of error. The jury went
the wrong way. That is a rule of error, but it is not
even a correct rule of error because under Stromberg you
say, could the jury have gone the wrong way; whereas,
under this Court's modern precedent you have to have a
reasonable likelihood that the jury --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you said that's what
happened here. That's what your brief says.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes. I agree that there
was an error here but not because of Stromberg. Because
this was a reasonable likelihood that the jury
misapplied the law.
JUSTICE BREYER: But you should have said
"no" to the question, I think. Because I thought the
question -- whatever it was, you are saying that there
isn't a reasonable likelihood that its error influenced
the outcome. You are not saying that?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: There is a reasonable
likelihood that the jury misapplied the law. That's the
error question.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Then the harmless error
question is: Given that they misapplied the law, do we
know under the requisite degree of certainty -- Chapman
on direct review, Brecht here -- that they would still
have found him guilty of felony murder under a proper
instruction?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you agree that the
California Supreme Court gave an incorrect explanation
to the answer to that question? They said there was no
harmless error because the -- the jury made a specific
finding that rebutted that, and that finding depended on
the difference between the word "and" and "or."
MR. FRIEDLANDER: I'm not sure I followed
the last part of the question, but I agree with you if
what you are saying is that the California Supreme
Court, in effect, applied a Stromberg-like test. They
said "necessarily resolved."
JUSTICE STEVENS: No. I'm -- I'm
questioning the basis for the Supreme Court's conclusion
that the error was harmless.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Their basis for the
conclusion was the jury's "special circumstance"
finding.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Now, they did not
consider, when they made that "special" -- when they
interpreted that "special circumstance," the "and/or"
mistake that was embedded in the instructions.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Which meant that the jury
really hadn't answered the question they thought it had
answered.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: No, it didn't mean that.
We don't agree with that. We don't believe that that is
a correct interpretation of the instruction.
But let me skip past that if you'll allow
me. Even if you -- even if you accent any meaning from
that "special circumstance" finding -- and we don't
agree with that but even if you did -- you had at a
minimum here the nature --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If you do that, you are
removing the basis for the California Supreme Court's
decision.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is that not right?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: The basis --
JUSTICE STEVENS: At least the basis --
MR. FRIEDLANDER: The basis for the
California Supreme Court --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The basis --
MR. FRIEDLANDER: I think -- I think that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- for the decision was a
-- was a specific finding --
MR. FRIEDLANDER: The reasoning behind the
decision, yes, I think that's right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: All right.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Okay. But it doesn't
matter because we are going to apply Brecht anyway.
JUSTICE ALITO: Could you clarify the -- the
category of cases that would be affected if your
argument is accepted? There would be -- an error would
be -- would not be harmless under Brecht if it had a
substantial or -- or injurious effect, right?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: True.
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, what is the standard
under California law for submitting a theory of
liability to the jury? Presumably, you have to have
some evidence in support of it.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: I'm not sure I understand
the question. I think that goes to the question of
whether there is error in the first place in submitting
a factually unsupported theory.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, you are -- you are
arguing that there are instances in which, when a theory
of liability is submitted to the jury, the error -- and
it's erroneous -- the error can be harmless.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: Correct? Now, what are the
-- what is the standard under California law for
submitting the theory of liability to the jury in the
first place? You have to have -- presumably, there has
to be some evidence in support of that, right? How
much?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: I don't think -- I don't
think I know the answer to that question. It would
certainly be error under California State law if there
is a reasonable -- if they have the same reasonable
likelihood standard that the Federal courts have, if
there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury
misapplied the law.
Now, in a -- but you seem to be focusing on
an evidentiary sufficiency, and I think that's governed
by Griffith where if you -- if you have an insufficient
-- if you have insufficient evidence to support the
theory, then it's inappropriate --
JUSTICE ALITO: What I'm asking is: When is
there going to be a case in which a theory of liability
is submitted to the jury and it's -- and it's erroneous
-- multiple theories are submitted; one erroneous. And
yet it would turn out that the submission of the
erroneous theory did not have a substantial or injurious
effect.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: This one -- this case --
this case was submitted to the jury on two alternative
theories: One of them correct, pre- killing aiding and
abetting; one of them incorrect, post-killing aiding and
abetting. And it didn't have a substantial injurious
effect because we know that at an absolute minimum here
the jury found that the defendant acted -- aided and
abetted robbery with reckless indifference to human life
and was a major participant in the robbery. And those
findings were not compatible with post-killing aiding
and abetting.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought there was --
that there was this -- there were three possibilities,
and one was that the defendant didn't do anything
before, didn't do anything during, but was simply an
accessory after the fact.
If the jury believed that, then there was no
way it could convict him of the crime that he was
convicted of.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Well, the jury rejected
accessory after the fact but --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How do we know that? Was
there a special verdict?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: They were instructed on
accessory after the fact as the lesser offense and they
found in essence robbery and felony murder.
JUSTICE SOUTER: They found the greater
offense, so there would have been no need for them to go
to the lesser included offense. Your trouble is -- and
I think the problem that we are having is that in
finding the greater offense, they may have done so under
a theory of accomplice liability that was consistent
with the accomplice simply coming in at a late stage in
the proceedings.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes. That's right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I mean, that's the
difficulty we are having.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes. There is a
reasonable likelihood that in deciding felony murder
they failed to decide that he engaged in the robbery
before the killing.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: However, they went and
found the special circumstance in which they found
reckless, aiding and abetting with reckless indifference
to human life and as a major participant.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I thought the, the
difficulty with using that as a means of answering the
first error was that the way the special circumstance
instruction was phrased, they could have found the
special circumstance without finding anything more than
that he came in at a late stage.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: No. That's not correct.
I don't believe that's correct.  It is true that part of
the instruction, that and/or difficulty, focused on a
different question, a different point, said that if you
-- if they -- I'm blanking out but --
JUSTICE SOUTER: The second -- go ahead.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: It didn't address the
reckless indifference to human life and the major
participant, but that was embedded in the instructions,
and from the start the courts that have looked at this
and have reached this question have all agreed that
there was a jury finding of reckless indifference to
human life and major participant, and they have
disagreed as to what it might have meant. Okay? Now,
the U.S. district court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How do we -- in this --
how do we know what the jury found? They just came in
with a guilty verdict; is that right?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: No. They came in with a
special circumstance finding. The special circumstance
finding that this was --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Isn't the special
circumstance finding the one that had the word "or" in
it, and therefore allowed the jury to give a post-
killing interpretation of the event.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: No. The special --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I thought that was what
the California Supreme Court relied on?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I agree with Justice
Stevens. I thought that was the whole problem, the "or"
and the "and" is the problem for you.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: The -- I'll read from JA
. This is the special circumstance instruction that
was -- was mistaken: "The murder was committed while
the defendant was engaged in the commission or attempted
commission of a robbery, or the murder was committed in
order to carry out or advance the commission of the
crime of robbery, et cetera."
Now, that -- that finding alone we agree if
you -- if you -- if you just follow that finding, that
doesn't implicate the defendant. But you have to read
at JA 13, the instruction, JA 13: "The defendant with
reckless indifference to human life and as a major
participant aided and abetted in the commission of a
robbery which resulted in the death of Flores." That's
at JA 13.
So there were multiple findings here. And
-- and the district court which -- this is at the bottom
of the first paragraph of JA 13.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but isn't -- maybe I'm
not getting it. Help me out here. One possibility
under -- under the instruction at JA 13 is "or assisted
in the crime of robbery." And the other instructions
because they are erroneous leave open the possibility of
finding that he assisted in the crime of robbery only if
he came in late. And that's why it does not solve the
original error.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: No. The -- the problem
with the, I think you're mixing up two things here.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I may be doing that.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: The felony murder
instructions did not speak to this question of
contemporaneity. They left it open. That was error.
We acknowledge that that was error. Okay? So they
arguably find felony murder, aiding and abetting felony
murder based on post- killing aiding and abetting. Now,
the jury has to get to the special circumstance finding,
right?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: And now it has to decide,
among other things, as I -- as I read to you, "did he
aid and abet robbery with reckless indifference to human
life and as a major participant in the commission of a
robbery which resulted in the death of Flores?" That's
at JA 13. So what we --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Where does it say that he
must have assisted prior to --
MR. FRIEDLANDER: It doesn't. It doesn't
say that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then that doesn't cure the
error.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes, it does, and the
reason that it does is because the harmless error test
is not whether the jury actually made the finding that
it needed to make; rather, the harmless error test is do
we know from the evidence and from the findings that the
jury would have made the findings that it was required
to make had it been properly instructed?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me that
you're arguing one of two things: First, that there was
no error at all under Stromberg; or second, that if
there was error, it was harmless error. And I thought
the case was about whether or not the Ninth Circuit
erred in concluding that harmless error analysis didn't
apply to a Stromberg error.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Yes. I'm not arguing the
first point. I -- I concede there was error. I just
wanted to make the point that Stromberg itself is an
incorrect rule of error. But I can see that that's led
us down a path that I didn't need to go down.
Now, we are certainly arguing harmless
error. As for the Ninth Circuit's opinion, we said --
the Ninth Circuit said this is structural error. We
don't even start a harmless error analysis.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The district court didn't
say that.
MR. FRIEDLANDER: No, it did not. And --
and we said that's wrong. This is trial error, not
structural error.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if we were to say,
Ninth Circuit, you were wrong, but the district court
was right --
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Well, the district court
was right to the extent that it found it to be trial
error. It was wrong to the extent that it found it to
be prejudicial trial error. But Respondent has agreed
with us that this is not structural error, that we need
to do a harmless error analysis, and what Respondent has
done is import into this harmless error analysis we are
saying the Stromberg rule; and it doesn't belong there.
The Stromberg rule is not a proper rule of
harmless error. It's at most a rule of error. I'd
like --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But do you not agree that
the harmless error -- the -- the rationale of the
California Supreme Court was incorrect?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: Was the rationale
incorrect? If --
JUSTICE STEVENS: In the harmless error
analysis. Actually, I'm agreeing with you that there
should have been harmless error. Did it perform the
proper --
MR. FRIEDLANDER: It's incorrect in the way
that you're thinking it is incorrect, but it was also
incorrect in another way. It was incorrect in a way
that it applied too strict a standard. It said has this
question been necessarily been resolved; and it said
yes, it has been necessarily resolved. Well, that's not
the question. The harmless error question --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The -- answer was
incorrect, too, wasn't it? And that answer was
incorrect?
MR. FRIEDLANDER: That answer was incorrect;
and as well as what you're thinking, it was incorrect,
in that they premised it on a factual basis that was not
in fact the case. But I better reserve time for
rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Shah.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PRATIK A. SHAH
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. SHAH: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I think the Chief Justice framed the main
issue in this case properly. Consistent with the last
two decades of this Court's instructional error
jurisprudence, the Court should hold that the type of
error at issue is not structural and is subject to
harmless error review.
The Ninth Circuit's contrary interpretation
of Stromberg creates the untenable result that adding an
invalid theory -- adding a valid theory to an invalid
one somehow makes the error worse. Even Respondent now
rejects that interpretation. It follows that this Court
should reverse the Ninth Circuit and remand for
application of harmless error review under Brecht.
The main issue --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's what the district
judge did, right?
MR. SHAH: Yes, Your Honor. The district
court did apply harmless error review under Brecht. The
court of appeals, of course, did not.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It could just review the
district court's decision using the standards that the
district court used?
MR. SHAH: This Court could do that, but the
longstanding and customary practice of this Court is
that when the court of appeals does not address the
harmless error question, that it remands to that court.
It did that in Rose V. Clark, in Pope V. Illinois and
California V. Roy, and more recently in Recuenco.
And in several of those cases the
intermediate court or the district court, in the habeas
context, did address it and the court of appeals didn't
in all of those cases that the Court did remand for
application of harmless error.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I wasn't questioning
that. The issue, is the United States position say
structural error was wrong, harmless error was right,
and then just have the Ninth Circuit review the district
court's decision that held that there was harmless error
the way it would ordinarily review a district court
decision?
MR. SHAH: Yes, Your Honor, but I would add
that this Court should also clarify the scope of that
harmless error inquiry. I think there are two important
principles. There is no logical reason to apply a
narrower form of harmless error review in this case than
the Court did in Neder.
So I think that this Court should clarify
that the principles of harmlessness articulated in Neder
should apply on remand to the Ninth Circuit. I think
those of those principles bear mention.
First, the question is not what the jury
actually or necessarily found, but rather, it
encompasses what a rationale jury would have found
absent the error.
And I think the second important point for
this Court to clarify is that harmlessness review is not
limited to cases, is not limited to cases where the
relevant elements are undisputed, but rather even when
disputed, a reviewing court should consider the entire
record and determine whether, in light of the jury
finding, there is sufficient evidence to support a
contrary verdict. And then it should remand, Your
Honor, to the court of appeals to apply those
principles.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do you say in light of
the jury finding when you have disavowed any necessity
that the jury had found this?
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, we do --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean "in light of the
jury finding," why don't you just drop that.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, we think it's
important because there are certain jury findings that
we know the jury made in this case. The jury returned a
special circumstance verdict. And we know based upon
that verdict that at a minimum, the jury found that
Respondent was a major participant in the crime -- just
taking the facts of this case, the Respondent was a
major participant in the robbery, that he exhibited a
reckless disregard for human life.
And we also know that the jury rejected a
duress defense. The jury was instructed on that
defense, and yet the jury came back guilty.
So I don't think that the -- that the
inquiry should take place in a vacuum, but, of course,
the reviewing court should have the benefit of the
limited jury findings that we do know were made, and
then apply the sufficiency inquiry in light of those
jury findings. There is no reason to disregard the jury
findings that were made.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Suppose it's not, in
the abstract anyway, necessarily true that this case
follows a fortiori, because here, at least you have a
valid theory. That may make it a harder case, because
the jury had based its entire verdict on an invalid
theory.
It may be more difficult than a situation
where you've got a theory of the case that is invalid
because a particular element is missing. And you can
look and see whether or not that was harmless or not.
MR. SHAH: I would disagree, Mr. Chief
Justice. I think there are two possibilities in a case
with alternative theories. One possibility is that the
jury relies upon the defective instruction. For
example, there is one element omitted just like the
instruction in Neder. If that's what the jury had done,
then this case is no different than Neder, no better, no
worse, right.
The other possibility, however, is that the
jury relies on the completely valid theory. If the jury
relied on the completely valid theory, then there is
even less of a problem than Neder. There is no problem
at all.
So I don't see how the error in this
alternative valid theory and defense theory circumstance
could be any --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The difference is when you
only got one theory, you know what he relied on. When
you got alternatives, how do you know which one he
relied on?
MR. SHAH: Well, you don't -- you don't,
Your Honor. And that's what the reviewing court has to
decide. But in either scenario, if it -- if you assume
that the jury relied on the defective theory, then we
are in the same box as in Neder, and the reviewing court
would decide whether there was -- you know, they would
apply the harmless error review to the missing element
and decide whether there was sufficient evidence to
render that error harmless; or the court could ask,
well, is that uncontraverted or overwhelming evidence
that the defendant would have been found guilty under
the valid theory.
And that would also be a permissible
inquiry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I guess,
though, the point is when you have invalid and valid
theories, it would be a little harder than Neder,
because they don't have to make any findings under the
valid theory. You know, because you don't just have to
fill in a missing piece of the puzzle, as in Neder. You
have to -- they might have been working on an entirely
different puzzle.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, in almost all
conceivable cases there is going to be at least some
overlap between -- between the two theories. And what
the -- the reason why that's relevant is because you
know that when the jury has returned a general verdict
of guilt, they have necessarily found beyond a
reasonable doubt that each of those elements has been
satisfied.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No. But in this case the
question is whether the uncle did it or the nephew did
it. And if there is a lot of doubt about -- about -- if
there is substantial reason to believe maybe it was the
uncle, they might have taken the easy case out. I think
this is vastly different from a single theory case.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your honor, here's why --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Because it's an -- there
is plenty of evidence that he might have been guilty
after the fact. There is no doubt about that. But
there is doubt about the former.
MR. SHAH: Your Honor, here's why I think
the cases aren't that different, because, you know, at a
minimum from the general verdict of guilt if you take a
case like this, you know that the jury found that there
was an unlawful killing. You know that the jury found
that there was a robbery. You know that the jury found
that Respondent was involved in the robbery. The only
element that we don't know --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Perhaps after -- after the
death occurred. That's all we really know.
MR. SHAH: It is possible that the jury
would have found that, and that's the question that the
reviewing court would perform in harmless error review,
just like if there -- basically that is the exact same
question the Court would form, would do under Neder if
the timing element were omitted all together. The
reviewing court would look at the evidence and decide is
there sufficient evidence to support an after-the-fact
participation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So what we are
talking about, in other words, is the application of
harmless error, which may or may not be harder in the
multiple theory case, and not the question of whether
harmless error analysis should be applied.
MR. SHAH: Yes, Your Honor. That's going to
be completely fact dependent whether it's harder or not.
But I think analytically it's exactly the same as in
Neder.
JUSTICE ALITO: Aren't there going to be
cases in which there's enough evidence to support the
submission of a theory of liability to the jury, but so
little that the court is going to be able to say that
it's harmless under -- that the submission of the
invalid theory was harmless under Brecht?
MR. SHAH: Yes. I mean, you can image in a
case -- take Neder. By this Neder instruction, the one
omitting the materiality element, was submitted to the
jury certainly enough evidence to support it, and then
there was another valid theory --
JUSTICE ALITO: There is difference. An
element of the defense has to be submitted to the jury.
And it may be that that it's -- the element is
undisputed, but a theory of liability isn't going to be
submitted to the jury unless there is some evidence to
support it.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, if -- if there
is some evidence to support it, if we were in a direct
review context, that's the inquiry that Neder says. So
on a clean slate it might be that if there is sufficient
evidence to support a contrary verdict, that that would
end the inquiry.
But in many of these cases we are going to
know that the jury has made at least some findings, has
found some of the elements. And that might inform the
harmless error inquiry, just like in this as we know
that the jury has found things like a respondent was a
major participant, exhibited a reckless disregard for
human life, discounted a significant portion of this --
of his statement by rejecting the duress defense.
If there are no further questions, Your
Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Shah.
Mr. O'Connell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF J. BRADLEY O'CONNELL
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. O'CONNELL: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Unlike the Sarausad case argued earlier this
morning, this is a case of conceded constitutional error
under the reasonable likelihood standard, the same
question that consumed so much of the Sarausad argument.
We acknowledge that this is a trial error
and is subject to the Brecht prejudice standard. And as
I believe Justice Souter commented during the Sarausad
argument, in a Brecht situation, the defendant wins the
benefit of the doubt. That is a lesson of this Court's
decision.
JUSTICE BREYER: I agree with that. And my
question is going to be -- at some point, both of you
seem to agree with that so -- pretty much, it's a
harmless error standard of review. I think a wrote a
case on that, which says that --
MR. O'CONNELL: Yes. You wrote on O'Neal,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Right. So why don't we
just send it back and say apply the standard?
MR. O'CONNELL: Your Honor, although the
Ninth Circuit admittedly used a structural defect
nomenclature with which we don't agree, we believe that
the Court can't -- that upon considering both the Ninth
Circuit decision and the district court decision, this
Court can affirm because the inquiry which the Ninth
Circuit did conduct was actually a case-specific
inquiry, not really a structural defect inquiry, and
when an examination of the evidence and the verdicts and
the instructions and anything else indicative of the
jury's thinking still leaves the court uncertain whether
the jurors relied on the valid or the invalid theory,
that's a substantial and injurious influence. That is
grave doubt. That is equipoise, in the language of Your
Honor's opinion.
JUSTICE BREYER: You're saying that I should
have grave doubt myself and any judge would have to. He
made an argument here I think that wasn't such a bad
one. He said look at page 14 and you'll see the
mistake, you know, in the joint appendix.
MR. O'CONNELL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: There it is. And it's
absolutely wrong. The basic instruction under the law
says you have to be engaged in the crime and you have to
have a certain state of intent. You have to have
committed this murder in order to help the crime or at
least in order to escape.
MR. O'CONNELL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's wrong. Put them
together, but then look at the instruction on page 13,
which he actually gave, and the one on 13 really does
seem to say that, or more so. It says, you can only
apply -- jury, you can only apply this special
instruction if two things are true: First, in lines 9
through 12 of that instruction, it seems to repeat that
you have to be engaged in the crime. And then just
before that, it says, and you have to have one of two
states of mind. You have to either intend to kill the
person or at least be recklessly indifferent. And since
that's what we said on page 13, the fact we made a
mistake on page 14 doesn't matter that much. That's one
of his arguments that I'm sure they have a lot of
evidentiary ones and a bunch of other ones.
MR. O'CONNELL: Your Honor, I think the
answer to that question is in the underlying trial
reporter's transcript at pages 1015 to 1016, the
district attorney's cross-examination of Mr. Pulido.
The district attorney developed the theme quite
effectively that, even under Mr. Pulido's own account,
he exhibited reckless indifference because he saw the
mortally wounded victim lying there, and the D.A. said,
did you try to resuscitate him? Have you ever had a CPR
class? I did once. Well, did you do CPR on him? No.
Did you call 9-11? You didn't care whether he lived or
died, did you?
So this entire line of cross-examination, to
which the district attorney came back again, though
somewhat less dramatically, at 1330 of the transcript
and again at 1337 to 1338, commenting that he -- that
Mr. Pulido did not go back in at some later point to
check on the victim's condition, that entire line of
cross-examination encouraged the theme that even under
Mr. Pulido's own account of the facts, he showed
reckless indifference. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So the error wasn't
harmless. And that's an argument you can make before
the Ninth Circuit on remand.
MR. O'CONNELL: That certainly is an
argument that if the Court -- if the Court is convinced
that the Ninth Circuit's analysis in substance --
because I realize the nomenclature -- the nomenclature
was inconsistent with harmless error, and I'm not going
to defend that. If the Court is convinced that the
substance of the Ninth Circuit's analysis was so far
removed from what harmless error analysis requires in
this context, we agree that the usual course would be to
send it back.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why don't we
just take them at their word? As you say, they are
applying the wrong nomenclature. It would be easy
enough for them when they get it back to say, oh, we
meant, you know, harmless error under Brecht. But that
seems to me to be at least an open question.
MR. O'CONNELL: Your Honor, I think I could
best answer that by offering my own critique of the
Ninth Circuit opinion and -- which may explain why it
may be unnecessary. In my opinion, what the analysis
that the Ninth Circuit conducted was equivalent to a
sufficient analysis, equivalent to the point of
equipoise discussed in O'Neal. That is to say, it
reviewed the evidence and said -- and the verdicts and
the instructions -- and said we're uncertain, we can't
tell which way the jury went.
My critique of the Ninth Circuit's -- at
least its per curiam opinion, as opposed to one of the
concurring opinions, is that in fact this is not just a
general verdict case. We know a great deal about the
jurors' thinking in this case. We know that by a vote
of either 8-4 or 4-8, the jurors rejected the
prosecution's primary theory, which was that Pulido
personally shot the victim and that, in the prosecutor's
words, Aragon had nothing to do with this, Aragon wasn't
there, Aragon isn't a murderer.
We also know -- and this will be another
echo of the Sarausad case -- we also know that
throughout their five days of deliberations, the jurors
submitted question after question directed to what are
now -- what are concededly defective erroneous
instructions, and moreover, those questions focused
right in on the defect in the instructions and in
particular the timing of Mr. Pulido's assistance.
And I refer the Court in particular to the
jurors' handwritten diagrams of alternative conceptions
of felony-murder aiding and abetting liability, which
are at 36 to 38 of the joint appendix, and also the
jurors' question at page 41 of the joint appendix
whether -- this goes right -- this goes, as the district
court said, to the crux of the issue: Does the
defendant have to have knowledge before or during the
crime of the -- of the unlawful purpose of the
perpetrator? And as to both of those questions the
judge said: Go back and reread those same instructions,
which of course were erroneous.
So my critique of the Ninth Circuit opinion,
which is again slightly different, I think, than the
State's, would be that it neglected to mention that
compelling evidence that in fact the jurors actually
found a set of facts corresponding to the invalid late
joiner theory, because in my view what -- the analysis
the Ninth Circuit conducted gets us to a point of
equipoise, and that's enough for Brecht. The defect in
the Ninth Circuit's analysis is they neglected to also
factor in those juror queries, and in my view the juror
queries move us from a state of equipoise to a very high
probability that the jurors relied on the -- and adopted
a factual scenario corresponding to an invalid theory.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Under Brecht, you
have the burden of showing a substantial injurious
effect.
MR. O'CONNELL: Well, actually, Your Honor,
as understand O'Neal the Court specifically renounced
describing it as a burden, and in fact said that we are
not going to use the "burden" terminology, and rather
than talk about allocating burdens, we are going to
address it from the perspective of the judge and say, if
the judge is in equipoise, that is sufficient.
We also know that -- drawing upon the
relationship between the Brecht standard and others, we
know that a Strickland standard is deemed to -- that if
you have Strickland prejudice, you don't have to go
through a separate Brecht analysis. Because of
Strickland, reasonable probability also satisfies
Brecht's substantial and injurious influence. Well,
this Court has said again and again, in construing
Strickland, it does not require a more likely than not
showing; it simply requires a showing sufficient to
undermine confidence in the outcome. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think you win
under Brecht?
MR. O'CONNELL: I think we will under
Brecht, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You think the Ninth
Circuit, although it didn't use that label, actually
applied the Brecht standard?
MR. O'CONNELL: In substance, it did even
though, as I said, I will -- I can't -- I can't run from
the language the Ninth Circuit actually used.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sure. Well, then it
seems to me you agree with your friend that the Brecht
standard -- and the government -- that the Brecht
standard applies.
MR. O'CONNELL: Yes, we do, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And all the fight is
over is whether the Ninth Circuit applied that standard
or not?
MR. O'CONNELL: Yes, Your Honor, whether it
applied it in substance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why don't we just
send it back and ask them? Say: We can't tell. The
parties are having disagreement about what you did.
What did you do?
MR. O'CONNELL: Your Honor, as I said a
little earlier, if I fail to persuade the Court that the
substance of what the Ninth Circuit did was --
effectively satisfied Brecht as interpreted in O'Neal,
then I agree that's an appropriate course, and we
indicated that in the final section of our brief. There
is not --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm sure that would be -- I
mean, what worries me is proliferating arguments among
judges. Why not just say, you know, apply Brecht. I'd
like it with the O'Neal clause because it seems to me
the O'Neal clause applies.
MR. O'CONNELL: I agree, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Just go do it. And then
they can say "we already did it," or they can say "we
didn't already do it, but we'll do it now." Let them
say what they want to say.
MR. O'CONNELL: Your Honor -- and, again, I
don't -- I don't strenuously object to that because, as
I've mentioned if the court, if the court remains,
remains of the view that what the Ninth Circuit did was
simply incompatible with Brecht, then I agree it should
be sent back and I -- and I understand why that might be
the Court's inclination. Let me offer another angle for
why what the Ninth Circuit did is entirely compatible
with Brecht.
In civil cases, this Court routinely applies
the same sort of general verdict analysis which in
criminal cases has become to be known as the Stromberg
line. In fact, it did it as recently this summer in the
Exxon Valdez case. Now civil cases don't have Chapman,
they don't have structural defect; civil cases are
subject to a harmless error standard which ultimately
goes back to the identical statute which was construed
in Kotteakos.
And going back to the opinion of the Court
in O'Neal, in addressing the relationship between
Kotteakos/Brecht harmless error review and civil
harmless error review, the Court indicated he think
rather strongly that those standards are either
equivalent or to the extent that they differ, the
Brecht/ Kotteakos standard is less forgiving of error
because of the liberty interest at stake. Now that
means two things. From a retrospective point of view of
simply construing this Court's different lines of cases,
I think it demonstrates that this general verdict
analysis is entirely consistent with a Kotteakos type
harmless error analysis, but it also has some
perspective implications, because if this Court were to
wholly disavow that type of analysis and say that has
nothing to do with harmless error review, that's going
to impact civil cases, too; and obviously in all this
Court's opinions, the Court is considering not only the
immediate case, but what is going to happen if we -- if
we rule one way or another.
So this case -- this case supports a finding
of prejudice under that O'Neal equipoise and as for the
Ninth Circuit did, that's not what it called it, it even
more strongly supports prejudice when one factors in the
rest of the record, notably the juror -- the juror
queries and another item which I think may be responsive
to some of Justice Alito's earlier questions, which is
the strength of the evidence on the various theories.
There were three theories and obviously
there was evidence in support of the prosecution's main
theory that Pulido shot the victim himself. There was
evidence -- obviously there was substantial evidence in
the form of Pulido's own testimony in support of the
invalid late-joiner theory. Out of these the one theory
that had least support in the record before the jury was
the valid aiding and abetting theory, because no witness
testified to a scenario in which Pulido assisted in some
fashion or another prior to the shooting; nor did the
prosecutor attempt to develop that type of scenario in
argument because the prosecutor was very clear:
Prosecutor said you're going to get aiding and abetting
instructions just in case. They only apply -- if --
they only come into play if you were to believe the
defendant's story which was a real whopper; but if you
believe the defendant's story the felony murder rule
applies.
But then the prosecutor immediately went
back, "but I don't think it applies at all, Aragon
wasn't there. Aragon didn't do it. Pulido did it," and
prosecutor went back to his primary theory.
So the theory which the -- present in the
instructions was least before the jury, was the valid
aiding and abetting theory, yet defining this conceded
error harmless depends on the notion either that the
jury actually adopted a pre-shooting aiding or abetting
or that they necessarily would have adopted one if
properly instructed.
There is one final point I'd like to make,
which is there is a qualitative aspect to Brecht; and
when one has an error under which the defense testimony
even if believed renders the defendant guilty
erroneously, that derails the entire defense. That it
seems to me is the quintessential substantial and
injurious influence; because it practically renders the
trial nullity by erroneously telling the jury even if
you find this set of facts, the defendant is guilty.
So for these reasons and additionally for
the very thorough prejudice analysis found in the
district court opinion, we urge the Court to affirm,
despite the Ninth Circuit's inept nomenclature, but in
the event the Court is dissatisfied with that
explanation, we have acknowledged that the appropriate
course in that instance would be to send it back under
Brecht.
Unless the Court has any further questions,
I'm prepared to submit.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. O'Connell.
MR. O'CONNELL: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Friedlander, you
have three minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JEREMY FRIEDLANDER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FRIEDLANDER: We agree that we need to
do Brecht. We disagree on what Brecht is. Respondent
is telling you that Brecht is the error test, whether
the jury relied on the valid or invalid theory. That's
what he says Brecht is. In Calderon v Coleman, this
Court said there is a difference between the error test
and the harmless error test.
All these questions that the jury asked went
to the question of error. Did the jury misapply the law
by failing to find a contemporaneity aspect of felony
murder? They did not go to the harmless error question
of what the jury would have done had it been properly
instructed.
We urge the Court in remanding the case to
make clear that the error analysis must be kept separate
from the harmless error analysis. This is a mistake
Judge Thomas made in his concurring opinion. We -- he
assumes -- he sees a mistake in an instruction; he
assumes that the mistake rises to the level of
constitutional error; and then he does a prejudice
analysis by deciding whether the mistake caused the jury
to misapply the law. In other words, he -- he applies
an error analysis to decide prejudice. And what he does
is he includes all this evidence of the questions the
jury asked when those questions went only to the
misapplication of law that was the error, and did
nothing to show the basis of the jury's special
circumstance finding, which is the heart of the harmless
error determination here. If there are no further
questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Friedlander. The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the case in the
