IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ENTERGY CORPORATION, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-588
RIVERKEEPER, INC., ET AL.; :
and :
PSEG FOSSIL LLC, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 07-589
RIVERKEEPER, INC., ET AL.; :
and :
UTILITY WATER ACT GROUP, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-597
RIVERKEEPER, INC., ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 2, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DARYL JOSEFFER, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Environmental Protection Agency, et al.,
supporting the Petitioners.
MAUREEN E. MAHONEY, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
RICHARD J. LAZARUS, ESQ., Cambridge, Mass.; on behalf of
the Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DARYL JOSEFFER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Environmental Protection
Agency, et al., supporting the Petitioners 4
MAUREEN E. MAHONEY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 18
RICHARD J. LAZARUS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DARYL JOSEFFER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 59
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first today in Case 07-588, Entergy Corporation
v. Riverkeeper Incorporated, and the consolidated cases.
Mr. Joseffer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DARYL JOSEFFER
ON BEHALF OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY, ET AL.,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONERS
MR. JOSEFFER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
For more than 30 years, EPA has construed
the Clean Water Act to permit it to consider the
relationship between costs and benefits in setting
limits on water intake. The court of appeals'
unprecedented limitation of that discretion is wrong as
a matter of basic Chevron interpretive principles for at
least three reasons.
First, the controlling statutory standard,
which looks to the best technology available for
minimizing adverse environmental impacts, is ambiguous
and does not preclude EPA's interpretation, especially
in light of the statute's other "best technology"
provisions, two of which expressly require consideration
of the relationship between costs and benefits.
Second, there is no indication that Congress
determined for itself that the benefits of stricter
regulations would in fact outweigh their costs.
Instead, from the context -- I'm sorry, for -- I'm
sorry. There is no indication in either the context or
the history of the statute that Congress determined for
itself that the benefits of stricter regulations would
in fact justify their costs. Instead the indication is
that Congress left that to the agency.
Congress took a very careful look at the
separate issue of the discharge of pollutants and
legislated numerous very specific provisions concerning
the discharge of pollutants. But when it came to water
intake, the Congress gave scant attention to that at all
and included only this one very general provision in the
act on that subject.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Of course, in the
other provision it specifically required consideration
of costs and benefits and it didn't do so in this
provision.
MR. JOSEFFER: Right. In our view, that
strongly supports our view that, first, Congress
understood that consideration of cost and benefits was
not incompatible with the application of a best
technology standard. Otherwise it would not have
required that consideration as part of the best quality
standard, which seems to show at a minimum that a best
technology standard does not unambiguously foreclose
consideration of the relationship between costs and
benefits.
JUSTICE SOUTER: May I ask you to follow up
on that, because your statement about compatibility
raises what for me is a fundamental difficulty in
understanding this case. And I think my difficulty goes
both to Chevron step one and step two. And that is
this: I think we all start from the premise that,
whatever else subsection (d) had in mind, it was
imposing some kind of a technology-driven standard
criterion. It's there in the words.
The difficulty that I have is if you are
going to apply on at least a site-specific basis a cost
benefit analysis, I'm not sure how it would work. In
other words, it seems to me that when you're talking
about the possible harm from pulling in a few fish or a
few plankton or a few baby clam larvae and so on, as
against the cost conceivably of millions of dollars for
extending intake pipes or putting technical expensive
filtering mechanisms, you are dealing with such
incommensurables that I don't know how on a site-
specific basis you would sensibly apply a cost-benefit
analysis. Are a thousand plankton worth a million
dollars? I don't know.
And my difficulty then is, I don't know how
it would work. And because I don't know how it would
work, it seems to me that if you are going to apply a
cost-benefit analysis, the odds are what you are going
to do is basically eliminate the whole technology-driven
point of the statute. So that's my difficulty. Can you
help me out on that?
MR. JOSEFFER: Two points on that. The
first is that this is how it's always been done. I
mean, since 1977 at least, first permitting decisions
have always been done on a facility by facility, case by
case basis.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Do we know so far as intake
pipes are concerned? I mean, maybe I'm being foolish in
thinking it's a little easy to make sense of it when
we're talking about toxic discharges, but leaving that
aside, do we know that, with respect to these kind of
intake technology decisions, that the cost-benefit
analysis has been in any way sensible? In other words,
maybe what Congress had in mind was this just doesn't
work doing it on a site-specific cost-benefit analysis
and that's why we're going to pass subsection (b) in the
first place. So you say, well, we've had experience
with cost-benefit analysis. What's the experience?
MR. JOSEFFER: Sure. I guess now I have
three points.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. JOSEFFER: The first is that -- the
first is that the history here is, that I was referring
to, is with respect to cooling water intake structures,
where for more than 30 years cooling water intake
structures have been determined on a case by case basis,
where EPA determined as early as 1977 and ever since
that it would be unreasonable to impose -- to require
the use of technology whose costs were wholly
disproportionate to its benefits.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And have these been
applications of something more than the outside
standard, which I guess everybody agrees would apply in
a case like this, that when it just becomes wholly or
outrageously disproportionate there wouldn't be -- that
there would in that sense be a cost-benefit cutoff?
These have been more subtle decisions than that?
MR. JOSEFFER: Yes. And I mean, just the
phrasing of the standard, whether costs are wholly
disproportionate to benefits, itself indicates that
there is a comparison here. We cite in our brief one
particular -- in our reply brief, one specific example
where benefits were clearly not de minimus.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The Second Circuit
recognized that latter kind of taking account of costs
disproportionate, more than the industry would bear, and
they also recognized a cost comparison. If you have a
cheaper method that is almost as good, you can use that
and you don't have to use the one that will capture the
extra fish. So everybody agrees that there is some
consideration of cost. The question is how much, and
the concern is, as Justice Souter says, that you are
comparing things that aren't comparable.
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, first off -- I'm sorry.
I guess one basic point is just that -- first off,
excuse me, in terms of the court of appeals' recognition
that costs and benefits could be compared in extreme
circumstances, that just deprives it of the logic of its
position, because when we talk about the extent or
degree or manner to which a permissible consideration
can be considered that's a classic manner for the
agency's gap-filling discretion, not something for the
court of appeals or Respondents to get discretion on.
And, second, in terms of the concern that
the cost-benefit analysis can be difficult because we're
comparing benefits that are not easily monetized to
economic costs, that is just systematically the case
with all cost-benefit analyses, even ones which people
do in ordinary life. When I decide whether to buy a TV
for this amount or a more expensive TV for a different
amount, I don't know exactly how in my head I quantify
that, but I do. And with respect to cost-benefit --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Isn't it easier to quantity
that than the value of a plankton?
MR. JOSEFFER: Not -- well -- but with cost-
benefit analyses, again, this is routinely done by
agencies. The statisticians and the economists --
JUSTICE SOUTER: It is -- let me -- I will
grant you that agencies purport to do this kind of
thing. But my question and I think Justice Ginsburg's
question is, does it make any sense in these
circumstances to think that you really can do a cost-
benefit analysis? And if the answer is no, we have been
purporting to do it but it really doesn't make a lot of
sense, then it either means that there is just going to
be an irrational process going on, or it means that the
technology-driven standard basically is going to be read
right out of the statute, because you are always going
to find some disproportion which is going to limit your
use of technology.
MR. JOSEFFER: I think the most irrational
thing would be to just throw up one's hands and say that
we are going to impose standards whether or not they do
harm more harm than good, whether or not they make any
sense. And -- and here the agency very carefully
considered the relative costs and the relative benefits
and also did so in a way that puts its thumb on the side
of the environmental side of the scales.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But just to get back
to your television hypothetical, if you told somebody
that you were going to buy the best TV available nobody
would think you meant that you were going to buy a very
cheap TV because, considering the costs and benefits,
that was the best one. They would think you are going
to get the fanciest TV you could.
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, these words have
different meanings in different contexts, which just
underscores their ambiguity. But taking the phrase here
as a whole, if I said I was going to acquire the best
technology available for winterizing my lawnmower so
that it would work again in the spring, the best
technology available for winterizing a $400 lawnmower
would not be $500 fluid, because when one's talking
about protecting something it's intuitive to think about
the value of what's being protected.
And again, Congress by expressly requiring
cost-benefit analysis for some of the pollution
discharge limits was expressly contemplating exactly
what seems to concern you, Justice Ginsburg --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Does it make any
difference --
MR. JOSEFFER: -- that costs would be traded
against benefits.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You have the two labels:
The BP, "best practical," and then "best available."
And isn't it so that the best available technology,
thinking of the Clean Air Act, what they call "BAT," is
considered the most technology-forcing standard and then
there are lesser standards? But you seem to think that
these can be --
MR. JOSEFFER: All of these words can have
different meanings. I think of the four best technology
provisions that are expressly cross-referenced in this
provision, the one that's most informative here is the
best conventional pollutant control technology, because
Congress expressly required cost-benefit consideration
in determining the best conventional pollutant control
technology and "best" is the only word in that phrase
that is amenable to a cost-benefit reading.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think maybe what
Justice Ginsburg was beginning to get at is my question
here. I assume that BTA is the most rigorous of the
standards set forth in the statute. You can argue with
that assumption, but grant me the assumption for the
moment. If BTA is more rigorous than the other
standards, what is it in the regulations that reflects
the agency's concurrence with that? What is there in
the agency regulations that indicates that there is a
more rigorous examination under BTA than the other
standards?
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, to be clear, the agency
does not think and therefore did not in its regulation
presume that the best technology available for
minimizing adverse environmental impact was more strict
than the other standards. Just two commonsense points
on that. The pollutant discharge standards, which are
the other ones, establish their goal to be the
elimination of discharges, whereas here this provision
says that its goal is to minimize. So on its face this
is a more measured standard than the others.
And, second, as a practical matter, there is
no reason Congress would want greater protection for
fish through intake structures than for people through
the discharge of pollutants. I mean especially --
Congress enacted all of these provisions in 1972, and it
provided at that time that in determining pollution
discharge, even including toxic pollution discharge, EPA
was required to consider the relationship between cost
and benefits up until 1989.
And it makes no sense to think that Congress
would have wanted stricter standards for fish here than
for people under the toxic discharge provisions. And on
its face --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are you disagreeing with
the premise of Justice Kennedy's question?
MR. JOSEFFER: Yes. Our argument is that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You don't think --
JR. JOSEFFER: -- this provision here for
water intact --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- Congress intended a
tougher standard?
MR. JOSEFFER: Pardon?
JUSTICE STEVENS: You do not think Congress
intended a tougher standard; is that true?
MR. JOSEFFER: We think Congress did not
intend this to be a tougher standard than the ones for
discharge of pollutants --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why didn't it use BPT or
-- or one -- one of the other standards?
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, because these are all
different standards. One thing that -- two thing are
for certain. One is that this standard is different
than all of the others --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If they are different,
then one is either less rigorous or more rigorous.
MR. JOSEFFER: Right. But there is no
reason to presume this one is more rigorous, especially
considering -- first -- I mean, the words here -- it
uses important words here it did not use elsewhere.
Here we have "best technology available" --
"best technology available for minimizing adverse
environmental impact." And, first, "best," as some of
the examples earlier demonstrated, is not necessarily
the way that most singlemindedly pursues a goal at all
costs and without regard to all of the consequences,
which is why -- for example, if you were talking about
the best way to get home, it would not necessarily be
the most direct route if that required payment of a
toll.
Similarly, "minimize" is also an -- and,
again, Congress used "best" to mean that in "best
conventional pollutant control technology," because that
is the only word there that is amenable to our reading.
And, second, "minimize" is also an important
word, because "minimize" has two perfectly common and
ordinary meanings. One is to reduce to the greatest
extended possible. The other in ordinary usage is to
reduce to some lesser, reasonable level.
So if I said, for example, that I was trying
to minimize the risk of being hit by a car today, I
presumably would not mean that I was staying inside at
home all the time. Instead, it would mean that,
consistent with other needs, including economic ones,
like the need to travel to work, I was being prudent.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if it "available to
reduce"? "For minimizing" is no stronger than if it had
said "available" -- if it meant what you suggest, why
didn't it read "available to reduce"?
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, elsewhere in the Clean
-- in the Clean Water Act, Congress clearly did use
"minimize" to mean a reduction. If Congress called for
a, quote, "drastic minimization of paperwork," Section
U.S. Code 1251(f), then a "drastic minimization" has
to mean a drastic reduction, which is a perfectly
ordinary meaning of the word.
"Available" is also relevant because,
Justice Ginsburg, as you mentioned earlier --
JUSTICE SCALIA: "Reduce" in any event is --
is not -- is not the same as what you are arguing. You
are arguing reduce to the maximum extent reasonably
possible. The word "reduce" alone doesn't convey that.
The word "reduce" would just mean, you know, if you --
if you knock it down any amount, you have reduced it.
But you are saying "minimize" requires more
than that. It means reducing it to the maximum extent
reasonably possible. Isn't that what you are saying?
MR. JOSEFFER: No. We -- we construe -- I
think the other side might take that view of -- of
"minimize." Our view is that "minimize" means you have
to reduce --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Just to reduce.
MR. JOSEFFER: -- a reasonable -- refers to
a reasonable reduction. And so some minimal reduction
in this context would probably not be reasonable.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I didn't understand that to
be your position. You -- you don't think that
"minimize" even means that you reduce it to the maximum
extent reasonably possible?
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, I guess it depends --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You think any reduction
constitutes minimizing?
MR. JOSEFFER: No, because it does have to
be a reasonable reduction, which would not be -- in this
context would not be a trivial one. Reasonableness --
we may -- we may agree, depending on what one means by
"reasonable." "Reasonableness" tends to connote a
consideration of -- of all relevant factors.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. JOSEFFER: And so when we're talking
about a reasonable reduction, we are going to talk about
a reduction that is reasonable in light of, among other
things, the relationship between costs and benefits. So
we may agree if that's what we both mean by
"reasonableness."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let me say it again and you
tell me whether you agree. I had thought that what you
meant the meaning of "minimize" was is that you reduce
the -- the harm to the maximum extent reasonably
possible, not merely that you reduce it to some extent.
MR. JOSEFFER: I think that's right with --
with "reasonably" entailing a consideration of -- of the
relationship between costs and benefits.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, "reasonable"
includes everything.
MR. JOSEFFER: Yes.
If -- I could reserve the remainder of my
time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Mahoney.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MAUREEN E. MAHONEY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MS. MAHONEY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I would like to start with just setting the
stage here. For almost 30 years now, the Executive
Branch has had an executive order through all
administrations that requires a cost-benefit analysis to
be done whenever regulations are adopted. And that's
because the Executive Branch considers that to be just
an essential component of reasoned decisionmaking.
So this Court should not be quick to
conclude that Congress intended to deprive the agency of
the tools that it needs to come up with reasoned answers
to these vexing problems in the absence -- -
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you agree that this is
a Chevron case?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, it is a Chevron case,
Your Honor. And we think -- certainly think it could be
resolved under step one, meaning the following: Can you
read the statute reasonably to say that Congress
unambiguously foreclosed cost-benefit analysis under
6(b)? I think the answer to that is no.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the -- the -- one
question I have on this is if I look at the two
standards -- and the first one is "best practical" -- it
talks about cost-benefit. It says you shall consider
the total cost of application of technology in relation
to the effluent-reduction benefits.
Then you look at "best available," and
they've changed the phrase. It doesn't get rid of cost,
but it simply says you shall take into account the cost
of achieving such effluent reduction.
MS. MAHONEY: Your Honor, but that's --
JUSTICE BREYER: So they both use the word
"cost."
MS. MAHONEY: They do.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then you look at what
Senator Muskie said at the time.
MS. MAHONEY: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what Senator Muskie
said at that time is the object here is when we move to
better -- to better technology, we -- you know, when you
get past the practical and you get into the other, it
says -- stop considering costs? Not quite. He says:
"While costs should be a factor in the administrator's
judgment." So he is not against using costs. He says
that you have to do it under a reasonableness standard
where you are taking into account all the goals and so
forth.
Now, that's ambiguous. But, as I read it,
it says: Of course you can't avoid taking into account
costs, but don't do it too much.
And, therefore, you would say: Don't apply
one of these big formal things when you reach your final
goal. There are other ways of getting there. Of
course, see that it isn't absurd. And for 30 years the
agency has had a way. It has talked about "grossly
disproportionate."
Now, that's the whole background to the
question. My question is, of course: Why not let
sleeping dogs lie? Let the agency take it into account
the way it's done it to prevent absurd results, but not
try to do it so that it's so refined you can't even take
account of what a fish is worth unless they happen to be
one of the 1.2 percent that goes to market.
MS. MAHONEY: Well, Your Honor, we are not
arguing that you have to do monetized cost-benefit
analysis, nor did the agency say that it was basing its
rule on --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, fine. Then what are
you arguing? Are you arguing that you should take costs
into account? Because I don't think -- or I don't think
you should reach much disagreement on that point, that
sometimes you take them into account the way that
Senator Muskie suggested.
MS. MAHONEY: But, Your Honor, the -- the
Second Circuit held, and Respondents argue, that the
benefits have to be essentially the same before you can
look at the cost of the technology.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well now, what they are
going to argue, I guess, is going to be up to them, and
I would be very interested in hearing it.
MS. MAHONEY: But that is what they --
JUSTICE BREYER: And then you would be
satisfied with the following ruling: The Second Circuit
went too far in saying that you can never take costs
into account.
MS. MAHONEY: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: Of course, you can
sometimes take account of them, and the standard that we
think is there -- I'm just imagining this -- is the one
they have used for 30 years. Is it grossly
disproportionate? Are you -- is it feasible? Is it
practical? Are you using costs along with other things?
How do you feel about some slightly vague thing like
that?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, something like that, as
long as it is clear that costs can be --
JUSTICE BREYER: You are happy with that?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, as long as costs can be
compared to benefits, and the Second Circuit said they
could not be; that the benefits have to be essentially
the same. That's what "cost-effectiveness analysis"
means. Of course the statute doesn't say "cost
effectiveness."
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So it's simply
saying the Second Circuit was wrong, the use of the word
"cost" is meaningless without some idea --
MS. MAHONEY: Of comparison.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- of what the costs are
relevant to, but a -- but a vague, grossly
disproportionate test is okay with you?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, if --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it or not?
MS. MAHONEY: A -- a vague, grossly
disproportionate --
JUSTICE BREYER: The one they used for 30
years at EPA, is that all right or not all right?
MS. MAHONEY: Your Honor, I think the point
is: Yes, if for 30 years they have not been mandating
closed-cycle cooling under that standing -- standard, so
from the industry's perspective, that probably is an
acceptable standard.
But the real point here is that when we
start talking about to what degree can you compare the
costs, is it significantly greater than, is it wholly
disproportionate, that's exactly where Chevron comes in.
If everyone concludes that you can compare costs to
benefits, then certainly the agency should have some
flexibility.
With respect to the question of whether it
should be the same standard as the -- what I think
you're referring to as the B-A-T standard, which governs
discharges of even toxic pollutants, I think the answer
to that is that not necessarily by any means, because
the acronyms are similar but the text isn't. That
standard actually talks about the goal of eliminating
discharges. Congress did not say eliminate all
impingement and entrainment to the country. They could
have, they didn't.
They said minimize adverse environmental
impact, which is necessarily a broad delegation of
discretion to the agency. In addition, that standard --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ms. Mahoney, I -- before
you go any further. I am not clear. I -- I did not
understand that for 30 years the only test has been a
grossly disproportionate test. You seem to accept that
as true.
MS. MAHONEY: Wholly disproportionate, Your
Honor, has been the test. That's what has been used.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wholly disproportionate?
MS. MAHONEY: Wholly disproportionate, not
grossly disproportionate.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you're -- you're happy
with that?
MS. MAHONEY: Well, the point is that I -- I
think what I am happy with is saying that the agency
should have discretion to formulate what test it's going
to use. But under the wholly disproportionate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. You think they can
use a wholly disproportionate?
MS. MAHONEY: Yes, I do, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you'd be happy if they
continued to do that, but you wouldn't be particularly
happy if we prescribed that as the only available test?
Is that the --
MS. MAHONEY: Well, I just think that it's
hard to get that out of the language. When -- when it
doesn't come straight out of the language "wholly
disproportionate," then you ought to leave it to the
agency. But --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could the -- could the
agency mandate a closed-cycle system, recirculating
system --
MS. MAHONEY: Well, they haven't.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- for a whole plant?
Could they -- under your view, could the agency, given
its Chevron latitude, mandate closed circulation?
MS. MAHONEY: Under a wholly
disproportionate standard, Your Honor?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Just under the statute.
MS. MAHONEY: Under the statute, I doubt it.
It would probably be arbitrary and capricious. But --
and -- and let me explain why.
The statute talks about minimizing adverse
environmental impact, and it's important to understand
what the EPA did here. At page 169a of the appendix,
they say: "We are using impingement and entrainment as
a quick and convenient metric." In other words, we are
going to make you reduce impingement and entrainment to
the -- to a very large extent, get it down, you know,
close to zero if we can, whatever. But that's not
because it is itself adverse environmental impact. They
say they didn't define it at 287a.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it -- it seems to
me -- of course, there are limits on what the agency can
do, but if it couldn't mandate the closed circulation
system -- I think I've got the term right -- if it could
not do that, then this is not -- you're backing away
from Chevron.
MS. MAHONEY: Well, here's -- here's how we
would say it, Your Honor. There may be some locations
where that -- where it would not be wholly
disproportionate. If -- if for some reason you couldn't
design an alternative system that would protect, for
instance, a balanced population of fish in that water
body, then it might be that -- that -- that
closed-cycled cooling would be required.
But on a national basis, at 355a the agency
said that they understood that reducing impingement and
entrainment at the ranges they were talking about would
not be justified in many locations across the country.
And that's because power plants may be impinging numbers
of fish that aren't actually harming that water body.
Fish have the potential to procreate in very substantial
numbers. Some fish spawn 500,000 eggs in a year. And,
so, if the -- and throughout the act, even under 316a,
for instance, Congress has said that, even with respect
to thermal discharges, you can get variances if you can
show that you are not harming a balanced population of
fish in the water body.
So given that, given the variances
throughout the act and even these kinds of limits on the
discharge standards, which are designed to protect human
health, why would you read the mandate for the maximum
technology on intake structures which has nothing to do
with human health, nothing. It is just to protect fish
in the water body.
So, it doesn't make sense that in a single
sentence added in conference in a voluminous act about
discharges of pollutants, that Congress would mandate
the maximum technology for --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Then why didn't they use
the word "cost"?
MS. MAHONEY: Because, Your Honor, I
don't --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I mean, your -- your
argument is they used cost here, they used cost there,
they didn't use cost here but they must have meant cost.
MS. MAHONEY: Here's why, Your Honor:
Because the most significant comparison between this
statutory section and the others is they didn't list any
of the factors. All of the other sections have -- have
a detailed list of considerations that the agency must
take into account. This one says nothing. This is not
an example of where --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And maybe the inference to
be drawn is the agency is not supposed to be taking any
of these considerations into account.
MS. MAHONEY: I -- I don't think that's the
most reasonable inference because it would lead to very
irrational results, 200-foot cooling towers in -- in --
in town -- in historic old towns --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You've got the -- I mean
everybody agrees that there is kind of an ultimate
irrationality standard here. So that's -- that's not --
that -- that kind of a horrible is not really the point.
MS. MAHONEY: I don't think so, Your Honor.
I don't know where in the language you can get allowance
to take into account things like energy impacts. Why?
If Congress gave a complete and full standard, why can
we take into account aesthetic harm, navigational harm,
energy impact? It doesn't allow for that, and I think
it doesn't allow for that because Congress intended the
agency to define the terms in a reasonable way.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MS. MAHONEY: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Lazarus.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD J. LAZARUS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. LAZARUS: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
In section 316(b), Congress did not
authorize EPA to decide that the benefits of minimizing
adverse environmental impact did not justify the cost of
available technology.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Except -- except, you say,
when it's grossly disproportionate?
MR. LAZARUS: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where -- where -- where do
you find that? Or the Second Circuit said, anyway.
MR. LAZARUS: Let me explain our position,
Your Honor. EPA has no authority in any circumstance to
decide that fish aren't worth a certain amount of cost.
So EPA never has the authority, in any context, to weigh
costs against benefits. The reason why we think that
would not lead to the kind of absurd circumstances
they're suggesting is not because Congress has that --
sorry -- EPA has that authority. It's because we don't
think that those kinds of absurd circumstances result
from the cost-benefit balance mandated by Congress.
Let me explain why, because there are three
safeguards in the statutory language, its plain meaning,
which would guard against any possibility that a
regulated facility would have to spend millions or
hundreds of millions or billions of dollars to protect
just a few fish.
They would -- that would never happen. I
mean, it would never happen, but not because EPA can
decide it's not worth it. This is why it would never
happen. Three reasons, and these are contributing
reasons.
The first reason is if you actually had some
exorbitant huge increase in costs, if that would happen,
most of those cases would be triggered by the
availability requirement. And that is, that EPA could
deem that cost not be reasonably borne by the industry.
That's the ground they --
JUSTICE ALITO: I don't want to interrupt
you in your enumeration of three reasons, but I just
don't see how you get cost into the concept of
availability. It doesn't fit in there any better than
it does under "best."
MR. LAZARUS: No, I think it -- I think it
fits quite well in the word "available." And EPA has
said that since 1976. It was not disputed by anyone
that available --
JUSTICE ALITO: It's not the plain meaning
of the word. If I look in the real estate page of
the -- of the "Washington Post" on Sunday and I look for
the best house that is available, the best house that is
available might cost $50 million. Now, that would be
available to me. I couldn't afford it, but it would be
available.
I don't see how cost can be fit into that
concept of availability.
--
MR. LAZARUS: I think because it's clear
that in the context of the Clean Water Act what Congress
meant in available -- and this is throughout the
statute -- all the technology-based performance
standards, the availability was both technologically
available and economically available. And that is not
JUSTICE SCALIA: You are using the word in a
strange -- economically available? Economically
feasible maybe. But you wouldn't say economically
available. You wouldn't say I can't buy the house
because for me it's not economically available. I might
say it's not economically feasible, it's not
economically possible, but it's not economically
available? That's weird.
MR. LAZARUS: It may -- it may be weird,
Your Honor, but it is not anything that has ever been
disputed in the interpretation of the Water Act. It's
how EPA has interpreted it for 30 years, and no court,
no one, has ever disputed the fact that availability
includes economic availability.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I disagree with that.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Availability -- if
availability includes economic availability, why doesn't
"best" include economically best?
MR. LAZARUS: Because what the statute says
is not that EPA should -- should promulgate the best
technology. It says the best technology available for
minimizing.
And what -- what Congress did was told EPA
what the technology must be best for. And that is not
reducing it to the amount that EPA believes is sensible.
It means minimizing it, which means --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that -- but that -- but
that doesn't answer, it seems to me, the question. Yes,
the best available for that purpose, but what is best
for that purpose could include other factors such as how
expensive is it and -- and how much it harms the
industry and all sorts of things.
MR. LAZARUS: No, it certainly -- it
certainly includes costs. It certainly includes sort of
whether it can be reasonably borne by the industry.
There's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why? Why does it? I don't
know how you draw the lines you are drawing. You say
yes, "best" includes whether it would bankrupt the
industry. Well, if it includes whether it would
bankrupt the industry, why shouldn't it include whether
it would bankrupt the individual power company?
MR. LAZARUS: Well, there is no -- there is
no question, Your Honor, that the word "available," and
perhaps the word "best" -- we think the word "available"
includes an inquiry into whether or not it could be
borne by the industry. We also wouldn't doubt, Your
Honor -- we wouldn't doubt --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I agree with you on
that, whether it's borne by the industry. But you draw
the line there.
MR. LAZARUS: No, that's not what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why isn't it where that
line is drawn up to the agency?
MR. LAZARUS: We're not, Your Honor -- let
me explain because I think we are confusing different
inquiries here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. LAZARUS: We also would agree that EPA
can take into account site-specific factors in deciding
whether technology is available. Some technology is
available for some facilities given their location, but
not available for other facilities given their location;
but when -- where EPA decides, right, where EPA decides
whether technology is available or not, we don't doubt
they have authority to do that and some discretion to
decide when technology is no longer available because of
the cost. But where they don't have --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Isn't that -- isn't
that exactly what they did here in listing what they
call a suite of technologies or approaches that is
available? I thought that was exactly what they did.
They said for different locations, different
technologies may be the best available.
MR. LAZARUS: Right. And that is perfectly
appropriate. But here's what they did which is not
permitted. They could decide based on site-specific
factors whether technology is available. What they
can't do is, once they decide a technology is available,
they can't then say: But we don't think it's worth
minimizing adverse environmental impact with that
technology, because we don't think those benefits are
worth that cost. That comparison inquiry they can't
make.
So if I can do my safeguards: The first one
is we think availability and cost would eliminate a lot
of those problems. But let's assume -- let's just
assume that technology is much more expensive, way more
expensive, but it's still available in our view. It
still can be borne by the industry even on a
site-specific basis, which we don't disagree that could
be done.
Then let's say that the national -- EPA says
well, but that will only save -- you know, your cheaper
technology will only save a million fish. We actually
think you have to save a million and one fish.
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't see how you can do
that. I just don't see it. It's -- I mean, suppose
that the cost of this machine is $100,000. Now, if you
say I'm talking about using that machine for an entire
industry, you would say, my God, that is certainly
available. But here I have just one part of the
industry here; I have a little plant; and you know, to
hook that machine up is only going to save one
paramecium. Neither of us wants that.
And so the logical thing to say is to say
well, it isn't available for that. And I would be with
you there.
MR. LAZARUS: No --
JUSTICE BREYER: But to be honest about it,
I would have to say the reason it isn't available is
quite -- it isn't available for minimizing the -- the
harm -- that particular adverse impact which is killing
a -- a water animal. The reason it isn't is because it
doesn't kill any water animals. Well, let me be honest;
it kills one, or it kills two --
MR. LAZARUS: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: Or it kills three, and
don't tell me de minimis, because as soon as you say de
minimis, I'm going to add one, okay?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: But what I'm trying to show
here is that -- that there -- it isn't meaningful to
talk about cost being available for an end, without some
-- about something not being available for an end in
light of its costs, unless you take into account what
that end is. I mean, we'd spend trillions to make
America secure so not 50 thousand people die, but we
won't spend trillions for a road accident. And -- and
of course you take those things into account.
So that's -- that's exactly the point I
wonder about. Are you really saying pay no attention or
are you saying, which I could understand better, but you
have to say what you want, I mean, that what we mean is,
yes, they can take costs into account. That's what they
do under the comparable standard, best available
technology, but just use your head, don't do it too
much, don't use it -- like take other things into
account, too, don't do a formal cost-benefit analysis;
don't try to evaluate the paramecium. Do the difference
between the -- you know, the two standards: Best
practical, best available. Do "grossly" or "wholly" or
something.
MR. LAZARUS: But for best available there
is no cost-benefit analysis. It's only for best
practical --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, no, but best
available says take costs into account.
MR. LAZARUS: Right. Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, there is a way of
doing that which is what I'd call a commonsense way that
they have some discretion over, that doesn't involve
some enormously elaborate thing; and that's what I am
searching for. I don't -- I am not sitting here with an
answer. I'm trying to find a way of making sense of
this.
MR. LAZARUS: But -- well, let me try to
give you an answer. They can consider costs only in a
cost feasibility perspective. They cannot compare costs
to benefits. Congress made --
JUSTICE BREYER: Those two things seem
contrary to me. I don't see how you could -- do you see
why?
MR. LAZARUS: No, I don't, because it is two
fundamentally different policy decisions. What Congress
decided in 1972 was that EPA should be allowed to
consider costs in determining whether technology was
available, but not -- and they did this for a reason,
Your Honor -- but not to weigh those costs against those
benefits in deciding whether or not those costs were
worth it.
JUSTICE BREYER: But how is it -- how is it
feasible if it has no benefits at all?
MR. LAZARUS: It -- it -- it's still
feasible for, in terms of the industry, whether they can
afford it.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then we are going to reach
our insane results.
MR. LAZARUS: Yes -- you are never going to
-- you are never going reach the insane result. It's
never going to happen, Your Honor. It's never going to
happen. Put aside the availability limitation, which
will cut off like it did dry cooling. EPA rejected it
saying it was too expensive. Not because of the
cost-benefit: it's too expensive. If you have some --
something where it will only just be saving a few fish
-- what you have to remember is that 316(b) doesn't
impose technology design reform. What it imposes is
that technology-based performance standards. And if EPA
were to say, you have to save just a few more fish, if
they really want to promulgate a standard on that kind
of increment, the regulated facility would always be
able to save just a small increment, without adopting
some expensive technology, because of the way cooling
water intake structures work.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, your
argument is focused on proving that your interpretation
won't lead to insane results, as you put it. But you
have to do a lot more than that. I mean, you have to
establish that this is not ambiguous language.
MR. LAZARUS: Well, I think it's not
ambiguous language because you look at the statutory
language, it says -- right? That's in section 316(b) --
EPA is required -- right? Instructed, required, that
location, design, construction, capacity of cooling
water intake structures reflect the best technology
available for minimizing adverse environmental impact.
And what we argue, and I think this is quite compelling,
Your Honor, is that with that language Congress itself
struck the cost-benefit analysis. Congress said for
costs, EPA has to ensure the technology is available.
Either on industry wide, and could take site into
account site-specific factors. For benefits, Congress
said EPA has to ensure that the environmental benefits
-- the adverse environmental impact -- be minimized to
the extent it can be done with available technology.
JUSTICE ALITO: You have a good -- you have
a good argument based on the language of the statute, I
think, that that costs cannot be taken into account at
all.
MR. LAZARUS: But --
JUSTICE ALITO: At all. But once you
concede that it can be taken into account at all, then I
don't see why you were not in Chevron step 2.
MR. LAZARUS: Well, Your Honor, this is a --
JUSTICE ALITO: Once the foot is in the door
I don't see how you can --
MR. LAZARUS: It's a complete line. Whether
the word "available" can extend to cost feasibility
analysis is one question. Whether the word "available"
can be -- allow EPA to compare costs and benefits, to
weigh one against the other, that's a completely
different question. So the fact that we say the first
half, it doesn't mean the second. Congress really had a
-- what they were doing in 1972, was Congress --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But our problem is that
we -- you've got a clear distinction in mind, and I -- I
don't think we are getting the distinction. Is the
distinction in crude terms this: they can consider
costs in the sense that on an industry-wide basis they
can ask, is there money in the bank or will there be
money in the bank to pay for this? They don't ask
cost-benefit in the sense of asking: is the money in
the bank worth what they are going to get for it?
So is -- is the line you are drawing a money
in the bank line? Is that the point you are making?
MR. LAZARUS: No. It's -- it's they can't
make a judgment that it's not worth it. It's --
JUSTICE ALITO: Right. But --
MR. LAZARUS: And for reasons that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if the only question,
when you say they can consider costs, are you saying
they are simply asking whether it is economically
possible for the industry to afford this, regardless of
whether it's any good or not?
MR. LAZARUS: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is that what --
MR. LAZARUS: Absolutely. What -- 1972, if
this is what Congress is faced with.
JUSTICE ALITO: When you say whether the
industry can afford it, does it take into account at all
the effect on the that price consumers have to pay? If
the effect of achieving a small gain in protecting -- uh
-- fish is to increase electricity costs ten times, is
that something that cannot be taken into account?
MR. LAZARUS: If it can be reasonably borne
by the industry or some site-specific, they can't make
any other judgment. And if I can, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: Can't make any other
judgment. So imagine the consequence of that
environmentally. They can't make any other judgment.
Suppose the EPA is right: it's going to add 20 electric
plants, huge plants, purely to save the fish; and the
result is the cost of electricity goes up, and the
result is there are no electric cars, because people
make the comparison with oil, and now they have to have
petrol. I mean, it's very hard for me to believe that
Senator Muskie would have written a statute that would
have foreseen such an effect.
MR. LAZARUS: Right. I think because such
an effect wouldn't happen. What Senator Muskie and
Congress was worried about in 1972, Your Honor, was they
were worried about the possible underregulation. They
worried about overregulation. And their concern was, if
you gave EPA the authority to weigh costs against
benefits, you would have systemic underregulation and
the regulatory process bogged down by --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's exactly where I
agree with you. So I go back to page 170 of the
legislative history, which I have read now six times,
and I agree with you that it is not totally clear.
Maybe you think it is. But it seems to me what he is
saying there is just what you've said: Don't go into
this with some elaborate thing, but remember costs are
still relevant. And what I've been searching for
throughout is a set of words that would help me
translate that thought into a legal reality.
MR. LAZARUS: And going back to Justice
Souter's statement a moment ago, which I agree with,
what Senator Muskie's distinction he wanted to draw was
to allow EPA to engage in cost analysis as to
feasibility, money in the bank, but not to make that
value judgment of what's worth what. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if you get to
that money in the bank, does this mean that best
technology available changes over time? I mean, maybe
the industry could have borne these costs two years ago,
but they probably can't today. Nobody has money in the
bank today.
(Laughter.)
MR. LAZARUS: It certainly does depend, and
this is how EPA does it, not just in this area but
throughout all the technology-based performance
standards, looking at availability. EPA looks at
industry revenues, barriers to entry, and decides
whether or not this technology is available.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think they
could have said, two years ago, this is what you have to
do, but today they would say you don't have to do that
anymore --
MR. LAZARUS: It's quite possible --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- even though the
technology is still available.
MR. LAZARUS: Notice -- notice -- not
economically. Notice in this case, what the Second
Circuit said in remanding was EPA may be able to justify
the same decision on availability basis, but they didn't
make that determination here. What has happened for the
past 30 years, which is how I -- counsel over here
posited the case -- what has happened over the last 30
years is the EPA has ignored the statutory language and
it engaged in this wholly disproportionate analysis as a
result, which has led to the very kind of
underregulation that Senator Muskie was worried about,
and that is that they had never looked to see whether
closed-cycle cooling is in fact available, economically
available. Instead, they tried to compare these things.
They've just kept from going Phase I through cycle
cooling. They've never given a serious look at
closed-cycle cooling. And the kind of increment we're
talking about, if they actually looked at closed-cycle
cooling, if they'd make available information, we are
not talking about increments; it's a 98 percent
--
reduction in the water flow that happens. If you go
from one --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Lazarus, can I ask you
MR. LAZARUS: -- phase to closed cycle.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you this
question? It's not economically available if it would
bankrupt the whole industry?
MR. LAZARUS: That's right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What about if it bankrupts
three firms?
MR. LAZARUS: If it bankrupts three firms --
if one looks how EPA has interpreted that historically,
Your Honor, throughout all the pollution control
statutes, the Air Act, the Water Act, Resource
Conservation Act, EPA has said that itself is not enough
to say it's available for the industry, but it is
possible -- we don't doubt this -- it is possible --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it's not economically
available to those three firms.
MR. LAZARUS: No, but here's what happens:
What the EPA said -- and you can see this in this
Court's decision in the Crushed Stone case, where the
Court drew this distinction. A particular facility can
seek a variance based on cost impact to them, if they
can show that the cost to them is much greater because
of some particular circumstances to them than it is for
the industry as a whole. And this Court said they could
do that. EPA has long said it. We don't question it,
that they can do a cost-benefit --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, but this -- they just
have -- they are just not quite as strong a company.
MR. LAZARUS: No. And that's the very
distinction this Court drew in the Crushed Stone case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But is the variance a
matter of statutory right or -- or is it available under
a regulation?
MR. LAZARUS: It's -- the way this Court
interpreted sort of the use of categorical standards in
the Dupont case, early on in the 1970s, the Court said
in that case that EPA can promulgate these kind of
technology-based performance standards on a categorical
basis --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. LAZARUS: -- but if they do so, they
have to take -- they have to give a variance possibility
because if a particular --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why -- why isn't that
simply another name for cost-benefit analysis?
MR. LAZARUS: Because you can't do it on a
cost-benefit -- it's not a cost-benefit variance.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, you are doing it on
cost-benefit. You are saying --
MR. LAZARUS: No --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- if we require this and
the company goes bankrupt, the value of demanding it is
not satisfied by the result.
MR. LAZARUS: No, that's not the
justification for the cost variance. The justification
for cost variance is not because of a sort of benefits
being lost. It's because if you can show -- if the only
basis you can get a cost variance -- and this is an
important distinction but not an easy one -- the only
way you can get a variance is if you can show the
assumptions EPA made about how much this would cost
don't apply to you because there is something different
about your facility, so it actually costs you much more.
You can get a variance for that. You can't get a
variance if you say, "We are a weak company and our
revenues aren't strong." You can't get a variance for
that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I assume you can't get a
variance and you also would say the EPA cannot take it
into account if this particular plant -- although the
company as a whole is quite prosperous, this is a small
plant, and it's not generating that much electricity.
It's really just not worth it to put in this big tower.
We are going to close down.
MR. LAZARUS: No, that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That would not be something
that EPA could take into account.
MR. LAZARUS: The EPA can take into account,
as they do for all technology-based performance
standards, they can take into account the size of the
facility to the extent it bears on the availability
question. They can't do it because they think it's not
worth it in terms of the benefits over here. They can
-- they can take into account on availability, but not
over here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what about the
particular case? What they said here is that, if you
require the closed circuit for everybody, we are going
to have to build, we are going to have to pay an energy
penalty of 2.4 to 5.3 percent. You will have to build
additional 400-megawatt plants, which is huge, many,
many, many billions of dollars, and the -- just to
replace the capacity you have lost. And the result,
which seems quite logical, would be to increase by a
lot, not just a little, the consumption of fossil fuel.
Well, now how are they not -- you seem to
be arguing that they can't take that into account,
which, for an environmental agency, I would have
thought, "But they must take it into account."
MR. LAZARUS: We are not saying they can't
take that into account. EPA has said they can. The
Second Circuit said they could, and we agree. But
here's how they could take it into account. They can
take it into account in deciding what will be necessary
to reduce environmental impact. So they can take into
account those things that --
JUSTICE BREYER: So if they did exactly the
same thing they've done, which I've just read you, and
they put a label on it, instead of saying "thinking of
benefits," we were calling it now "taking into account
environmental impacts," then they could do it?
MR. LAZARUS: Well -- but they -- here's
what they could do, Your Honor, and I don't think there
is anything anomalous about this: The EPA can say,
"Here are the factors we're going to take into account
in deciding whether or not we are minimizing adverse
environmental impact, and we have some authority to
decide what is and is not a relevant environmental
impact. We -- here the industry can take into account
in deciding whether or not this technology, this cost,
makes it available or not." They have authority here,
but once they decide whether technology is available,
once they decide what "environmental impact" means and
what it means to minimize, once they decided that, they
can't then say, "Well, we don't think these impacts are
worth those costs."
JUSTICE BREYER: I see that thought, and
this is what's concerning me, but there may be a very
good answer. A lot remains to be done with EPA. They
have an enormous job to do. And I wouldn't want to get
them tied up in unnecessary red tape, where everybody is
suddenly taking them to court on rather technical
things. So if this "grossly" or "wholly," or whatever
you call it, read out of the Muskie page 170 -- read it
out of the "available technology" definition, you can
take costs into account; just don't do it in this other
way. I can see how they could work with that.
MR. LAZARUS: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, I'm worried about what
you are saying that may make it so difficult for them
that they won't be able to do the job.
MR. LAZARUS: Well, we are doing the exact
opposite now, Your Honor. What we are trying to do is
say that the information that EPA has to focus on, the
way Congress constrained them, is limited and it doesn't
allow them to weigh one against the other.
What happens if -- and this is why Congress
didn't want to give EPA cost-benefit analysis authority
here or almost anywhere in the statute. Congress was
concerned that it would bog down the regulatory process,
and that is that if you actually had EPA -- had to come
up to this weighing of one to the other and try to weigh
these imponderables, you would be subject to such
extraordinary attack -- it happened in this case with
this rulemaking -- it would slow down the decisionmaking
process. It wouldn't speed it up. Congress understood
that information is not costless. And sometimes one can
achieve a better cost-benefit balance by having
regulation be based on less information rather than more
information.
JUSTICE BREYER: I agree.
MR. LAZARUS: And that's why they said, "We
want to take out this particular" -- remember, before
72, there was cost-benefit analysis based upon
assessment of water quality impacts. And Congress saw
what happened with that. It completely paralyzed the
regulatory decisionmaking process. They ended up with
very little regulation. So they said: All right, we're
not -- we think EPA can do cost-feasibility analysis
well. We don't think they do cost-benefit analysis
well. We think that kind of information is several
orders of magnitude greater and more imponderable, and
it's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, is the reason they
don't do cost-benefit analysis well because they are
forced to do it in a political atmosphere in which it is
difficult to make rational decisions? Is that basically
the reason Congress would have come to that conclusion?
MR. LAZARUS: I think that may be part, but
I don't think that's --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is that --
MR. LAZARUS: -- the real reason in 1972. I
think that does happen. I think the real reason, 1972,
was that Congress saw what happened before, and they
said, it turns out to be really hard in the water
quality context to measure and value environmental
impact. It's so hard that we think that EPA can get a
better, more rational result if we instead say, here's
what you focus on, technology available, minimizing, and
don't try to compare.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I think -- I see your
point, but I think if I accept your point, all I am
doing is saying, they may in a kind of smoke and mirrors
way take cost-benefit analysis into consideration sub
rosa, when they decide what availability is going to
mean; and they make take it into consideration when they
decide what a -- a -- an undesirable environmental
impact is; and that sort of gets the -- the weighing
process out of the public focus.
And if they do it that way, they -- they can
bring in just the considerations that Justice Breyer is
talking about, but they don't do it in an obvious way.
And I think that's what your argument boils down to.
MR. LAZARUS: Well, I think argument boils
down to that they can focus on environmental impact,
decide what is and isn't environmental impact, they can
focus on availability, decides what costs are relevant
to that, and when is the technology available --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What costs are relevant to
that?
MR. LAZARUS: Well, the relevant --
JUSTICE SOUTER: When they made that
decision, are they not in effect anticipating the kind
of decision they would make on a more specific basis in
a more highly charged political atmosphere, if they
engaged in the cost-benefit analysis that you say they
can't do?
MR. LAZARUS: It may well be one reason why
Congress didn't want to compare one to the other, about
that charged atmosphere. But what -- they can't do it.
I don't think they are doing it sub rosa. Our point is,
Your Honor, is they do it according to Congress's
instruction, you won't have these kinds of absurd
results.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the page -- the page of
the legislative history or the page of the text of the
statute that says what I think is a -- I mean, try it
with your son. It costs $100.
MR. LAZARUS: I think that's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Your son says, "It costs
$100." You say, "That's too expensive." He says, "But
I didn't tell you what it was for." What? I mean --
you see?
Now you tell me the page, and I have read a
lot of it; tell me the page of the legislative history
or the phrase of the statute where it says what you just
said -- that you cannot take into account what you were
buying for that $100.
MR. LAZARUS: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: What page? I will read it
again.
MR. LAZARUS: I'm -- I'm not going to give
you a specific page. I'm going to give you the
statutory language in section 316(b).
JUSTICE BREYER: I know 316(b).
MR. LAZARUS: What Congress is doing
systemically in 316(b) and throughout the Clean Water
Act is that Congress is saying we want to give EPA the
authority for cost feasibility; we don't believe in this
-- that it works with cost-benefit analysis because of
the weighing against one against the other.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it has -- it has
required, not just permitted but required cost-benefit
analysis in other areas. What --
MR. LAZARUS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what is your
response to the fact that it -- it seems ridiculous to
allow it, and indeed require it in effluent situations
where human health is at stake, and yet to forbid it in
this intake situation when you were just talking about
the snail darter. What -- what's your response to that?
MR. LAZARUS: Two responses, Your Honor.
The first is that in 1972, which is when 316(b) was
enacted, Congress did not allow cost-benefit analysis
for toxic pollutants. Toxic pollutants were not
regulated under section 301 and 304 of the statute.
They were not subject to best practicable technology;
they were not subject to best available technologies.
They were subject to a separate provision, and that this
section 307 at that time. That's a subsequent amendment
to the law. Where Congress originally --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And did that section 307
not allow cost-benefit?
MR. LAZARUS: It did not allow cost-benefit.
The way Congress originally approached hazardous water
pollutants and toxic air pollutants, the Clean Water Act
is the same. They said EPA, this is so harmful that we
actually want you to do an assessment to figure out at
what level will it no longer be harmful to humans? And
what they found out when they tried that, is they found
out, boy, that information is unbelievably hard to come
up with. And so, they had -- the regulation depended on
this incredible information, and the result was that EPA
did nothing. They did the nothing for water toxics,
they did nothing for air toxics. So in 1977, when they
learned how more information could lead to less
regulation, they said all right: we've got to change
that. That doesn't work, so we are going to move to a
technology-based performance approach in the first
instance, and then couple it with -- still keeping the
health-based as a backup, to be able to go past that.
So they put the technology-based as the
first step and they kept the 307, but in 1972, Your
Honor, there was only one provision of the Clean Water
Act in which Congress delegated any authority to EPA to
compare costs and benefits; and that was under 301(b)(2)
and 304(b)(2). And in that provision they said until
77 only, EPA for best practical control technology,
you can and you must do cost-benefit analysis.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel --
MR. LAZARUS: That's the only provision.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You would have to
agree, wouldn't you, that the panel's decision in this
case overruled the prior panel's decision in judge
Katzman's decision in Riverkeeper 1?
MR. LAZARUS: No, they certainly didn't
overrule it for two different reasons. If you look at
the Riverkeeper 2 opinion, I think it's on 25a, note 11,
they explain that in Riverkeeper 1, dry cooling was
rejected because it was too expensive. That's an
availability consideration, not a cost-benefit
consideration.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, in Riverkeeper
what Judge Katzman said is that we think EPA was
permitted to consider costs and energy efficiency in
determining the best technology available. He was
deciding it on the basis of availability, too.
MR. LAZARUS: He gave -- he gave several
reasons, Your Honor. Also included was the fact that it
was too expensive. Which is why the Riverkeeper 2 court
characterized that as dictum. In all events, with all
due respect to my former colleagues on the Georgetown
faculty, Judge Katzman was wrong.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Joseffer, you have four minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DARYL JOSEFFER
ON BEHALF OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY, ET AL,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONERS
MR. JOSEFFER: Thank you. If I could start
where I left off, the fact that Riverkeeper 1 in their
view is wrong, I think does confirm what anyone would
conclude after reading the two opinions, which is that
they are not consistent. At a minimum that helps to
demonstrate ambiguity.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It's an ambiguity the
government said it could live with. Now the government
advised this Court not to grant cert in this case, isn't
that so?
MR. JOSEFFER: Our -- our -- what we said
was we thought the court of appeals was dead wrong, that
it was a very important issue, but in the interlocutory
posture of this case, which was a remand, we did not
think that it was -- was so important as to warrant your
cert standards. Frankly, we were delighted to find out
we were wrong about that.
The other point I need to make is that this
case is, after all, about the one sentence in the Act
that deals with water intake, not about all the other
detailed provisions about the discharge of pollutants,
which is important because about half of the last
argument dealt with the discharge of pollutants.
The fact that there is no list of factors
here, and instead just one general sentence, just
underscores that on this issue, Congress was delegating
especially broad authority to the agency to address a
problem that at the time was relatively novel, and that
legislative record confirms Congress itself did not give
any real weight to. If we want to look at floor
statements, thought I would not look to the floor
statement of Congressman Muskey concerning a different
standard, which was the BAT standard, but instead the
only floor statement that addresses this standard, and
it says that economic practicability is the test, and
everyone agrees that practicably considers costs and
benefits.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, that was the House
side, which the House side was against that. And the --
the question I have from your point of view is the --
the obverse question: if you look at this particular
cost-benefit analysis, I mean, it goes through all these
things which, they don't know what the numbers are,
nobody knows what the values of the fishes are, which
% are never even eaten, they are fast swimmers or
whatever.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: But the -- the -- you see
the point here. That all of his fears, your -- your
opponent, brother here, seem to be manifest in this kind
of a document which, if you do read Senator Muskey,
seems to be the very things he was against.
So -- so what is -- I am still left with
your suggestion of what to do, other than just, "well,
it's all fine."
MR. JOSEFFER: Well, look -- first off.
What EPA did here was not among the most robust forms of
cost-benefit analysis. In other words we don't think
the Court necessarily needs to expand -- to opine on the
outer limit here. EPA did two things. First, as you
mentioned, it first created national performance
standards; second it did a variance when an facility's
costs are significantly greater than the benefits.
So first in determining -- so -- well, the
second of those is easiest, because there is an obvious
thumb on the environmental side of the scales there.
Costs have been to be significantly greater than
benefits, which is not all that aggressive.
Here, with respect to the nationwide
performance standards, EPA again did not just try to do
a strict -- costs are, you know, one penny greater than
benefits. Instead it weighed up a number of
considerations. It looked to the incremental benefits
of closed cycle cooling versus the technology it chose.
And then it -- it determined that those incremental
benefits were outweighed by a variety of other things,
including -- one was the extremely high costs of
closed-cycle cooling, three and a half billion; second,
the cost-benefit ratio, which was extremely
disproportionate; third, the energy impacts which you
mentioned are really quite significant.
We are talking about 40% of the Nation's
power supply. If we are going to reduce that by 4
percent and require 20 new plants to be built and
require each of those plants to be taken offline for 10
months while it's retrofitted, that's really a very
significant concern of EPA's. And then the fourth is
air pollution.
And so when EPA is weighing benefits against
all the other thing and is not purporting to assign
artificial monetary values to everything, I argue that
this just underscores that we are well within the
agency's discretion here.
If I could also turn then to just the main
point. One of the main points here is that I really
don't think Respondents have any logic to their
position, because when we are talking about the text
they say costs have to be considered against
affordability and not against benefits. But when we are
talking about absurd results, they say, oh sure, you can
consider costs against benefits, when it would otherwise
be absurd. But under Chevron it's the agency's
gap-filling discretion to decide when where to draw that
line, and nothing draw a de minimis line in the statute
any more than the line EPA has drawn.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel,
the case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the case in the
