IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
BEN YSURSA, IDAHO SECRETARY :
OF STATE, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 07-869
POCATELLO EDUCATION :
ASSOCIATION, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 3, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:08 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CLAY R. SMITH, ESQ., Deputy Attorney General, Boise,
Idaho; on behalf of the Petitioners.
JEREMIAH A. COLLINS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of the RespondentS.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CLAY R. SMITH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
JEREMIAH A. COLLINS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 25
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CLAY R. SMITH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 51
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:08 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 07-869, Ysursa v. Pocatello Education
Association.
Mr. Smith.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CLAY R. SMITH
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SMITH: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case is narrowed to a single, but from
the Petitioner's perspective a critical, dispute over
the scope of internal State sovereignty: whether the
First Amendment trumps the otherwise existing authority
of the Idaho legislature to direct political
subdivisions of the State to take an action, here
restricting access to their payroll systems, that the
subdivisions could take independently without violating
the Amendment.
The genesis of this dispute is Idaho Code
Section 44-2004(2), which was adopted in 2003. That
provision prohibits State and local government public
employers from deducting amounts for political
activities from the payroll checks due to their
employees and remitting those amounts to third parties.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Didn't the statute also
prohibit private employers from doing that?
MR. SMITH: As construed by the district
court, it did. The base legislation in this, the
Voluntary Contribution Act, excluded from application an
employee -- an employer subject to the two major labor
-- Federal labor relations statutes, the NLRA and the
RLA.
But there was obviously a group of
employers, private employers, in -- who were not engaged
in commerce, as well as the agricultural sector.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And you concede the
statute was unconstitutional as applied to them?
MR. SMITH: The district court concluded
that the -- yes, Your Honor, we did.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And you agree with that
conclusion?
MR. SMITH: We do.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And what is the difference
between the private employer and the county agency?
MR. SMITH: Well, the principal difference
is that one is a private employer -- that is to say,
engaging in private speech -- while the public employer
is a -- is a subdivision of the State of Idaho, subject,
we would argue, to the plenary control, pursuant to the
Idaho Constitution, of the Idaho legislature.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think Justice
Stevens's question highlights for me one of the
confusing parts of this case. You sort of paired off a
number of the people who would otherwise be covered, and
you are left with the county employees. If you
had started with the county employees, is this how you
would have gone about telling them they can't do this?
I mean the county employers.  Would you have passed a
law saying that the county employers are not allowed to
have this checkoff? If you think they are part of the
State, I guess you could have just written them a letter
and say don't do this, right?
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, in a word, the
answer is no. I don't believe we, referring to the
Petitioners in this case, could have written the -- the
political subdivisions of a State to direct them to take
an action unless there was a legislative basis for doing
In this instance, the -- the legislature
concluded that it wanted all public employers, among
others, to not allow access to their payroll systems.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do I understand that the
counties, if they elected to, could decide not to -- not
to do the checkoff?
MR. SMITH: Prior to the adoption of the
statute in 2003, yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And so why should counties
be different from -- from -- I'm still puzzled about why
counties -- county employers are different from private
employers in terms of the State interest in preventing
the checkoff.
MR. SMITH: Well, there is a fundamental
difference, Your Honor. And -- and it rests in the
notion that the State has no interest in the -- in
private employers' determination to be involved or not
involved in political matters. The State legislature,
however, has a very concrete interest in avoiding either
the reality or the appearance --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If you -- if you think of
the case as a principal-agent case so that the principal
can direct the agent as to what to do, the agent being
the county, then it seems to me that the unions might
still have an argument that this is an unconstitutional
condition.
I've been looking for ways to examine this
case. The public forum doesn't really work for me.
Subsidy doesn't really work for me. It seems to me to
be an unconstitutional-condition case. At least that's
the argument.
That doesn't mean you necessarily can't
prevail. But suppose the State told the city: You
can't have a parade that you sponsor for this particular
cause. That would raise an unconstitutional-conditions
argument; wouldn't it?
MR. SMITH: It might, Your Honor, but that
situation, of course, is not the situation presented
here.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why isn't it? And I say
that because I think that follows on Justice Stevens's
line of questioning. I didn't mean to interrupt him,
but it seems to me that is consistent with what he is
asking.
MR. SMITH: Because the statute at issue
here, Justice Kennedy, speaks across the board to a
specific kind of conduct, political activities. It does
so in the a viewpoint-neutral fashion. To prohibit a
particular parade might well raise viewpoint
non-neutrality issues.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, because the
State couldn't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You stand up and say that
this isn't viewpoint -- that this is -- that this is
viewpoint-based. Isn't it where the union -- and
aren't they right about that?
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, they are incorrect
about that. The district court concluded that the
statute is viewpoint-neutral. Indeed --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But does it get at any
speech other than union speech? I mean you say, yes, it
is content-based, but it's viewpoint neutral. But it
seems that what is banned by the statute is union
speech. Is any other organization affected? Does the
ban affect any other organization? Isn't it simply
union speech that's at stake?
MR. SMITH: The answer is no. It -- the --
the statute just -- does not just affect union speech by
its literal terms.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But, in practice, is
there any other application?
MR. SMITH: Well, there is no evidence in
the record, Your Honor, as to any other entity who is
affected by the statute. But that is hardly -- that's
hardly remarkable, given the fact that the plaintiffs in
the litigation are six labor organizations. I should
add that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are there -- are there in
counties some charitable drives that occur annually and
that permit employees to donate to those charities
through deductions from their wages?
MR. SMITH: There are, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And would they presumably
be covered by this? United Fund drives, so-called, my
-- my recollection is that usually the contributions to
that simply come out of -- are deducted from the wages.
And if they existed in the counties, presumably they
would have been covered. But we don't know if they
would.
MR. SMITH: Well, to the extent that the --
the contribution was for political activities --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, it's only political
activities?
MR. SMITH: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I see. Well, none of those
would allow that --
JUSTICE BREYER: But if in fact there is a
charity, which charity in Idaho is a charity that makes
all of its contributions to help support right-to-work
laws. All right. So that charity goes and says, could
you -- we'd like a payroll deduction. Can they get it,
or not?
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, again, it depends.
I -- I don't know the answer.
JUSTICE BREYER: You don't know. Okay. So,
then, we do know this. We do know -- what I'm wondering
is: Isn't this case, to me, quite confused about
something fairly simple? The question would be: Look,
one, do you or do you not in Idaho allow anybody to have
payroll deductions for anything? And I take it your
answer to that question is: Yes, we do allow some
payroll deductions for some things. Okay?
So then we look at this one, and it says:
No payroll deductions for union activities that are
political. All right? Now, you either do have or you
do not have a justification for that difference. If you
have a reasonable, or whatever the sufficient test is,
justification for the difference, you win. And if you
don't, you lose. And, indeed, whether you are the State
or the county could have to do with the plausibility of
the justification.
Here we are, end of case, traditional. You
just -- you didn't argue it that way, I guess, below.
What's wrong with that?
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, in fact, we argued
below that there was no constitutional right of access
to the payroll system for purposes of making political
contributions. And let me reiterate at this --
JUSTICE BREYER: There certainly, I would
think, would be a problem if the right-to-work people
can get there. And you are not going to let the unions
get there. But I don't know the facts. So shouldn't we
just send this case back and say: Please look at what
the situation is? If they have to treat some people one
way, some people another, bad; if they don't, everybody
is treated alike for good reason, probably okay.
MR. SMITH: Well, the -- I would suggest
that a remand for that purpose would be futile. The
district court, as I said before, concluded that the
statute is viewpoint neutral. And let me stress that
the term "political activities" does not -- is not
defined with reference to unions or speech by other
entities that might be controlled by unions.
It addresses political contributions for
electoral matters, independent expenditures, and
expenditures to political parties.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would -- would they include
contributions to an organization that makes
contributions to political parties --
MR. SMITH: Yes, to the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- such as a right-to
work-organization?
MR. SMITH: To the extent that the -- the
organization is, for example, a political action
committee, it would.
And let me go back to Justice Ginsburg's
question for a moment. Had the legislature intended
-2004(2) to apply only to unions, they would have --
it would have been engaging in a redundancy because
under another provision of the same legislation,
-2603(1)(b)(iv), which appears at petition appendix
, the Idaho legislature proscribed amounts being --
amounts -- required all amounts to be paid -- paid to a
separate segregated fund which was established pursuant
to the legislation that was invalidated by the district
court, required those kinds of contributions to be made
directly by the employee and not through -- or not by
the employee's employer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does the State give some
particular favor to unions? I mean, does it allow --
what -- what is the situation? Can you be forced to
contribute to the union even though you're not a union
member?
MR. SMITH: No, Your Honor. The --
-2004(2) is part of the Idaho Right to Work Act, which
was adopted in the mid 1980s. It allows amounts to be
deducted through payroll checkoffs for union dues.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But unions do have a
special prerogative which -- which no other
organizations, as far as you're aware, have in the
State, which is to have money deducted from people's
--
payrolls?
MR. SMITH: That's -- that's correct. The
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No other
organization other than the Federal, State and local
governments.
MR. SMITH: True. But let -- let me -- let
me continue with my response to Justice Scalia's
question.
The special prerogative that, for example,
the Pocatello Education Association or the firefighters
union has is the ability to engage in collective
bargaining pursuant to State statute as the exclusive
bargaining representative of, for example, the Pocatello
School District's teachers.
That exclusivity which is granted to a
limited number of -- of -- in fact, two areas under
Colorado -- excuse me -- under Idaho law, namely,
firefighters and teachers, is the extraordinary benefit
that unions have.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. The point of my
question is it doesn't seem to be terribly
discriminatory if indeed the only organizations in the
State that are given the right, whether by Federal or
State law, to deduct, private organizations, given the
right to deduct from the salary a municipal or private
employer pays. It doesn't seem to me particularly
discriminatory to say that, moreover, in making those
deductions, no part of it will be given for political
activities. I mean you're only addressing a narrow
class, but it's a narrow class that has a special
benefit.
MR. SMITH: Well, I would agree that -- that
unions have, and particularly these -- particularly the
Respondents have a special benefit. But again, I go
back to the basic point that 2004(2) addresses all
public employers or public employees and is not limited
to political activity contributions. That might be, for
example, as the situation is here, to a union-sponsored
political action -- political action committee.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask a question
about, say, an attempt to deduct contributions to a
charity like the United Fund? Do counties have a choice
to either do that or not do it, or does State law
require them to accept such requests?
MR. SMITH: Local governments have
discretion.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They have discretion to do
that?
MR. SMITH: That's correct.
JUSTICE STEVENS: With respect to the union
situation, the statute takes away that discretion.
MR. SMITH: With respect --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And the question is why is
there -- why is there a State interest in taking away
that discretion for unions, but not as to charities.
MR. SMITH: Well, it takes away that
discretion with respect to any third party who might
receive amounts for political activities.
JUSTICE STEVENS: For political activities.
But what is -- what is the reason for differentiating
political activities from charities?
MR. SMITH: The reason, as we articulate in
our brief, is the desire to avoid either the appearance
or the reality of public employer involvement in, in
this instance, electoral politics.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I see.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are there other
areas in which the State exercises the authority you're
asserting here with respect to county employers, telling
them what they can and can't do?
MR. SMITH: Outside the area of elections,
not with respect to payroll deductions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I mean more
generally. Your assertion is that this is part of the
State, and therefore, as I gather, it's conceded on the
other side, this is acceptable with respect to State
employees but not other public employers. Are there
other areas in which you act like the counties are part
of the State?
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, the -- the county --
counties in Idaho and I suppose in most States act as
political subdivisions of the State. And whatever
authority they have or don't have derives, if not
exclusively, virtually exclusively from State law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm looking for --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. Please.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm looking for a
specific example. I mean, maybe counties or
municipalities, you know, contract for trash collection
or water services and maybe the State tells them, look,
you've got to deal with these people, you've got to do
it by open bidding, whatever.
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, let me go back to
the election context for a moment to try to address that
question. Prior to its amendments pursuant to the
legislation at hand, Idaho Code Section 67-6605, which
is part of Idaho's election campaign finance and
reporting statute or general statutes, allowed payroll
deductions to be made for contributions to political
committees. In that sense, it allowed counties, as well
as other public employers, to make deductions of the
kind at issue today.
Now, that authority was rescinded by virtue
of the amendment to 2004(2). The point simply is that
if necessary, we -- we could describe in detail various
kinds of -- of requirements that exist with respect to
counties or school districts or cities.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's --
since I asked the question, I think it's necessary. So
what's the best example where the State exercises
control over what the counties would otherwise have
discretion to do? You mentioned school districts. Is
that -- is that an area?
MR. SMITH: Well, Your Honor, for example,
with respect to -- take open meetings, for example, take
public records, for example. Those are general kinds of
statutes that impose requirements on all levels of State
government. So, for example, with respect to open
meetings, the Idaho law requires essentially all
meetings, except for certain exclusions, to be open to
the public. In that sense, it's akin to the Wisconsin
statute.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about a Hatch Act?
Does -- does -- does the State allow State employees to
engage in political activity?
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, it does, but not --
not in connection with their public employment
activities.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know -- I don't
know what that means.
MR. SMITH: It means that there is no
prohibition under State law, for example, for a public
employee to engage in political activity. If -- but our
statute in Idaho applies actually only to State
employees. It doesn't govern those kinds of activities
by local government.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's interesting. Why
not?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The general proposition
that underlies your argument that the local entities are
creatures of State law and they cannot receive Federal
powers from the Federal Government when the States
object, is that -- is that an acceptable proposition?
MR. SMITH: It would be an acceptable
proposition to the extent that Federal law doesn't
pre-empt State law, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Right.
MR. SMITH: In this instance, we would argue
that the First Amendment does not interpose some kind of
barrier to essentially vulcanize local government from
State legislative control.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There is -- there is a
case out of the Ninth Circuit, and it was affirmed by
this Court on a procedural point, but not on a -- not on
the merits -- out of the neighboring State of
Washington, where the State says a locality cannot build
a dam more than 25 feet high.  The locality then gets a
license from the Federal Power Commission, and the State
said, well, you still don't have this authority. And
the Ninth Circuit said you do. The Federal power then
supersedes.
Would you agree that that case is valid?
MR. SMITH: Depending on -- on the facts, I
-- I would agree that it is certainly possible for the
State law to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because there the local
entity has powers greater than what the State wants to
give it, even over the State's objection.
MR. SMITH: Well, but -- but, Your Honor,
that is, I think, beyond cavil; that is to say that
Federal law --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I -- I didn't hear
you. You think that's what?
MR. SMITH: Beyond cavil, beyond --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Really, if the State can
-- can opt not to do something, it can't tell its
subdivisions, we don't want you to do it, either? And
the subdivision can then go to the -- directly to the
Federal Government and say, please let us do this, even
if the State would be free to reject it on its own?
MR. SMITH: Well, it -- it depends on --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It seems to me that that
is the argument you should be making here.
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, perhaps it was --
it was an argument that we don't have to make in this
instance. Needless to say, by virtue of the Supremacy
Clause, there may be instances where Federal law --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought your whole
argument was that the counties are simply
instrumentalities of the State, and the State has full
power over them. It chooses to delegate to them
autonomy, but it holds the control rein. And now you're
saying no, that the Federal Government can give the
State local-unit authority that the State, itself,
chooses not to give. And you say that's beyond cavil.
I really don't understand your argument.
MR. SMITH: It is beyond cavil if the
Federal law, in fact, supersedes State law. There may
be issues --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That depends -- I
mean the whole case turns on -- and the response to
Justice Kennedy, I think, would be -- if the Federal
Government is simply saying you can do it if you want,
that's one thing. If the Federal Government is saying
you must do it because it's covered by the Federal Power
Act, or whatever, that's different.
If it's just a grant of permission, I would
suppose the State can say, well, fine, it's okay with
the Feds, but you can't do it because we don't want you
MR. SMITH: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And don't -- don't you
suffer from -- doesn't your position suffer from a -- a
more serious problem that doesn't even implicate the
pre-emption doctrine? And that is, as I understand your
argument, the -- the local governments are creatures of
the State. Their powers are the powers that the State
gives them by statute, as -- as you were pointing out.
The same thing is true for corporations.
Corporations are creatures of the State. They have the
powers, and only the powers, that the State gives to
them. It -- it seems to me, going back to Justice
Stevens's initial question, that I don't see where the
distinction lies between the -- in effect, the position
of the local-government units and corporations, and --
and between the local-government units and the
corporations. And it seems to me that that's a problem
for you quite apart from any application of Federal law.
MR. SMITH: I disagree, Justice Souter. The
-- as I stated in response to Justice Stevens, the
difference is a central one. That is to say, a
corporation is a private entity with -- with distinct
rights under the First Amendment.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it has distinct
rights under the First Amendment if State law creates a
corporate form of -- of -- of business organization.
And the -- the -- when -- when it comes into existence,
it then does acquire some rights under the national
Constitution. But if in the first instance it's a
creature of State law, its powers, generally speaking,
are the powers that State law gives it. And that is --
that same proposition is true of counties and towns and
-- and other sub-State governmental units.
MR. SMITH: I disagree to the extent that
there is any attempt to equate a private corporation
with essentially an agent or an arm of the State such as
a county, which has been delegated governmental
functions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. Then -- then it
seems to me that your argument is not that State law
controls what it may do and defines its powers. Your
argument, it seems to me, has to rest upon the fact that
what it is doing is a public, as opposed to a private,
function. And that's the extent of the argument. Isn't
that true?
MR. SMITH: Well, that is -- certainly is
the distinction between a private corporation and, for
example, a county.
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's the only distinction
that you can maintain. You can't maintain the
distinction based upon the superiority of State law in
defining the -- the extent of the governmental unit's
powers and so on, because that is just as true of a
corporation. So your distinction has simply got to be a
distinction based on the nature of the function that is
being performed.
MR. SMITH: And -- and the very nature of
the entity, itself, Your Honor. A county --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What -- what do you mean by
the "nature of" --
MR. SMITH: A county or school district
performs functions assigned to it by the State
legislature to carry out the function, to carry out
activities that are public in nature.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, it's doing -- it's
doing a governmental job.
MR. SMITH: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: We understand what that is,
so I understand that point.
MR. SMITH: Your Honor, I -- I can only
repeat that the distinction between the private
corporation and the -- and a political subdivision of
the State is that, in fact, one is an entity created by
the legislature for the very purpose of carrying out
State governmental functions. That -- that, I think, is
entirely consistent with the position argued throughout
this case.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. But -- it -- it is,
but I mean when you say, as I think you are now saying,
the -- the law for the State to be the law for the
subdivision because they are both governmental, the
counter-argument is, in fact, there are resemblances to
private organizations, too. And those resemblances are,
in effect, their creation and definition by State law;
their enjoyment of the powers, and only those powers,
which State law gives them; so that, in fact, there
is -- there is not only an analogy with the State
government, there is an analogy with private
corporations, too. And the question is why should we
choose one analogy rather than the other analogy?
MR. SMITH: And Your Honor, I think I
responded.
JUSTICE ALITO: You don't think that under
our Federal system, the States have greater powers
deciding how they are going to organize themselves than
they have with respect to the regulation of artificial
private entities that they choose to permit under State
law?
MR. SMITH: Yes. States -- of course States
do have that authority.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, we'll give
you a minute for rebuttal --
MR. SMITH: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Since our
questioning has taken away from your time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Collins.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEREMIAH A. COLLINS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. COLLINS: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
This case turns on three points. First, the
statute at issue is a content-based restriction on
speech which is therefore presumptively invalid,
requires heightened scrutiny, which Petitioners
acknowledge they have not satisfied, unless one of the
exceptions to heightened scrutiny is applicable here,
those being exceptions which as the Court has explained
in R.A.V. and Davenport, are limited to circumstances
where there is no real risk of viewpoint suppression.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Collins, suppose -- I
gather Idaho doesn't have it, but suppose Idaho wanted a
Hatch Act similar to the Federal Hatch Act that
prohibits Federal employees from engaging in political
activity, and suppose it decided that not only should
the State employees at the capital not engage in
political activities, but it's a problem for any
governmental employee to do that; they ought to be
neutral and we don't want patronage to be passed out on
the basis of whether they are campaigning for one party
or another, and we don't want them to be coerced into
campaigning for one party or another. Now, I assume
that such a law would violate the First Amendment if it
were extended to all employers. Saying no -- no company
employee, no private employee can engage in political
activity would surely violate the First Amendment.
Would it violate the First Amendment if it was extended?
Certainly, it doesn't when it's applied to State
employees because there are a lot of State Hatch Acts.
And you're saying it would violate the First Amendment
as applied to county and municipal employees?
MR. COLLINS: Not at all, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why not?
MR. COLLINS: We don't take that position at
all, because, as the Court has indicated in Letter
Carriers and Broadrick and other cases, there is a
compelling interest in a statute which says that
government employees -- and it could be State or local
-- will not be performing their jobs as servants of
politics.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're saying -- you're
analogizing these to private entities. That's your
whole point.
MR. COLLINS: That's not our point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is not a creature of
the State. You're saying what the First Amendment -- as
the First Amendment applies to private individuals, so
it applies here. This is regulation by the State,
rather than the State's control of State government.
MR. COLLINS: We are saying that, Your
Honor, because the only defense that the State can
possibly offer here to this content discrimination is
the forum notion that the State has introduced. In the
case of --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Now --
MR. COLLINS: It's not a forum analysis.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let me just establish something at
the outset. You had conceded below, and I thought I saw
this in your brief as well, that as to the State of
Idaho, its determination not to allow the deductibility
is permissible.
MR. COLLINS: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right. So, we begin
with the proposition that a State may do this if it
chooses; i.e., this -- refused on its own to have the
payroll deduction.
MR. COLLINS: Yes. And the reason for that
is that, under Regan and Finley and Rust and the other
cases, the State has perfect freedom to decide not to
devote its own resources and expenditure. But
interestingly and very much on point here --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And if -- and if a State
had a system in which all payroll deductions were -- by
local entities -- were routinely controlled by the
State, the State did all the pay roles for the local
entities, then it -- in that case the nondeductibility
would also be permitted, I take it.
MR. COLLINS: Yes, Your Honor, and let me
explain because those are two -- the answer to both
questions is "yes" but for two very different reasons.
The answer to the second question is that our contention
is not that the State is never a proprietor and never
entitled to the kind of deference that goes with the
proprietor when it's dealing with local government
programs. As the Court noted in the Council of
Greenberg case, a government can become a proprietor
with respect to property or programs it doesn't actually
own. Our point is quite simply that the State has not
done that here. That's why, if the State had done it,
if the State said we are going to dictate the nature of
payroll deduction systems for and local governments, the
State could do that, and it would be then --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did you have any
doubt how they would? I mean, they passed a law
dictating that with respect to everybody. And then it's
pared down by litigation and concessions. So, we don't
have any real question of what the State is wanting to
do here. It's --
MR. COLLINS: What I'm suggesting, Mr. Chief
Justice, is that since we are beginning with a
content-based restriction -- and I do want to emphasize
it's a law here which says that for all employers --
public, private, or State -- the only expenditure you
can't make through payroll deduction is for political
activities, and also the only resource of an employer
that can't be used for any kind of political activity is
payroll deduction, this being in a statute targeted at
employee support of union activity. So, we have a
content-based restriction, and the question is: Can it
come within an exception to the heightened scrutiny that
Petitioners acknowledge they can't satisfy?
But when I'm suggesting that the State could
come within reduced scrutiny if it were actually
managing the payroll system, I'm referring to situations
like Council of Greenburg, where the government with
respect to a particular kind of facility or program
says, we don't own it, but we -- it's an integral part
of a system that we are managing, establishing, not just
saying -- not just to say all we care about is one kind
of speech we don't want to go on there. If the
government says we have -- we want to be the manager,
the operator of a particular kind of local government
operation, the State is free to do that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, if the State wants
to, it's because it can exercise a heavy hand and
control its local units, but if it wants to give the
local units discretion, then it has to leave it to the
local units whether or not they want to enact such a
ban. That's your position?
MR. COLLINS: No. It's not a question of
whether the State has the power to regulate. The
question is if the State regulation is in the form of a
content-based restriction on speech, can it elude
heightened scrutiny? And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: My question really is, if
you look at this at the most basic level, we have two
important concessions. You don't question the
constitutionality of the ban as to State employees. And
the other side doesn't question that it is
unconstitutional as to private employees. So here we
have State local employees. Do we bracket them with
with State employees or with private employees as
essential --
MR. COLLINS: Your Honor, functionally
that's the question, but I think analytically we don't
see it that way because the question is, as we see it,
is the State, with regard to this challenged statute in
its application to the local governments, acting in a
capacity that entitles it to be free from the normal
First Amendment scrutiny that it acknowledges it would
fail-- and that's where our point is. The reason it is
free from that scrutiny as to its own employees is
because of the cases that say the government doesn't
have to spend its money.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's at that part, just
where you are, that I've always had a hard time not for
lack of trying. I don't understand what the word
"content-based" means, and I know it's all over the law,
but I've never understood it and maybe since you're
relying on it 15 times you can explain it. And the
thing I don't understand it about is it seems to me
government engages in thousands of different kinds of
activity, and there isn't some special test. When they
say that in the jury room, the jury room is there for
juries; it's not to show movies of Steven Spielberg.
And there isn't some special test when you say the
purpose of the biology class is to teach biology, and we
don't want people coming in here teaching some other
thing. I don't understand what this special test called
"content-based" is, and that's rather a deep
misunderstanding on my part, but since you're depending
on it, why don't you take 30 seconds or 45 seconds to
see if you can help me?
MR. COLLINS: Well, Justice Breyer, the --
the concept of content discrimination may blur on some
edges, but one thing that the Court has been clear on is
that when a government says speech -- one form of speech
will not be allowed and that will be political speech,
that is treated as requiring heightened scrutiny. And I
should say --
JUSTICE BREYER: It doesn't -- for example,
in biology class, the school board says: You know,
biology teacher, I want you to teach biology; I don't
want you to teach politics. And then there is some
special scrutiny about how the biology teacher is to
teach or -- but they say just face it. The jury room is
for juries. It's not for politics. All that is subject
to some special First Amendment test?
MR. COLLINS: Well, first of all, Your
Honor, all of those would pass muster either because --
JUSTICE BREYER: They might. They might.
But you know a lot of them, you know you could show
movies in jury rooms in the evening and people might
find it much better.
(Laughter.)
MR. COLLINS: They would pass muster either
because they are within exceptions to heightened
scrutiny -- because not all content distinctions require
heightened scrutiny -- or they would pass muster even
under heightened scrutiny. But one kind of content
distinction that the Court consistently has indicated
requires heightened scrutiny is in -- well, in Burson, a
majority court at least, you can talk about anything you
want near the polling place but not politics. That was
content. Consolidated Edison -- you can talk about
anything -- billing envelopes but not controversial
issues. Davenport, very recently -- from fees that
individuals are required to pay to you -- and in this
case we are not talking about any compelled fees -- but
with compelled fees, you can use them for anything you
want but not politics.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Since we are in
confessional mode, I've never understood forum analysis.
I don't understand how --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- how you can say
that this payroll deduction system is some kind of a
forum. A forum is, you know, the corner at Hyde Park or
something. This is -- this is something that
governmental entities and private entities do, and they
can either exclude this type of activity or they can't.
And the problem with the forum analysis is it's all or
nothing. I mean -- and both parties seem to agree: If
it's a State forum, you could do it; if it's a private
forum or if it's an open forum, you can't. That's not
how we usually analyze these things.
MR. COLLINS: Well, two points in response
to that, Mr. Chief Justice. First, we are not the ones
who say that this must be looked at under forum
analysis. We'd be quite happy, and I think the most
sensible way actually to approach the case is that this
is a content distinction, and it's presumptively
invalid, and there is no sufficient justification.
The other side says wait a minute; there is
a line of cases that says that when there is a forum
involved of the government, and the government is
restricting speech in that forum, there can be an
exception to heightened scrutiny. In Davenport --
JUSTICE ALITO: You say there is a
sufficient -- presumably you concede there is a
sufficient justification for this content-based
restriction as to State employees.
MR. COLLINS: What we say as the State
employees, Justice Alito, is that if falls under the
Regan-Findley line of cases; that you don't even get to
a First Amendment scrutiny because it's under the
doctrine that when the government says we won't spend
our money on something, that's not an infringement of
speech in the first place. And interestingly --
JUSTICE ALITO: So if there is State money
involved in these payroll systems that would be
sufficient?
MR. COLLINS: If the State said you can't
use our money for payroll deductions of this kind then
it would arguably be into that category. But I think
what's important to recognize --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Isn't there -- isn't
there some State tax money that goes to fund local
units? I mean, you say here there are State taxpayers'
funds involved; therefore the State doesn't have to pay
for what it doesn't want to buy. But are there State
funds that fund local government entities?
MR. SMITH: There is State funding, but the
reason, I believe, why the Respondents -- excuse me the
Petitioners -- have conceded that the subsidization case
law does not apply to this statute in its application to
the local governments, is that what the subsidization
cases are talking about -- cases like Regan, Rust,
Findley -- are situations where we'll say the State is
involved in developing a program which it will pay for,
and it says because we are paying for that, our
priorities are to be honored.
The government in this instance, it's been
conceded, as the Court of Appeals pointed out, there is
no actual subsidization to the payroll systems. In
effect the State says we have some money we give to our
local governments -- by no means, all revenue, but they
get some money. But we -- the State does not set the
kinds of budget priorities that are protected by the
Regan line of cases. Specifically, the State in effect
says that as far as payroll systems and in fact as far
as most employment matters and most administrative
matters are concerned, here's some money for you, local
government. The only thing we say about it is don't use
it for political payroll deductions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but another way of
looking at it is to say in each of these instances --
whether we are talking about the State taxing in order
to perform functions at the State level or whether the
State is authorizing taxation for functions for
functions to be performed at the local level -- in all
of these instances, the State is in the position to say
not that it is sort of our money, but to say it is
public money. And our decision is that public money
will not be used to -- by a public entity to underwrite
political activity.
And why isn't the State in exactly the same
position in making that judgment, whether it's talking
about money that goes directly into the State coffer or
public tax money that happens to be going into a -- a
town coffer?
MR. COLLINS: Because, Your Honor, I think
the courts never applied the Regan subsidization
analysis in that kind of --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But I'm -- I'm asking you
why shouldn't --
MR. COLLINS: It shouldn't --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why shouldn't we, on the
theory that what is important is not which particular
coffer the penny goes into, but the fact that it is
public money, i.e., money being raised from taxpayers
under a statute passed by the State authorizing
taxation; and it is going to -- and its justification
for taxation is the performance of public functions.
And if the State can say it is not a proper public
function when the money is being filtered through our
particular treasury, why isn't it equally valid for the
State legislature to say that when the money is being
filtered through a local treasury?
MR. COLLINS: For the following reason, I
think, Justice Souter. That -- the doctrine that says
when a government is refusing to subsidize something
there is no violation in the first place in the First
Amendment, and therefore except in the rarest, rarest of
cases -- the rarest of cases there can be no First
Amendment claim; that's very powerful medicine and it
turns on the notion that -- somewhat alike but different
from in detail the proprietor concept -- but it turns on
the notion that the government is making judgments about
how its money is going to be used. It decides what it
wants its money to be used for, and we are going to
honor that --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but what you're saying
is, I -- you're saying in effect that I -- that you
reject my -- my hypothetical assumption here, that what
we ought to regard as the proper characterization of the
money is not "our" State money, but public money raised
under a system of public taxation; and you're saying you
should not go -- you should not characterize the funds
that way.
Of course that's your position --
MR. COLLINS: No, I --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- because if you do
characterize the funds that way, it seems to me you're
in trouble.
MR. COLLINS: Now --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But why shouldn't I
characterize them that way?
MR. COLLINS: The -- even characterizing --
even characterizing it that way, the reason that I think
the analysis breaks down as to applying subsidization
law, is that the subsidization law doctrine,
subsidization doctrine -- Regan and those cases -- as
the Court has explained it, it is to protect the
prerogatives of the government that is making decisions
about how it wants particular programs to be operated.
JUSTICE SOUTER: The State -- the State
legislature is making a decision as to how it wants the
-- the programs which comprise local government to be
operated.
MR. SMITH: But the difference, Your Honor,
in all of the other cases one could look at Regan and
the like, there is a program where the government is
involved in its manifold details. The government
determines the purpose of the program; it has an
overriding interest in the program; and it says in the
course of that, in the course of dealing with this
program, we don't want government money to be used for
the following things.
If you -- if that were extended to say that
there will be essentially no First Amendment claim
whenever the government says as to some program that it
has no other involvement and that it has no other
interest in, we don't want the following speech, and
over here we don't have the following speech --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, but the point in the
case that you concede that the government may make that
choice is that the government is subsidizing it by the
activity which the government is refusing to perform.
So it's not nearly a case of saying there shall be this
kind of speech and not that kind of speech. In each
instance there is a decision being made in my
hypothetical that the government will not subsidize that
kind of activity, that kind of speech, by using public
money.
MR. COLLINS: But the difference for First
Amendment analysis, I would submit, Your Honor, and the
reason why I think the subsidization doctrine has been
confined in the areas it's been confined, is when we are
talking in this case, for example, about the State, the
State determines whether it's going to have a payroll
deduction system. It determines whether it's going to
allow deductions for charities; whether it's going to
allow deductions for this that and the other. It
determines who -- who's going to administer the program,
how expensive it's going to be, all of those things.
Its money is going into that program and it is as to
that program making all of these decisions about how its
money is going to be spent. That is -- and if the
course of that it says we don't want this one, this
element as part of it just as we do want charitable, we
don't want political; maybe we don't want charitable
either -- it is a different situation in items of basic
First Amendment analysis, I believe, if you have a
government that's saying we don't care anything about
government payroll systems.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Collins, may I
interrupt you and ask you the converse of the question I
asked your opponent?
He conceded that it was unconstitutionally
what you call it, content discrimination -- whatever --
to have the deduction from the private sector, but the
counties were different; and he justified the counties
on the ground that the State's interest in avoiding
taking a position with regard to union matters justifies
it. But that's the only justification for the -- it's
not the administrative justification -- this statute
wasn't enacted to save the government administrative
expenses. The purpose of the statute is perfectly
clear, and I'm surprised that you concede that it's
constitutional as applied to the State government, when
there's no evidence whatsoever that it serves the
purpose that everybody is talking about.
MR. COLLINS: Your Honor, we conceded that
reluctantly under the view that where the question is
whether the State -- our claim against the State would
say we are -- we are going to require the State to start
devoting money that it doesn't want to spend as we -- we
have chosen given the force of cases like Regan, not to
make that contention, but to accept the ruling that the
State's refusal to spend money on its own programs is in
a different category.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But this is not a case
involving a State's decision not to spend the time and
energy to do payroll deductions because they do them for
everybody else. It's simply based on the reason for the
payroll deduction, which is, in your view, an
impermissible reason. Is that not correct.
MR. COLLINS: That's correct, Your Honor.
And if it were clear that as to what kinds of reasons
are considered impermissible under subsidization --
JUSTICE STEVENS: How can it not be clear?
It enacted a general statute that had the same
justification throughout the State. And now you're
justifying on the ground it doesn't apply to all their
other government activities because they allow payroll
deductions.
MR. COLLINS: Well, in Davenport, Your
Honor, the Court did indicate that a statute that
applies to public and private, even though it's a
unitary statute, you have to analyze it separately in
the two contexts.
But our point, though -- I think the point
that is being lost, we don't see this as a question
about what can the State do with respect to its own
operations as such and what can it do with respect to
local government operations. We see it as a case that
asks the question whether a content distinction directed
at certain kinds of political activities that would
normally require heightened scrutiny gets the pass from
that scrutiny because it's in a "forum"?
And we -- our position is quite simply that
if the State were, in fact, managing these local
government payroll systems, which it would have a
perfect right to do, that then it could avail itself of
that analysis, but because it doesn't, it cannot.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I see your argument.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the State at the
State level says this is a contentious area, we want to
stay out of it. We are going to be neutral. We are
simply not allowing payroll deduction for right to work
clauses, for union clauses. We don't want this. If the
State can say that, and your concession indicates to me
that it can, then why can't it tell its subdivisions you
have to be efficient, we don't want arguments from one
city to the next city about payroll deduction that's
going to consume the time of the city council's, the
time of the citizens, we want to take this off the table
for you just the way we've taken it off the table for
--
MR. COLLINS: Because I think the difference
here, Your Honor, as I understand the case law, is that
when the State is simply saying we choose not to spend
our own money on this activity, it does not have the
same burden of explaining why it's made that choice that
it has when it reaches out and says, and by the way, we
don't want local government or even private government
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, of course, that's
the interest. This is a very strong Federal interest in
allowing the States to organize their governmental
systems the way they choose. Our gun control
registration case, where we said the Federal Government
cannot tell the counties that it has certain duties for
gun control.
MR. COLLINS: And we have no quarrel at all
with that notion. Our position in no way dictates, in
no way has the First Amendment dictating how a State is
going to structure its government. It simply says,
look, we begin with the proposition that normally this
restriction on public speech would be heightened to
public scrutiny.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I -- I'm not sure
that's right. I'm not sure the State isn't saying we
want to determine how our government is structured in
this respect.
MR. COLLINS: If the -- if the State wants
to have a uniform law for itself -- for public
employer -- employees, its own employees and local
government employees because of some unitary interest
that the State wants to pursue, there is nothing wrong
with the state pursuing that objective. But when it
does it through restricting political speech, it has to
either satisfy heightened scrutiny or come within one of
the exceptions.
And the distinction -- maybe I can put it
this way, Justice Kennedy. The reason why for First
Amendment scrutiny analysis, there is a sharp
distinction in this case between what the State's
treatment of its own employees and the State treatment
of local governments is -- I think it's basically
threefold.
That, first, when the State says, we don't
choose to allow certain speech in our own forum, it is
simply declining to facilitate speech that couldn't take
place without an affirmative grant. When it says to
local governments, who in the state of nature can allow
whatever they want in the way of speech, when it says
that there we will not allow these kinds of deductions,
it's blocking speech that would take place but for the
government's intervention. And so --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'll read Russo again, but
I didn't think Pocatello, Idaho, was part of the state
of major.
MR. COLLINS: I just meant that no -- it's
this simple, Justice Kennedy, and the point I'm trying
to make is that for someone to get access to
political -- to a payroll deduction system of the State
government, it needs an affirmative grant from the
State. To have access to the use of payroll deduction
from local governments, it doesn't need an affirmative
grant from the State. It simply needs the State not to
interfere and reject the local government.
So it's -- it's a different kind of action.
But equally important, the basis for the kind of relaxed
scrutiny that the -- that the Petitioners have argued
for, the forum cases like Cornelius, et cetera, those
are all situations where a government, that is, that has
established and managed a facility is determining on a
day-to-day basis what's the purpose of our program, what
are we going to allow --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could you help me with
this? Would you object if we analyzed this as a
constitutional condition case? I don't know that you
would prevail or not. But it -- the forum analysis
doesn't seem to me to quite fit.
MR. COLLINS: It's fine with me, but if you
analyze it in any way that says that heightened scrutiny
is applicable and there is no exception --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why is that?
(Laughter.)
MR. COLLINS -- the problem with
constitutional condition -- if it were a condition on
the local governments, then it's not really --
JUSTICE BREYER: Are you saying -- is it
your view that heightened scrutiny applies whenever a
government tells any group that wants to raise money for
political purposes in any way they want involving the
government that it can't?
MR. COLLINS: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. Okay. I thought the
answer would be no.
Then, will you try to say in a sentence or
two if the answer is it heightened scrutiny doesn't
apply to any kind of an effort to raise money for
political purposes where they say to the government you
got to help me, when does it apply and when doesn't it?
MR. COLLINS: The -- well, there are
exceptions to heightened scrutiny where the government
is acting as a proprietor. There are exceptions to
heightened scrutiny where the government --
JUSTICE BREYER: But then you are making --
say it always applies except in a few little exceptions.
I mean I know there is one for government speech and so
forth. But you're saying whenever the government tells
a person you can't, for example, go to the city hall and
raise money, you can't do it in the jury room, you can't
raise money here, you can't raise money there, dah, dah,
dah, or you can't speak there, you can't -- it's always
heightened scrutiny?
MR. COLLINS: Well, if the government is
allowing other speech it would be heightened scrutiny.
JUSTICE BREYER: You cannot -- you have to
use heightened scrutiny when the FDA, for example -- you
know, the case I wrote in -- the FDA says you cannot
advertise on a label for a drug. We don't want
advertising. We don't want advertising on the label.
That's heightened scrutiny.
MR. COLLINS: It -- if it's -- if it's
commercial speech, it might fall under a different
standard. It would easily pass it is the point. I
mean, this is no question that a lot of situations
easily pass heightened scrutiny, and a lot of
circumstances are an exception. And the problem in this
case is that the Petitioner's sole submission --
JUSTICE BREYER: And regulation of
government employees is the same?
MR. COLLINS: It basically would trigger
the -- the heightened scrutiny except where the
government is involved. When the government is involved
in managing employees in just as when it's managing a
forum, there -- there could be a different analysis.
But the problem -- where the shoe doesn't
fit the Petitioner's are trying to put on this case is
Petitioner's concede everything there is to concede
about this case and then say but it's just like
Cornelius, and it's just the government deciding what to
do with its own programs. And our point is quite simply
that unlike every case where the court has applied
relaxed scrutiny in a proprietary situation, this is a
case where the government does not play any role with
respect to the -- to limit the speech.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why are you -- why
are you focusing on heightened scrutiny? We have a
whole series of cases about employee speech Darcetti and
Pickering where it's quite different than heightened
scrutiny, and here we are talking about the employees
being able to deduct checkoffs from their paycheck for
political speech?
MR. COLLINS: If I may answer that question,
Mr. Chief Justice? It's correct that where a law is
based on employee behavior, that other kinds of scrutiny
can be involved. Darcetti is, obviously if it's speech
in your capacity of doing your job.
But the Hatch Act cases, letter carriers use
the Pickering balance. That's not a mere reasonableness
test by a long shot. That's a comparison as in the
NT -- National Treasury Employees honoraria case, same
situation, a balancing test between the harm that's
perceived from allowing the speech and the benefits of
the speech to the individual.
So, there can be that separate analysis,
which if it were applied here, the State would also
fail. The State, it says it only prevails under a
reasonableness test. But none of those are near
reasonableness analyses.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Smith, you have one minute.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CLAY R. SMITH
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SMITH: Two points that I think are
critical. First, the concession with respect to the
State government employees based on Regan it itself
entails a concession as to the reasonableness and the
due point neutrality of the statute.
Two, Respondents' theory of government with
respect to the legislature having to speak in some kind
of specific term, we would suggest, ignores -- would ask
this Court to create entirely new case law. But it also
ignores in this situation the fact that the Idaho
legislature contributes in 2006-2007 about half of the
funds used by school districts in the State. And over
percent of those funds that go into what is known as
a general maintenance and operations fund from which
salary compensation is paid.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, the case in the above-entitled
