IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
EDWARD JEROME HARBISON, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-8521
RICKY BELL, WARDEN. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, January 12, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 1:00 p.m.
APPEARANCES:
DANA C. HANSEN CHAVIS, ESQ., Assistant Federal Community
Defender, Knoxville, Tenn.; on behalf of the
Petitioner.
WILLIAM M. JAY, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; on behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, in support of the judgment below.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DANA C. HANSEN CHAVIS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
WILLIAM M. JAY, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the judgment below 30
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DANA C. HANSEN CHAVIS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
(1:00 p.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument this afternoon in Case 07-8521, Harbison v.
Bell.
Ms. Chavis.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DANA C. HANSEN CHAVIS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. CHAVIS: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
This case is about a logical reading of the
statute's plain language, and section 3599(a)(2) that's
printed on page 1 of the blue brief provides that when a
state death row inmate seeks 2254 relief he shall be
represented by counsel, he shall be appointed counsel by
the federal court. And that representation is governed
by subsection (e). Subsection (e) that is on page 2a of
our blue brief defines the scope of counsel's
representation and also divides that representation by
two clauses that begin with the word "shall."
This case is controlled by the second
"shall" clause, which appears about four lines up from
the bottom of subsection (e). And that clause says
that: "Counsel shall also represent the defendant in
proceedings for executive or other clemency as may be
available to him."
We know that this means state clemency
proceedings because of the words "available" and the
words "or other." For a 2254 petitioner or defendant
like Mr. Harbison, the only type of clemency that is
available to him is state clemency, and in order to give
effect to the words "or other" that were used by
Congress we know that that must refer to state clemency
because the only type of clemency that the Federal
Government provides is executive clemency.
Now, not only is the interpretation of this
statute controlled by the plain language, but this
interpretation makes sense, and it makes sense that
Congress would provide for continuous representation for
a capital defendant in that it fills a need, a gap in
representation, it's efficient, and it also helps to
improve the reliability of the death penalty as it's
administered in this country.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your interpretation
would make all of the provisions of subsection (e)
applicable in state proceedings, so long as there's been
a 2254 petition filed?
MS. CHAVIS: No, Your Honor. And if I may,
I would like to discuss the structure of subsection (e).
And I believe your question would go to the very first
--
"shall" clause, which begins at line 3 of subsection
(e), and that would -- in that counsel that is appointed
under (a)(2) "shall represent the defendant in
subsequent stages of judicial proceedings." And for the
(a)(2) lawyer, the lawyer appointed under subsection
(a)(2), that stage of proceeding that the representation
begins with is described in (e) as "all available
post-conviction process." And then it goes on for the
remainder of the statute, together with the applications
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. Where
are you reading, the first part, "available
post-conviction process"?
MS. CHAVIS: Right. It begins at the "and,"
which is eight lines down or about seven lines up, right
in the middle of subsection (e).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that doesn't
modify what comes before it, does it? New trial,
appeals? In other words, if at the end of the habeas
proceeding things start all over then presumably the
appointed counsel represents the defendant throughout
all those new proceedings?
MS. CHAVIS: No, Your Honor. With respect
to the habeas attorney the representation would begin
with the "all available post-conviction process." If
that attorney did obtain relief for the defendant or the
federal court granted relief for the capital defendant
and that case were to return to state court, then of
course we're not talking about continued representation
of the federal habeas counsel because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why not? Why not?
MS. CHAVIS: Well, because, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That would be a subsequent
-- a subsequent stage of available judicial proceedings,
his retrial in state courts.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, the retrial and the
trial proceedings that's referred to in subsection (e),
those are duties of counsel appointed under (a)(1) of
the statute, which is on page 1a, which would be trial
counsel for those defendants charged with a federal
capital crime.
We would not -- a habeas lawyer would not
participate in a retrial because -- for a few reasons.
The first reason is because of the statute and the
structure of the statute, which sets out the ordinary
course of the capital case, so that there's nothing
subsequent, no duties listed here that are a subsequent
stage for habeas counsel.
JUSTICE ALITO: I don't see how that's
possible a plain reading of the statutory language. You
started out by saying you're relying on the plain
meaning of the statutory language.
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: How do you get that out of
the statutory language at (e)?
MS. CHAVIS: It's in context with the whole
of the statute. With respect, we look at (a)(1) and
(a)(2) for that context for subsection (e). So --
JUSTICE ALITO: So now you're out of the
plain language of the (e) and you're looking at the
context of the whole statute.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, I would submit that
looking at the context of the whole statute is in
accordance with also looking at the plain language used
by Congress. And we do look at the statute as a whole
in order to inform our --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's your answer to the
plain language of (e)? That was your prime -- that was
the argument you started out with, that this fell under
the plain language of (e).
MS. CHAVIS: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: How do you explain under the
plain language of (e) why -- how you avoid the result
that once habeas counsel is appointed in federal court,
the counsel has to appear in all of these other
proceedings?
MS. CHAVIS: Yes --
JUSTICE ALITO: New trial in state court,
etcetera.
MS. CHAVIS: "In all subsequent stages of
judicial proceedings" is exactly what subsection (e)
states.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you are including
then -- suppose that the result of the federal habeas is
that the State -- that relief is granted unless the
State retries the defendant in X number of days. And
your reading I think would be the appointed counsel on
federal habeas would be responsible for representation
in all available post-conviction process, and that would
be an available post-conviction process.
MS. CHAVIS: Respectfully, Your Honor, the
State retrial would be an entirely new case that would
not fall under "all available post-conviction process."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would? Tell me,
what would fall under "all available post-conviction
process" in addition to clemency and competency
proceedings?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, "all available
post-conviction process" I submit would be defined by
the 2254 or 2255 proceeding, now these together with
appropriate applications for stays and appropriate
motions and procedures. Now, that is a part of this
first clause in subsection (e) that, under appropriate
circumstances, may permit the federally appointed lawyer
to return to state court if deemed appropriate by the
federal court. If the federal court found that an issue
in the federal habeas case needed to be exhausted in
order to aid that judge's determination of the habeas
petition, then it would be appropriate for the federal
judge to say: Counsel, please return to state court and
exhaust the issue.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but he couldn't find
it inappropriate, could he? If you're again talking
about the plain language of the statute, I don't see
there's much room for the district judge to say: Well,
now, I'm not going to say that you have to participate
in further state post-conviction proceedings, the
unexhausted claim. It seems to me under your reading of
the statute the appointed counsel, say in an unexhausted
claim instance, would have to under the statute
represent the defendant in further State collateral
post-conviction proceedings.
MS. CHAVIS: Well, Your Honor, again the key
here is that Congress used the word "appropriate" and
that's an easy legal standard for the federal judge to
determine. The statute does not say State
post-conviction process or State post-conviction case.
It indicates "appropriate motions or procedures." So
that would be for the federal judge --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I'm sure
I'm missing something here, because the statute does say
"all available post-conviction process."
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, Your Honor, and I submit
that that is a reference to, if we look at (a)(2), where
it says, the very first line, "post-conviction
proceedings under 2254 and '55." So that describes all
available post-conviction process, describes the 2254 or
55 proceedings.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you're just
saying a new trial because you succeed on habeas is not
post-conviction process?
MS. CHAVIS: No, Your Honor, not by a plain
definition of that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well then, if you
look up earlier in the statute, it says "shall represent
the defendant throughout every subsequent stage of
available judicial proceeding."
MS. CHAVIS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why doesn't it fall
under that?
MS. CHAVIS: Yes. Well, that's the key,
"subsequent stage." And a retrial would not be a
subsequent stage. That would be an entirely new case
back in the state court.
There's also a second reason why federal
habeas counsel would not represent the defendant in many
retrials or resentencings, and that would be --
JUSTICE ALITO: Why would it not be a
subsequent stage of available judicial proceedings?
MS. CHAVIS: I'm sorry, Your Honor?
JUSTICE ALITO: Why is it not a "subsequent
stage of available judicial proceeding"?
MS. CHAVIS: Well, under the structure of
the statute there's nothing subsequent --
JUSTICE ALITO: Without using the word
"structure of the statute," because there I think you
get into lots of trouble -- and you started out by
saying the plain language of (e) and I'm still
struggling to understand what you're doing with the
plain language of (e).
MS. CHAVIS: Okay. Well, there is another
reason why federal habeas counsel would not do a State
retrial, and that's because under (a)(2), the clause or
the part of the statute that does provide for the
appointment of counsel, if there is already counsel
available then that appointment clause would not be
triggered.
If we look at (a)(2), which is on page 1a,
the trigger for the appointment of counsel is that we
have an indigent defendant. It says "a defendant who
is" -- four lines down -- "a defendant who is or becomes
financially unable to obtain adequate representation
shall be appointed a lawyer."
In a retrial, the State must provide trial
counsel --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, no. That
doesn't work. The language you just quoted is simply to
say when you get somebody appointed.
MS. CHAVIS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You are financially
unable so you get somebody appointed. Then you go back
and say that person shall represent you through every
subsequent stage. It doesn't say that, oh, if you
suddenly get somebody else appointed, you know, then you
can -- then he doesn't have that obligation.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, I would submit that
these circumstances that trigger the appointment do
carry through the appointment process in that, if you
look at the language used by Congress, it says "any
defendant who is or becomes financially unable." So
Congress was --
JUSTICE ALITO: What if the remand is for
State post-conviction review, and there is no attorney
available under State law for State post-conviction
review?
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, Your Honor, then we would
be looking again at the first clause of subsection (e),
and we would be looking at the language used by Congress
-- "any appropriate motions and procedures."
And again, appropriateness is an easy legal
standard applied by the courts. The federal judge
overseeing the case could determine whether to --
whether returning for that State post-conviction process
is appropriate. It would be just like a federal judge
determining that in order to aid its decision-making
process, it needs to certify a question back to the
State courts.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. I have lost
you. Where is the "appropriate"? I don't see any
"appropriate."
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, "appropriate" --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It says "shall represent
the defendant throughout every subsequent" -- every
subsequent stage of available judicial proceedings.
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, and then it describes
those stages.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, right.
MS. CHAVIS: And then we are at four lines
up from the bottom.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. CHAVIS: I'm sorry. Five lines up from
the bottom.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it says "and all" --
MS. CHAVIS: And other appropriate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. CHAVIS: -- motions.
JUSTICE SCALIA: "Other appropriate," but as
far as what's covered by the first clause is concerned,
"appropriate" doesn't apply to that.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: "Represent throughout every
subsequent stage of available proceedings, including
pretrial, trial, sentencing, motions for a new trial,
appeals, applications for writ of certiorari. There is
no "appropriate" in any of that.
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, sir. But, Your Honor,
that is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: "And shall also represent"
-- and "other appropriate motions and procedures," but
that doesn't cover the earlier stuff.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, if we were looking
at the possibility of exhausting a claim in State court,
then we wouldn't be -- none of this first part of (e)
would apply. That wouldn't be a pretrial proceeding.
That wouldn't be a trial. That wouldn't be a
sentencing. What that would come under would be after
"and all available post-conviction process," that would
be described as "other appropriate motions and
procedures."
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you would interpret
"all available post-conviction process" as meaning
federal?
MS. CHAVIS: The habeas proceeding. Yes,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then why don't
we interpret the clemency provision the same way, as
being limited to Federal?
MS. CHAVIS: Well, because, Your Honor,
Congress doesn't use the word "Federal" here, and if we
were to interpret it as --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But then the use of
"Federal" -- we were just talking about.
MS. CHAVIS: Well, that's correct, Your
Honor; however, when we look at post-conviction process
in (e), we have the context of (a)(2), that talks about
post-conviction proceeding under section 2254 and 2255.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't know why you
just didn't take the position and say, yes, it applies
to all these provisions. That doesn't seem to me a --
to doom your position at all. Once have you somebody
appointed who helps you on the Federal habeas --
presumably they do a lot of work, they get up to speed
on everything -- they ought to represent you through the
next stage of available proceedings.
MS. CHAVIS: Well, Your Honor, and that's
true. The interpretation of this first clause of
subsection (e) doesn't impact the second -- the
interpretation of the second clause, which says
specifically counsel shall represent the defendant in
those clemency proceedings that are available to him.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you see why --
I mean, if you say, well, the first part is implicitly
only federal, that makes it very hard for you to argue
that the second part is not also implicitly only
federal.
MS. CHAVIS: Respectfully, Your Honor, I
would disagree, and that's because the words are
different, used by Congress. Congress is very explicit
in stating other clemency as may be available to the
defendant. There is no way that that could be
--
interpreted as federal clemency. There is no other
federal clemency --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I just want to make clear
what your position is. Federal determination on habeas
corpus, that there are unexhausted claims, ordered to
return to the State court: Is the appointed counsel
required under the statute to represent the defendant in
the State court in further post-conviction proceedings?
MS. CHAVIS: No, and for two reasons: One
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you have to take that
position? But that is your --
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, I don't have to.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that is your position?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, that is my
position. However, of course, again, the interpretation
of this first part of this statute is separate from an
interpretation of the clemency clause, but for two
reasons the answer would be no to that question, because
this statute -- number one, (e) does not specifically
set that out as a subsequent stage of judicial
proceedings, okay? What it does instead is it states
"appropriate motions or procedures." So it would be
discretionary. On a case-by-case basis, the district
judge could determine whether he believed it was
appropriate, non-abusive, to return to State court to
exhaust a claim.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but -- but, you know,
it mentions trial proceedings, trial, motion for a new
trial, appeals, applications for writ of certiorari.
And then, in the next clause it just says "and all
available post-conviction process." Now, you would
acknowledge that going back to exhaust claims that had
not been exhausted before the State courts would be
post-conviction process or not?
MS. CHAVIS: Not with respect to subsection
(e). I mean, ordinarily an exhaustion proceeding is not
a subsequent stage. Ordinarily, if that is what this
statute contemplates, is the ordinary course --
JUSTICE SCALIA: "Subsequent stage" does not
apply to this clause. I'm reading the clause "and all
available post- conviction process."
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MS. CHAVIS: The very beginning of (w)
indicates "each attorney so appointed shall represent
the defendant throughout every subsequent stage of
available judicial proceedings including" -- and then it
recites all of those stages.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But if it did not have the
including phrase, if it just stopped there, would it
then include proceedings necessary to exhaust the State
remedies? I'm a little unclear why you think it does
not include necessary proceedings -- proceedings
necessary to exhaust State remedies.
MS. CHAVIS: I'm sorry, Your Honor, if I
wasn't clear. It may include. It does not require. It
may include going back to State court to exhaust.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why doesn't the word
"shall" require it?
MS. CHAVIS: Because, Your Honor, we're --
when we're talking about an exhaustion proceeding or
returning to State court, it can only fit under this
part of (e) that says that it would be an appropriate
motion or procedure. That's the only thing that you
could define a State proceeding under in this statute.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you step back and
look at the structure, it seems to me unusual that your
interpretation would be correct. It seems to me that it
would be more likely that Congress wanted this counsel
to continue on in State proceedings, trials.
The clemency thing seems a little bit more
removed. It's a different argument -- you know, we're
guilty, but show us mercy -- than what may well be the
same sort of argument on the subsequent State proceeding
as was raised in the Federal habeas. I mean, if I were
writing this, I would want them to continue in the
subsequent State proceedings before I would want them to
continue -- before I would want to have them represent
the defendant in clemency.
MS. CHAVIS: And I understand that, Your
Honor, but I think also, if we look at the
representation as it does occur in the real world, we
have the AEDPA, we have this Court's decisions that
structure the -- the capital litigation so that State
court exhaustion normally comes before the Federal
habeas process.
But, again, there are these two separate
clauses. The first goes to judicial proceedings; the
second clause goes to -- to nonjudicial proceedings,
including competency, because the Court in Ford v.
Wainwright indicated that we need not have a judicial
proceeding, a judicial determination of competency so
Congress has separated out competency and separated out
clemency, knowing that those are stages of a capital
case that come at the very end of Federal habeas, that
the Federal habeas counsel would be in the best position
to represent that defendant at that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This goes back to my
earlier question: So what else fits under "all
available post-conviction process" other than competency
and clemency? What else?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, competency and
clemency are in their own "shall" clause, mandatory
clause, in and of themselves. They are not included in
the -- the post-conviction process.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Right. But what would be
included?
MS. CHAVIS: The post-conviction process
would refer to anything in the 2254 to 2255. For
example, it could be the discovery motions; it could
be -- it could be notions in aid of an evidentiary
hearing; it could be motions in aid of an appeal. So,
that's the descriptor.
JUSTICE ALITO: But only things in Federal
court?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, that is it my
reading of "all available post-conviction process," as
referring to the 2254, 2255.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Does that seem reasonable
that Congress would have -- suppose you had a real
complicated case with five or six issues in it, and they
find out one issue is not exhausted. The capital case
has been around for two or three years. Does Congress
--
think, well, you've got to go on your own when you go
back to the State court and try and exhaust that one
claim?
MS. CHAVIS: No, Your Honor. I don't think
Congress contemplated that, and that's why I think they
included this language "appropriate motions and
procedures," to encompass a return to State court where
JUSTICE STEVENS: Now, where is that
language again, "appropriate motions" --
MS. CHAVIS: It's four lines up -- five
lines up from the bottom, the end of that line --
"appropriate" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, but that's in the next
clause.
MS. CHAVIS: That's in the first "subsequent
stage" clause.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why does that limit the
interpretation that -- of the words "subsequent stage"
-- "throughout every subsequent stage of available
judicial proceedings"? And doesn't the State collateral
proceeding which is necessary to exhaust a remedy fall
right within that language?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, it may.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What?
MS. CHAVIS: It may. However, in our -- my
reading of the statute, when we look at the subsequent
stage, exhaustion ordinarily comes before Federal
habeas. It would be, you know, an unordinary situation
where you would have to go back and exhaust. But I
believe the statute contemplates that with "appropriate
motions and procedures."
But of course, Congress could have
contemplated that the Federal lawyer continue to
represent the defendant in exhaustion proceedings. Back
when the statute was created, Congress was looking at
the States and looking at the fact that States were not
providing counsel for capital defendants in these cases.
And Congress --
JUSTICE ALITO: But I thought it was your
position that it didn't apply in that situation.
MS. CHAVIS: I'm sorry, Your Honor?
JUSTICE ALITO: I thought it was your
position that it did not apply in that situation.
MS. CHAVIS: That it wasn't mandatory. It
doesn't require. As is appropriate --
JUSTICE ALITO: So you think it's
discretionary.
MS. CHAVIS: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: The court can -- as a matter
of discretion, can order the counsel who is appointed to
represent the Petitioner in the habeas to go back and
handle the exhaustion of a claim in State court"?
MS. CHAVIS: Absolutely, Your Honor, just
like this Court in Rhines v. Webber said it's
discretionary as to whether this -- as to whether the
Federal judge is going to determine that we are going to
hold this case in abeyance, we are going to stay this
case while we -- while counsel goes back to exhaust some
claims.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ms. Chavis, what do you do
about(a)(1)? That also is not limited by its terms --
MS. CHAVIS: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to federal prisoners.
Would you argue that it says "in every criminal action,
which defendant is charged with a crime that is
punishable by death."
MS. CHAVIS: It does, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So even in the original
State trial, he is entitled to a federal defendant; is
that right?
MS. CHAVIS: No, Your Honor. For --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why not? It doesn't limit
it to Federal trials.
MS. CHAVIS: Well, Your Honor, in this case,
in (a)(1), we would -- because (a)(1) sets out the
factors that trigger the appointment of counsel, we have
to have a defendant who is charged with a capital crime,
who is indigent, and who otherwise doesn't have a
lawyer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. It says he "shall
be entitled to the appointment of one or more
attorneys."
MS. CHAVIS: That's correct, but, Your
Honor, for a State capital trial, for a State capital
direct appeal, the States do provide counsel, and
Congress would know that States have to provide counsel
under --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So what? I mean, it still
is -- is unqualified.
MS. CHAVIS: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And part of your argument,
not your only argument but a large part of your
argument, is since it is unqualified in (E), the last
clause, it has to include State. Well, you could say
the same about (a)(1).
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, certainly last
clause of (e) is unqualified and unambiguous; however,
(a)(1) there is a qualifier in that it says "unable to
obtain adequate representation."
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, but -- but --
MS. CHAVIS: If the State provides
representation, then you don't have a federally
appointed counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So -- so if the State
doesn't provide counsel, the Federal Government will
provide it, and the States can recede from their
obligation to provide counsel, right.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, I think this Court
would have problems under Gideon -- if the States cannot
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why? Why? So long as he
has counsel, we don't care who pays for it.
MS. CHAVIS: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It says "adequate
representation." And then later on it says the lawyers
we appoint here has to have five years of experience,
three years experience in felony trials. I think that
is a lot better than most of the attorneys who are going
to be appointed under the State system. So I would say:
Look, this statute itself recognizes that this person
you have appointed under the State system is not
adequate. They say you have got to have five
years/three years, so I want one of those.
MS. CHAVIS: Well, Your Honor, again, the
answer to that question under (a)(1) is that you would
not get federally appointed counsel when you have
counsel available to you otherwise. And that simply is
the fact, that the States do provide for counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what about expert
services? I think most States don't provide for that.
MS. CHAVIS: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Federal Government will
provide expert -- compensation for the use of experts
when the States won't?
MS. CHAVIS: That is -- that is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Under (a)(1)?
MS. CHAVIS: That is part of (a)(1), and
it's part of (a)(2). However, you still have to have --
you still have to have those -- those three
circumstances present.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Sure.
MS. CHAVIS: And I believe that that -- that
still would not -- the States, if they provide any sort
of resources at all, and if they provide a lawyer, then
certainly the trigger for appointment isn't -- isn't
available under (a)(1).
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems -- it seems to me,
counsel, that the mere fact that it doesn't mention
"federal" explicitly is -- is not a very strong argument
unless you are going to take the position that even
(a)(1) applies to federal and state. And -- and really
what you are -- the only strong strength to your bow is
that it says "executive or other clemency." And -- and
there -- there seems to be no federal clemency except
executive clemency, I guess. I guess.
Can Congress declare something that has been
a crime no longer a crime and set the guy loose?  I
don't know. Is that "clemency"?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, it's the
Constitution that determines the -- the federal
authority for clemency. So Congress cannot effect that.
There is -- the -- only --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It says here the President
can. It doesn't say Congress can't. Does it say
Congress can't?
MS. CHAVIS: No, Your Honor, it does not say
that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You put a lot of
weight on -- I mean, the problem arises because Congress
did not specify whether it was limited to federal or
state. And yet you are saying they were -- what they
clearly meant to do when they said "executive or other
clemency" was to signal implicitly that it must cover
state because there is no other kind of clemency. It's
-- it's kind of a real round-about way to make that
point, isn't it?
MS. CHAVIS: Well, Your Honor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Somebody's not going
to sit there and say, oh, we put "other" in because we
know that in the federal system it's only executive, but
in the State system there might be others.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That guy wouldn't
suddenly say, well, maybe we should say this is meant to
cover the State system.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, these are the words
that Congress used. They know that the -- that the
States provide for forms of clemency other than
executive clemency. We know that -- that Congress
specifically stated they wanted the defendant to be
represented in that clemency proceeding that is
available to him. And in -- in these cases --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And we know that they read
this text carefully before they voted for it, right?
MS. CHAVIS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't know any of that.
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: These are all assumptions.
That's all.
MS. CHAVIS: The -- the language of the
statute is the best intent of Congress, yes, Your Honor.
If I have any time remaining, I would like
to reserve it for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Jay.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM M. JAY
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF THE JUDGMENT BELOW
MR. JAY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Section 3599 authorizes federally funded
representation only in the three categories of
proceedings specified in subsection (e). At least three
distinct aspects of the statute's text and structure
show that the only proceedings included are federal
proceedings before a federal officer.
First, as Justice Scalia pointed out during
the previous argument, the word "federal" does not
appear anywhere in the statute, including in (a)(1).
Several other terms in the statute, including the phrase
"every criminal proceeding," plainly refer to federal
proceedings and federal proceedings only. Congress
plainly saw no need to include the modifier "federal" to
make that limitation manifest.
Second, the statute requires that appointed
attorneys have federal qualifications based on
experience practicing in federal court and it requires
that federal judges exercise significant oversight of
the attorney's representation. Both these federal
requirements for qualifications and federal requirements
for oversight make sense only if the proceedings that
the qualifications and oversight pertain to are federal
ones. Third, if Petitioner were right that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I just make sure I
understand your position. Does (a)(2) authorize the --
the federal judge to appoint counsel for a -- a person
on death row under a state death conviction under 2254
or 2255?
MR. JAY: For that -- for that habeas -- for
that person's federal habeas petition --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. JAY: -- it requires the appointment of
-- of a federal habeas attorney qualified to practice in
federal court.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So he is -- he is entitled
to a lawyer in the -- in the federal collateral review
of a State death penalty case?
MR. JAY: In the federal review, that's
correct.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And what in the statute
limits the scope of that review?
MR. JAY: Well, subsection (e) limits the
scope of that review, Justice Stevens. It specifies the
types of proceedings that the attorney is -- is
permitted to -- permitted and, indeed, required to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you agree that (e)
applies to State prisoners?
MR. JAY: We agree that (e) sets out the
scope of services to be provided by the appointed
attorney during the 2254 proceeding.
JUSTICE STEVENS: In the -- for a State
prisoner in a federal collateral proceeding?
MR. JAY: We agree -- we agree with that,
Your Honor, because we think that term "proceeding" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What, then, in that
proceeding does the word "clemency" refer to? Is that
clemency by the President of the United States?
MR. JAY: We think, Your Honor, that a -- a
habeas petitioner who is coming to federal court under
section 2254 has available to him no proceedings for
clemency because the term "proceedings" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Even though the statute
says so in so many words?
MR. JAY: Well, it's -- I -- it's -- the
menu of services, if you will, set out in subsection (e)
applies both to lawyers who are appointed under (a)(1)
who are doing work in federal court for federal
defendants facing a federal capital charge and also for
attorneys appointed under (a)(2) who are representing
habeas petitioners under section 2254.
Because the term "proceedings" -- it is our
position -- each time it appears in subsection (e)
refers to federal proceedings before a federal officer,
a 2254 petitioner has available to him no proceedings
for executive or other clemency. That person can obtain
the services that are -- that are available to him under
subsection (e), which includes representation throughout
the 2254 proceedings.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Now, supposing on the eve
of execution he wanted to apply for a stay of execution.
He'd be entitled to representation before a federal
judge, right?
MR. JAY: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But what if the federal
judge says, you have to -- under our practice you can't
get a federal stay without first exhausting your attempt
to get a State stay. Could he represent the defendant
applying for -- in the State court for a stay of
execution in that situation?
MR. JAY: Subsection (e) would not authorize
that, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So he would have to get a
separate counsel to -- to go to the State court because
-- even though the federal judge required him as a
normal matter of practice to exhaust the State remedy
under the very limited situation of a stay on the eve of
execution?
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor, State courts
also appoint counsel --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I understand that, but he
would have no right to have his federal lawyer get paid
for doing that work?
MR. JAY: Would not get paid by the Federal
Government for litigating a matter in State court that
may have no connection to federal law.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Just for this, for the
stay application on the eve of execution?
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor, I -- it would
not be a federal judicial proceeding, and, therefore, it
would not be covered under subsection (a)(2).
JUSTICE STEVENS: It comes in with the --
the general language "other appropriate motions and
procedures," and so forth. That's got to be tailored
back to mean other appropriate motions and procedures in
a federal tribunal?
MR. JAY: We -- we think that the federal
limitation applies throughout the section --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You think that is
perfectly clear from the text of the statute?
MR. JAY: I am sorry, Justice Stevens?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do you think that is
perfectly clear from the text of the statute?
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor, I think that the
federal limitation is apparent from a number of aspects
of the statute, including the fact that Congress didn't
use the "federal" modifier anywhere else in the statute.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It could have used the
"federal" modifier very easily just by inserting the
word "federal" in places.
MR. JAY: Well, if it had inserted the word
"federal" in some places and left it out in others, that
might be probative intent -- probative evidence that
Congress intended the -- the other instances to be
federal and State as well. But we don't have that here.
We have -- we have terms that are clearly indicated to
be federal only in nature such as every criminal
proceeding in (a)(1).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You don't doubt in
the scenario Justice Stevens hypothesized that the
federal defender would in fact represent the person
before the State court. You are in an emergency stay
situation. He's -- he's allowed to go to federal court.
He does so. The federal judge says, you got to go back
to State court. There's 12 hours left. He's not going
to say, you know, get another lawyer. He's going to
represent the person before the state court. And I
gather he can do that; he's just not going to get paid
for that.
MR. JAY: But the -- subsection (e) doesn't
bar the lawyer from doing that. And two points on that:
There might be other sources of funding available; and
indeed, the same lawyer who need not be a federal
defender -- he may be a panel attorney appointed -- who
is in private practice appointed from the district
court's panel of available attorneys who meet the
federal qualifications.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So he presumably --
MR. JAY: He may be appointed as well.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So he presumably is
spending a huge amount of time and resources on this --
in the nature of these proceedings, and you want to go
back and say, all right, on this day you spent six hours
redoing your papers that were filed before the Federal
judge to file them before the State judge, and you don't
get paid the whatever -- how -- what do CJA attorneys
get paid these days?
MR. JAY: In capital cases for fiscal year
08 it's $170 an hour.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So he goes back and
says: Look, you don't get that; you know, you get the
$15,000 you spent on the last ten days on this but you
don't get the $810. That -- does it seem reasonable to
impose that burden on the public defender?
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Since you know as a
practical matter, because of professional responsibility
that person is going to represent the defendant in the
State court proceedings.
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor, the limitations
in subsection (e) are there for a reason, and it's
precisely because the State -- the State post-conviction
process that would become available under Petitioner's
reading of the statute is certainly not limited to a few
hours spent on the eve of execution in State court. It
potentially could include returning to State court for
any form of post-conviction process at any time after
the Federal habeas application is filed.
JUSTICE BREYER: Would we have to reach that
question here? I mean, I don't understand three things
that you've said. You said it says Federal; I don't see
any place it says Federal. It doesn't use that word.
Then you say it doesn't say Federal and State; in my
copy it does say Federal and State. It talks about 2254
and 2255. So if I just read this in English, it says
that once you appoint the person, and it's either State
or Federal, 2254 or 2255, that person shall also
represent the defendant in such competency proceedings
and proceedings for executive or other clemency as may
be available to the defendant. QED, end of the case.
All right, now why isn't it?
MR. JAY: I think it isn't, Justice Breyer,
because 2254 is not a reference to proceedings in State
court. A 2254 proceeding is in Federal court, it
involves Federal constitutional issues and a Federal
constitutional challenge to the legitimacy of the --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's right. That's
right, because they are referring to people who are
under State death penalty or Federal death penalty, and
what it says is that they shall get a person to
represent them in these later habeas proceedings. And
then it adds that that person -- and no point quoting it
again; you heard what I just said -- it adds that that
person will represent them in clemency proceedings.
Now, is there any reason for thinking that
Congress ---and contrary to some things mentioned, I
believe that probably Congressman Conyers did read what
he wrote. He certainly referred to it enough in
speeches, and those speeches make very clear to me that
that is what he had in mind, what it says. Now other
people can read it differently, but I -- I mean, I've
read it. I read the language. What's the answer?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought this was a
Federal law. Is this a Conyers law; is that what it is
here?
JUSTICE BREYER: He happens to be the person
who wrote it, and it's referred to in the Solicitor
General's brief, and on page 21, I took what you said, I
went back and looked it up, just as you might have
suggested I would by putting in the relevant citations,
okay?
So having looked it up, as implicitly you
suggested, I think Conyers knew what he said. I think
he did mean those words to say what it says, but you can
convince me to the contrary. That's why I raised it.
MR. JAY: Well, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did his colleagues know
what he said?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, they did.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. Counsel,
you lead.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We direct our
questions to counsel.
JUSTICE BREYER: My experience in Congress
is that the members of Congress do know the kinds of
things that they are voting on; maybe others have
different experience.
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor, let me answer
your point about Congressman Conyers first, because I
think that the suggestion in Petitioner's brief is that
Congressman Conyers was -- had misinterpreted the text
of his own amendment, and as we have shown, the text of
the amendment proposed by Congressman Conyers in the
House and the text of the amendment proposed by Senator
Levin in the Senate using the same -- using virtually
the identical language, each of them provided no funding
for --
JUSTICE BREYER: I think you are wrong about
that. The reason I think you are wrong about that is
that that language to which you refer is language that
Congressman Conyers himself introduced in response to a
bill by Representative Gekus, and in Representative
Gekus's bill he referred, just like this one, to both
State defendants and to the Federal defendants. And the
purpose of Conyers' amendment, which was to substitute
for the Gekus amendment, was to extend, not to limit,
what Gekus has done. And he introduced lots of
information, all of which referred almost uniquely to
State defendants.
That's then picked up in the Senate, and the
Senate, which is Levin, is trying to do precisely what
Conyers was trying to do in the House, which we know
from the fact that he said it.
Now, I can't find anything in that
legislative history that supports the statement that you
made on page 21 that this initially was meant to refer
only to people under Federal sentence of death.
MR. JAY: Well, Your Honor, the text of
Congressman Conyers' amendment wiped out the Gekus
amendment. It replaced subsections (q)(1) through
(q)(4) of the Gekus amendment. Subsection (q)(4) is
what you are referring to, referring to 2254
petitioners. Congressman Conyers replaced that with a
lengthy piece of legislation that is the predecessor of
what appears in the statute today, and it made no
provision whatsoever for 2254 petitioners, even those
appearing in Federal court.
Now, your previous question to me, which I
didn't get -- which I would like to come back to, is
about the 2254 representation. When a State prisoner
comes to Federal court raising a constitutional
challenge to his conviction in a 2254 proceeding, there
is a direct Federal interest and his Federal rights are
at stake, and it makes sense that Congress was providing
counsel for the vindication of those Federal rights.
That is not so with the clemency proceedings before a
State governor, which are a matter of grace, they don't
turn on Federal issues, and they don't deal with an
inmate under a Federal sentence of death.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do you do with
"other"? I mean, there is no "other" clemency for
Federal defendants, right? It's just executive
clemency?
MR. JAY: We think, Your Honor, that the
purpose of that phrase, which was added, as I tried to
explain in my previous answer, was added at a time when
there was no -- there was no funding available for a
54 petitioner. We think the purpose of that language
is to be as capacious as possible when a Federal
defendant seeks clemency, and that the -- recognizing
that the proceedings for clemency in which counsel might
be helpful might include proceedings that don't take
place before the Chief Executive himself, and there are
a couple of examples.
Throughout history presidents have enlisted
the assistance of various people, including individuals
who don't work for the Executive Branch.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I understand that, but it's
still executive clemency.
MR. JAY: We agree, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: When a clemency decision is
made, it's not being made by these other people who are
helping out the president. It's being made by the
executive.
MR. JAY: We don't disagree with that at
all, Justice Souter, but we think that the phrase "or
other" was simply Congress' attempt to make sure that
proceedings before these other officers --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Should the Constitution be
amended it would cover that, right?
MR. JAY: Should the Constitution be amended
to permit -- to permit legislative clemency, I think
that that -- I think that that is right. But at any
rate, the phrase "or other," we don't think that it's a
sub silentio or at least a very subtle way of indicating
State clemency, because as we pointed out in our brief,
the existence of non-executive clemency in the States
is -- in every State that has the death penalty,
clemency is a matter -- is a decision made by the
governor or his appointees or other executive officials.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Jay, would you comment
on this general reaction I had when I read the statute?
I had the impression that most lawyers appointed under
this statute would be to represent defendants in State
execution cases, and there are a few cases where there
are Federal death penalty cases, but not very many
across the whole spectrum. Am I right about that?
MR. JAY: In terms of the numbers of
clients, yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you're primarily
dealing with the representation of State defendants in
capital proceedings, and the number of cases in Federal
proceedings where at the last minute there is a plea for
executive clemency is very rare. And you think this
particular provision we are debating here was really
intended just to take care of the rare case where a
Federal defendant is on death row seeking executive
clemency, and not even to consider all the cases in
which -- in State -- before -- that originate in State
trials, where there is a lot of applications for
executive clemency. You think it was intended to focus
on that very narrow category?
MR. JAY: Well, we think the entire statute
is intended to focus on when Federal rights and Federal
interests are at stake in the administration of the
death penalty. And in the clemency context, because
clemency does not actually -- does not involve the
vindication of a Federal right -- or a constitutional
right at all, the number of instances where the clemency
process actually involves such a Federal case is a
limited --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There are occasionally
Federal constitutional question and sometimes arguments
made in Federal clemency -- I mean, in State clemency
proceedings and Federal clemency proceedings.
MR. JAY: There are sometimes such arguments
made but there is no such thing as a Federal
constitutional right to clemency, and indeed the
governor is --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But arguably there is
Federal right or constitutional right to a fair
proceeding in a clemency application?
MR. JAY: Well, there is a -- in a capital
clemency proceeding, the Court has recognized a limited
due process right, but that is not the sort of right
that would be vindicated in a habeas proceeding at all.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Jay, I assume that
(a)(1), which provides for the appointment of counsel to
conduct the trial in a capital case, would not have very
much application either, would it?
MR. JAY: That's right, Your Honor, (a)(1)
applies only in federal proceedings.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Only in federal capital
cases, of which there are very, very few.
MR. JAY: That's correct, Your Honor. So
many of the -- many of the provisions -- even on
Petitioner's reading, which places great reliance on the
subsequent stage language -- many of these provisions
such as pretrial proceedings, trial sentencing, would
apply only to the limited number of federal death
penalty defendants.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The government's principal
concern in this case is the possibility to potential,
assuming the Petitioner prevails, of appointment of
counsel in State post conviction collateral proceedings,
i.e., when there are unexhausted claims. Apparently the
Sixth Circuit in bank addressed this, and in your brief
you indicated there is a number of additional claims.
Is that the principle thrust of your concern rather than
clemency?
MR. JAY: It is the principle thrust of our
concern, I think that's fair to say, Justice Kennedy.
And that's because the word "proceedings," which appears
three times in subsection E, we think that either that
is limited to federal proceedings each time it appears
or it's not each time it appears.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You think there is no way
to interpret that the statute so that it could include
state clemency proceedings but only federal post
conviction review proceedings in judicial -- before
judicial tribunals?
MR. JAY: We don't see a way to have a
federal limitation before judicial proceedings and not
have it before --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Surely, you could. You
could put all I don't remember weight on the other
executive or other -- and you could say that's the only
provision where it's apparently clear from the text that
State proceedings were included.
Assuming you are wrong, that there are
non-executive State clemency proceedings, you are sure
that there aren't?
MR. JAY: Well, our position, Your Honor, is
that in every State with the death penalty, the clemency
decision is made either by -- in most cases, by the
governor or gubernatorial appointees or by other
executive officials. And the Petitioner has suggested
that gubernatorial appointees for that purpose might be
"other." But, there is -- there are no -- we have been
able to find no instances of, for example, legislative
clemency in the capital case. That is limited.
The constitutional provisions that the Tenth
Circuit relied on that there is such an institution of
legislative clemency, that's limited to treason against
the State, a noncapital felony or mostly noncapital
felony that we can't find a treason against the State
prosecution since the 1940's.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Of course, it would have
made sense for Congress to use to other -- as a way of
referring to the states simply because it would have
been a matter of indifference to Congress whether a
State process was executive or was other in some way, in
effect, just leaving the issue open as an irrelevance.
MR. JAY: I think if your premise,
Justice Souter, were right, that Congress intended to
fund proceedings on both levels, then I suspect that
that is right, that it would be a matter of indifference
to Congress which form the State clemency process took.
But we think that Congress intended to fund only those
proceedings in which there are federal rights or federal
interests at stake, and State clemency proceedings do
not meet that qualification.
JUSTICE SOUTER: That still leaves you with
the question that the -- what the words "or other" can
possibly refer to, given the present state of federal
law and federal constitutional law, unless they refer to
State proceedings.
MR. JAY: Well, the phrase is -- the phrase
is ambiguous. We turn to legislative history to
partially resolve that ambiguity, because as we have set
out in our brief and I alluded to earlier, they were
added -- they were added at a time when funding wasn't
contemplated for 2254 proceedings at all.
Even if that -- even if that weren't the
case, we would think that because of the impact on the
federal-State balance that would result from funding the
State proceedings, that that's not the kind of clear
statement that would qualify. So I mentioned before,
one of the two possibilities that we see for what "or
other" might mean --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me, what do you mean
by the federal-State balance? Because this is funding
somebody to argue against the interests of the State,
isn't it?
MR. JAY: It is, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, assuming the state
has convicted somebody, you are arguing against the
State.
MR. JAY: That's true, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the federal government
is funding that.
MR. JAY: The federal government would be
funding that.
We see another instance in which there is an
impact on the federal-State balance, which is the fact
that if, on Petitioner's reading, the attorney must
return -- must go to State court or go into State
proceedings and continue the representation there, they
still answer to the federal judge who supervises their
appointment, supervises their qualifications, and
determines whether and to what extent they will be paid.
And of critical importance, the federal judge determines
when the attorney will be permitted to withdraw. And
the federal judge may not permit such a withdrawal,
unless and until the federal judge can find another
attorney who meets the same qualifications for a federal
appointment.
So you would have, on Petitioner's reading,
an attorney appointed by federal court who would go into
State judicial proceedings and would be unable to ask
the State tribunal before whom he or she was appearing
for permission to withdraw from the engagement. He or
she would have to return to the federal court for that
permission. We see that as a direct -- direct
infringement on the State tribunal process.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I just be clear on one
thing on your position, Mr. Jay? Is it your view that
the federal judge may not allow the lawyer to do
anything in an unexhausted claim, or does he have some
discretion?
MR. JAY: Well, I think -- this statute,
Your Honor, doesn't deal with discretion. It deals with
shall. And -- so we don't think it is possible under
this statute. It is possible.
Now, there is another provision in federal
court to the appointment of counsel, the Criminal
Justice Act 18 U.S.C. 3006 capital A, which was in
existence long before this statute, used to permit
discretionary appointment of counsel in 2254 cases. It
does contain a provision for some ancillary
representation. It is possible that an attorney might
be able to invoke that provision which has its own
legislative --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What is the government's
position on that issue?
MR. JAY: I don't -- I don't think we have
a -- have a position on that issue, because it --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It seems to me that issue
would arise more often than the issue we are fighting
about in this case.
MR. JAY: It -- it might, Your Honor,
because the Criminal Justice Act applies to noncapital
cases as well. But I have not seen it litigated. And
so, I don't think we have taken a position on it. But
that is -- that is a potential source for discretionary
funding.
But the suggestion that subsection E permits
some exercise of discretion because of the inclusion of
"and other appropriate motions and procedures," I don't
think that works in this case to cabin the necessary
implications of Petitioner's reading, because the three
categories of proceedings are judicial proceedings,
competency proceedings and proceedings for executive or
other clemency, and each of the examples from pretrial
proceedings down through applications for stays of
execution and other appropriate motions and procedures
fall into the category of judicial proceedings.
It is our position that those are to be
federal proceedings, not proceedings in State court.
Anything that is on that list, from -- again from
pretrial proceedings down through -- at least to all
available post conviction process, that is not
discretionary, and we don't think that the district
court could decide that even though something were
available post conviction process, it was not to be
funded because the district court deemed it not to be
appropriate.
And many of the filings that a habeas
counsel might wish to make in State court, if the
Petitioner's reading were adopted, would fall under the
category of available post conviction process, a
successive writ of habeas corpus or a writ of coram
nobis, such as the one that Petitioner litigated in the
Tennessee Court of Criminal Appeals while its federal
habeas proceedings was pending.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But all this is dependent
upon the defendant is showing that he is financially
unable to obtained adequate representation. And if he
is in the State court, then that's the answer to it.
It's the only when he isn't. And I thought in the
clemency cases, particularly, there was no funds in
State court.
MR. JAY: There are some funds on the State
level, and I would like to come back to how Tennessee
handles that in a moment. But as a general answer to
your question, the statute does not make clear that if
Petitioner can obtain counsel at no cost to himself,
that he is no longer eligible for federal counsel under
this provision, because he, after all, would still be
indigent. And I think the situation that occurred here
in the Tennessee courts highlights the difficulty that
would be raised by creating a -- by permitting funding
for State proceedings.
The Tennessee post conviction defender is
authorized by statute to represent inmates under a
sentence of death in post conviction and clemency
proceedings in State court, and he has discretion over
the clemency portion.
The post conviction defender in this case
declined to use his -- to use his resources to represent
Petitioner in the clemency proceedings, because he
determined that he didn't have the resources and he was
focusing on other cases. So, there -- at least as a
matter of Tennessee law that that option was available
to him but it's not been suggested that he was not
himself financially unable to obtain counsel.
So, in any instance like that in which there
is -- there are, in some circumstances, State-funded
counsel available, I think he would set up -- you would
create a powerful incentive for the State to say it
wishes to go second that allow federal -- allow federal
funding to come first and state funding to come second,
and for the federal government to respond in like
measure.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's the government's
position, under this provision, even if -- even if State
funding -- well, as you say State isn't covered anyway.
MR. JAY: Right. Our position,
Justice Scalia, is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Assuming State funding is
covered, assuming representation in the State is
covered, it does seem to be the case that the test of
whether you get some Federal lawyer appointed is not
whether you don't have a State lawyer, but rather
whether you can pay for counsel, right?
MR. JAY: Whether you as a personal
matter --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can pay.
MR. JAY: -- are financially unable.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's strange.
MR. JAY: And the ultimate test for
appointment is also based on when the defend -- at the
time the defendant is or becomes financially unable,
there is no reference in the statute to when -- to the
defendant becoming financially able again. It has been
interpreted in some instances to permit revisiting that
financial ability decision, but in circumstances unlike
what we are discussing here, where the State provides
free counsel.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, you don't
really think the fact that this provision was recodified
helps your argument at all, do you?
MR. JAY: Well, it doesn't hurt, Your Honor,
and we do think that it helps because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When I see that
argument, particularly in a gray brief, that strikes me
as tantamount to a confession of error.
MR. JAY: Well, I am certainly not here to
confess to error, Your Honor. We do think that it helps
our argument because to the extent that there is any
ambiguity or there is any doubt left in the Court's
mind, I think the fact that Congress chose to use the
same words again --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You were earlier
resisting the notion that the particular legislative
history here showed anything because of how broadly it
may have been familiar, but there is no evidence at all
that when Congress recodified this language it was in
fact aware of the different court of appeals decisions
you cite, right?
MR. JAY: Other than the general presumption
that this Court apply ins these ratification cases,
that's right, Your Honor; we can't -- we can't point to
any particular report or colloquy. The term proceeding
has to be given a consistent construction across section
99(e). Clemency proceedings, judicial proceedings and
clemency proceedings, we submit, are made clear by the
text and structure of the statute to refer only to
Federal proceedings. Adopting Petitioner's reading,
even if -- even though in this case it refers only to a
clemency proceeding, would inevitably lead to Federal
funding for any proceeding on the State level that meets
one of the descriptions set out in subsection (e).
Clemency would be a particularly poor candidate for such
funding because a clemency decision before a State
governor, which may indeed be initiated before the --
before the inmate comes to Federal court for habeas
petition, implicates no Federal rights and implicates
indicates no Federal interests. For those reasons we
submit judgment of the Court of Appeals should be
affirmed. Thank you all.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Jay.
MS. CHAVIS, you have a minute left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DANA C. HANSEN CHAVIS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. CHAVIS: Thank you, Your Honor.
The word proceedings in subsection (e) is
given meaning by Congress by the words that Congress
used, and when it says proceedings for clemency, it
means proceedings for that clemency that is available to
the defendant. Subsection (a)(2) put 2254 defendants
and 2255 defendants on the same footing, and if we don't
give affect to the "or other" language or the available
language in the clemency clause, then we are rendering
those words meaningless. We're -- and we are saying
that Congress somehow sub silentio read out 2454
defendants from the clemency clause.
In addition, Your Honor, I just would like
to point out that giving a lawyer for an -- giving an
attorney for a person on death row to present a case for
clemency before the clemency decisionmaker is not an
intrusion on the States. If it were we would see the
States lined up here in opposition to our interpretation
of the case, and they have not done that. In particular
in this case, the State of Tennessee takes no position,
and at least four other times this statute has been
litigated, other death penalty States have taken no
position. So there simply is no intrusion in providing
a person a lawyer, and we have heard from 11 governors
representing seven other death penalty States that say
it's very important for them to be fully informed when
they make this life or death decision when they are
presented with these capital clemency petitions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How often has
clemency been granted in Tennessee?
MS. CHAVIS: Your Honor, clemency has been
granted one time since Furman, that I am aware of, Your
Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One time in the last
how many decades?
MS. CHAVIS: That would be the last 20 or
, Your Honor. We just recently started having
executions.
If I -- if I might may just add one other
factor. Clemency was granted four times in 2008
throughout the country.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 2:00 p.m., the case in the
