IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
OREGON, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 07-901
THOMAS EUGENE ICE. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, October 14, 2008
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 1:00 p.m.
APPEARANCES:
MARY H. WILLIAMS, ESQ., Solicitor General, Salem, Ore.;
on behalf of the Petitioner.
ERNEST G. LANNET, ESQ., Senior Deputy Public Defender,
Salem, Ore.; on behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MARY H. WILLIAMS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ERNEST G. LANNET, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 23
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MARY H. WILLIAMS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 45
P R O C E E D I N G S
(1:00 p.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 07-901, Oregon v. Ice.
Ms. Williams.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MARY H. WILLIAMS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. WILLIAMS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The factfinding at issue in this case is
significantly different than the factfinding at issue in
this Court's recent Sixth Amendment cases, in which the
Court struck down changes in sentencing practice that
had the effect of removing factfinding from the province
of the jury. In those cases, the change in practice
meant that a defendant could be convicted by the jury
for one offense and then, based on nonjury factfinding,
the defendant could be sentenced for what appeared to be
an aggravated, more serious offense without the jury
having made all the factual determinations necessary for
that more serious offense.
That doesn't happen in this case. In this
case, the jury convicted Mr. Ice of six counts, and the
sentence imposed on each of those six convictions
satisfies the Apprendi rule. There's no additional jury
factfinding that alters -- or nonjury factfinding,
excuse me, that alters a specific sentence for one of
the convictions. Instead, what the factfinding in this
case does is to significantly restrain the judge's
ability to decide how to administer those multiple
sentences for the multiple convictions.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but it -- it, by
reason of the unusual law at issue here -- -I think it's
unusual, I don't -- I'm unaware of any other State that
has one -- the sentences -- the defendant has an
entitlement to have the sentences run concurrently
unless a certain additional fact exists and that
additional fact is to be found by the judge rather than
by the jury. So that if you take seriously what -- what
we have said in prior cases, namely that any fact which
has the effect of lengthening the sentence to which the
defendant is entitled must be found by the jury -- if
you take that seriously, I don't see why it doesn't
apply here.
MS. WILLIAMS: Justice Scalia, first on the
point in terms of how unique this statute is, there are
other States that have similar requirements, that there
is initial a presumption that multiple sentences will be
concurrent unless there is additional nonjury
factfinding that authorizes the judge to impose
consecutive sentences. So it's not entirely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How many others? Do you
know?
MS. WILLIAMS: It's difficult actually to
come up with an exact count, and the numbers vary when
you look at how other courts have sort of combined
cases, but perhaps as many as 13, but as different
States have sort of changed their practice some of those
have fallen away. It's clear that there's at least a
minority of States that have this kind of limitation on
what is otherwise inherent or a discretionary authority
of the judge to decide how to administer these multiple
sentences.
The difference is that what this Court has
been addressing in the Apprendi line of cases has always
been a specific sentence imposed on a specific
conviction. And what Oregon Supreme Court did was to
expand that to say that, in addition to the statutory
maximum that this Court described in Blakely, there is
in effect a second statutory maximum that you must
consider when there are multiple sentences being imposed
for multiple convictions, and that's the total period of
incarceration that the defendant will serve with and
without the additional factfinding.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You know, this fact can --
can turn out to be the most significant fact for the
defendant. I mean, it could lengthen his sentence
enormously. It's more important than many of the other
facts that we leave to the jury.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, Your Honor, and in this
case, for example, the additional factfinding extends
the whole duration of the -- of Mr. Ice's period of
incarceration from 90 months to 340 months. But what is
significant is that, as this Court said in Blakely, the
Sixth Amendment is a reservation of jury power; it's not
a limitation on judicial power. And I would submit it's
not a limitation on legislative power, except to the
extent that that exercise of power removed something
from the province of the jury. Historically, it's
undisputed that the judge made this decision about how
multiple sentences would be administered.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you could say the same
about sentencing in general, and we held that the Sixth
Amendment does impose a limitation upon judicial power
where at least there is an entitlement by law to a
certain lower sentence. And there we said you can't
leave it to the judge to decide whether the facts that
trigger that law exist or not.
MS. WILLIAMS: I think what's important is
the foundation for that holding and the foundation for
the Apprendi rule. It wasn't simply that factfinding in
general that exposes the defendant to a harsher
punishment is something that should -- would be better
served by having it done by the jury. It was that,
because of the changes in sentencing practices, because
States and Congress have been taking what traditionally
had been elements of an offense and relabeling them as
something else, as sentencing factors, that the jury was
no longer finding what traditionally it would have found
for each conviction. It was no longer finding what
would have been each element of an offense.
So what the rule does is it provides a
bright-line way of testing what is the functional
equivalent of an element for a specific offense that
would have been within the province of the jury and
therefore that can't be removed without violating the
Sixth Amendment.
JUSTICE STEVENS: The rule --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The rule does bear on
culpability, and culpability sounds like part of the
definition of an offense or a more serious offense.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, Your Honor.
And I think the Oregon Supreme Court viewed
this case as in terms of -- that it may have simply been
happenstance that the Court was looking only at single
convictions and single sentences being imposed on those.
But I think that takes away the analysis that the court
used in reaching the conclusions that it reached.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't understand why
this happenstance is required to do it under the
statute. I didn't quite understand that.
MS. WILLIAMS: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You said it's only
happenstance. He has to do it under the statute if he
makes the finding.
MS. WILLIAMS: No, what I'm trying to say is
that I think the Oregon Supreme Court viewed the fact
that so far in this Court's cases you had only been
dealing with a single offense and a single sentence, as
-- as not foreclosing the possibility that there would
be a different statutory maximum when you have multiple
sentences being imposed for multiple convictions. And
so the supreme court, I think, treated it -- what I was
saying was it simply is happenstance that that had been
the -- the nature of the cases that this Court has
decided, but then drew from this Court's decision and
from discussion about punishment a broader meaning that
somehow the jury must be involved in any factual
determination that relates to the overall quantum of
punishment for multiple sentences being imposed.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, didn't we furnish the
premise for that broader reasoning? Because we pointed
out that the traditional role of the jury was standing
in effect as the buffer between the power of the State
and the individual, and our concern in the Apprendi
cases was that the concept of elements was being
manipulated in such a way that the jury no longer stood
in that -- in effect, that buffer position.
And I guess the question here would be, is
there -- is there room for -- in effect, for
manipulation by the law in the consecutive sentencing
scheme or the potential consecutive sentencing scheme,
so that the jury in effect loses control over the
length, the ultimate length of time that an individual
is going to serve? What is your response to that?
MS. WILLIAMS: That the jury does not lose
anything that the jury historically had within its --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but isn't the problem
with that argument the problem that Justice Scalia
raised a moment ago, where you could have made the same
argument with respect to a mandatory State guideline,
but nonetheless, the change in the law brought to bear
on the new law an old concept. And this is a change in
the law, to be sure. I agree with you, historically.
The judges -- once consecutive sentencing came in at
all, they were free to, in effect, do what they wanted
to, subject to some kind of a rule of reason.
But we've got to apply the Apprendi concept
and the concern of the jury trial right to this new
situation. So I don't think it's an answer to say,
well, the judge has never had such a -- such a power.
MS. WILLIAMS: But there's something
different here in terms of looking back on history and
what we have presently, compared to when you are looking
at the offense-specific sentence associated with a
specific conviction, because the changes in practice
there had the effect of taking away the ability to find
an element or something that was the equivalent of an
element, of removing that from the jury. And,
historically, that is clearly what the jury's job was:
To stand in as a buffer between the defendant and the
government.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So I gather from your
argument that you would -- you would be taking the other
side and you would be saying that it has to go to the
jury if, instead of being a statute that applies to
concurrent sentences from various crimes, there was
added to a particular crime, if this crime was committed
with the use of a gun, any sentence imposed shall not
run concurrently but shall run consecutively with any
other sentence arising out of this same occurrence?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There it's attached to a
particular crime. Do you really think that we should
have a different result in that case from this one?
MS. WILLIAMS: No, Your Honor, I don't,
although I think that makes it a more difficult
situation to try to analyze, because there it is -- it
is focused on a specific sentence for a specific
offense. But what is different is it still goes to not
adding to the penalty for that sentence, but adding to
how you are going to administer multiple sentences.
And the history here is very different.
Because what we have is, even though there wasn't a
statute when the Framers would have looked at this
issue, the issue did exist. Judges did make the
determination about how multiple sentences would be
administered. And what they would have considered would
have been a wide array of facts and without really
limitation other than --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You could say the same
thing about the length of the sentence, that it was up
to them and they considered a wide array of facts. So
what? We said in Apprendi, once you try to narrow it by
law and say they can't do more than this, once you do
that, that fact has to be found by the jury. And that's
what's going on here.
MS. WILLIAMS: But I think what's different
is that the history at issue and underlying Apprendi
actually wasn't that the judge could simply make nonjury
factfinding and expand the sentence beyond what the
sentence was that was associated with the jury's
verdict; that, in fact, that was the problem. Because
once there was additional factfinding that permitted the
judge to add to the penalty, that that had changed by
taking something away from what the jury's role was.
And so here we don't have that
same sort of situation. I think that -- that that was
exactly the argument this Court has rejected in those
cases of -- of -- where Faith and others have attempted
to suggest that historically judges were able to do this
and so it shouldn't matter now that we have changes.
But the Court rejected those arguments to say that, no,
because the sentencing practices have taken something
away from the jury, that is why we have the Sixth
Amendment violation.
So if in this circumstance we
-- we have constrained judicial power -- and clearly
that's what this statute does, is it tells the judge
that, instead of being able to make this determination
based on this wide array of factual considerations, the
judge now is limited in what the judge must consider to
-- to then exercise discretion in administering these
sentences. But all of that is
legislative restraint of judicial power without touching
in any way on the jury's historic role in -- in how to
deal with these multiple --
JUSTICE BREYER: Am I right in -- I just
want to get the facts right. Am I right, you did this
historical research, and if you start with Apprendi we
can go all the way back to Nebuchadnezzar and you
haven't found a single case ever where it was a jury
rather than a judge that made this question of how you
put together sentences for two separate crimes committed
on the same occasion? Is that right, or is it an
overstatement?
MS. WILLIAMS: It is an overstatement only
in the sense that I did not go back as far as --
JUSTICE BREYER: I didn't say how far you
went back. I said as far as you went back.
MS. WILLIAMS: As far as I went --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know what
Nebuchadnezzar found, but I take it you did look to see
what was true at the time of the writing of the
Constitution.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And at the time of the
writing of the Constitution, which sometimes some of us
feel is relevant, in that instance they did have the
judge, not the jury, decide how to create a total
sentence where the person had committed two crimes on
the same occasion.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, exactly. And that
difference in terms of the history of showing that this
was a judicial determination, that -- and now that the
factfinding --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you could say the same
in Apprendi. It was a judicial determination how much
of a sentence you were going to get from ten years to
life. It wasn't up to the jury. It was up to the
judge.
MS. WILLIAMS: But where --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And yet when you constrain
the judge and you say, judge, you cannot give more than
years unless the crime was committed with a -- with a
gun, we said suddenly that that matter can no longer be
left to the judge. It's a matter of law, and the facts
must be found by the jury. And I don't see any
difference here. I mean in both cases it was
traditionally done by judges.
MS. WILLIAMS: But what this Court focused
on with the Apprendi rule is that, although judges made
decisions about sentencing within a range of possible
sentences, what judges could not do was to find
additional facts that were the functional equivalent of
an element of a greater offense. And that's what was
happening with those new sentencing --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But we defined in effect
what was the functional element of the greater offense
in terms of the -- the power or the capacity of the
judge to increase the sentence beyond the range that
would have been -- that would have established the
maximum in the absence of that factfinding, right?
MS. WILLIAMS: Correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. And aren't we
in exactly the same position here? Because the
defendant here can correctly say: I cannot be sentenced
to the more onerous -- under a more onerous scheme of
consecutive sentencing unless some fact is found which
has not been found by the jury in coming to verdicts of
guilty in any of these crimes; a further fact must be
found to expose me to the heavier penalty.
And that is exactly the same as the
situation in Apprendi with one possible exception; and
that is, do you accept, as I thought you did, the
proposition that consecutive sentencing is the heavier
penalty or is a more onerous sentencing alternative. If
you accept that, I don't see how you would escape the
analogy with Apprendi.
MS. WILLIAMS: Your Honor, I do not accept
that it is a -- an enhanced penalty for any of the
specific convictions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Everybody agrees.
MS. WILLIAMS: And it would be --
JUSTICE SOUTER: If you had a choice between
two concurrent sentences and two consecutive sentences,
you know which one you are going to choose. So we -- we
know what is the heavier sentence or the heavier
sentencing option.
MS. WILLIAMS: It does have certainly a
harsher effect on the defendant than serving each of the
sentences beginning at the same time. But I think the
same could be said in terms of mandatory minimum
sentences and the factfinding required for those.
We obviously have cases where a defendant
facing a mandatory minimum sentence is going to be
confronted with a harsher sentence than he would face
without that additional factor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the mandatory minimum
is at least within the range of sentencing possibilities
that the judge could impose anyway without any further
factfinding by the jury.
MS. WILLIAMS: And depending on how you view
this in terms of if you are looking at it with an
offense-specific frame, each sentence imposed for each
of the six convictions is also within the range of what
the judge can impose. This additional piece of when
those sentences begin does not take away from the jury's
role. It does limit what the judge could otherwise have
done, and it does that limitation by requiring
factfinding.
JUSTICE BREYER: What about the -- what
about restitution, forfeiture, taking a child and having
him tried as an adult? What about probation? What
about alternative drug programs? What about diversion?
I mean, I can think of five or six where there might be
a factual finding necessary to proceed to a situation
where the total amount of punishment is greater rather
than less.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, Your Honor, and we are
now litigating some of those very questions in light of
the Oregon Supreme Court decision about what is the
scope when you look beyond the specific sentence imposed
for a specific conviction and look at this greater
quantum of punishment --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's a lot easier to limit
it to sentence than it is to limit it to sentence for a
particular conviction as opposed to sentence for the
whole ball of wax, all of the -- all of the horribles
that Justice Breyer proposes would -- would be overcome
if -- if you just adopted a rule that only applies to
sentences.
MS. WILLIAMS: Although, Your Honor, some of
these Douse-Greene decisions that are made again by
nonjury factfinding do affect what the defendant's
period of incarceration is going to be.
JUSTICE BREYER: And doesn't the sentencing
-- doesn't the Federal law define a sentence to include
restitution, to include what is the equivalent of
probation? I mean, there is a broad definition of the
word "sentence" in the law which includes some of the
things that I mentioned, though not all.
MS. WILLIAMS: Yes, Your Honor, and the same
is true for Oregon, that the sentence imposed and if you
-- the -- the judgments are set out in the joint
appendix in this case, that set out each of the
sentences imposed for each of the six convictions, and
you will see that there are a number of things in
addition to the term of incarceration that are a part of
that sentence being imposed.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you a question
that may seem totally irrelevant? Do you think our
decision in McMillan v. Pennsylvania was correctly
decided?
MS. WILLIAMS: I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It seems to me under your
reasoning in your case you might say that case was
wrong. And I think it was wrong. I will be perfectly
candid and say so. I think it was a very important
decision.
MS. WILLIAMS: No, Your Honor, I don't think
that it is necessary to say that that decision is wrong
to be consistent with the position I am asserting here
or the decision in Harris, because there the Court made
a distinction between what the jury traditionally would
have been -- been doing and determined that that jury
role was limited to deciding facts that increased only
the -- the maximum penalty that the defendants faced.
And so factfinding tied to imposing a mandatory minimum
sentence is different.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, I understand. But it
seems to me it is -- in the old common law tradition,
following sort of the reasoning in the case you relied
on, McMillan really should have come out the other way,
because the jury normally would be finding the facts
that would allow the minimum -- the maximum to go up or
the minimum. I forget which it was.
MS. WILLIAMS: And -- and what I have done
is to start with the proposition that we have in place
the Apprendi rule as it has been construed in McMillan
and in Harris, but that this is a -- a very different
extension of that rule beyond anything that this Court
has addressed in these cases.
And it's an extension that doesn't have the
same historic support that the Apprendi rule has. So I
don't think that this Court needs to -- certainly this
Court doesn't need to consider what impact this would
have except for, I think, in accepting the Oregon
Supreme Court holding. That to me does raise questions
about the ongoing validity of McMillan and Harris. And
-- and again, there are ways that you could certainly
distinguish that and retain those. But what it does is
to focus more on the jury as factfinder instead of
focusing on what the jury's historic role was and the
Sixth Amendment as a reservation of the power that the
jury has, not somehow giving the jury additional power
beyond what it has whenever factfinding is involved that
is -- is related to a defendant's aggregate punishment.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And, of course, it's part
of your position that historically sentences were always
consecutive, if you go way back.
MS. WILLIAMS: But, Your Honor, in the older
cases we actually do find that they were -- there was
discretion for the judge to have the sentences be served
concurrently. It was viewed as in some ways not giving
full effect to the jury's verdict of finding the
defendant guilty for multiple offenses, which
consecutive sentencing did give full effect to that
verdict.
And so it was in the nature really of a
mitigation that the judge could do to lessen the
severity of the punishment based on certain facts that
the judge would consider and then in simply exercising
the judge's discretion.
But what is important here, I think, is that
it was clearly something for the judge to decide. Once
there were the multiple convictions, the jury's role was
at an end, and it was then up to the judge to make the
determination about how to administer those multiple
sentences. And so long as we are not changing the
jury's role in establishing that sentence for each of
the -- the six convictions in this case, then we have
not removed from the jury anything that would have been
incorporated within the Sixth Amendment.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What happens with
sentences from multiple States? You commit the crime in
State A; you flee. You are then tried and found guilty
of a second crime in State B. I -- I -- let's assume
that the judge in State B has considerable discretion as
to whether or not he intends to impose a sentence in B
or send back to A, and that he knows that A is going to
be concurrent.
Under the theory of the case that's
advocated by the Respondents, do you think that a jury
trial or some sort of finding would be required?
MS. WILLIAMS: I think that if the -- the
law required the sentences be concurrent unless
additional factfindings were made, then under the -- the
rule announced by the Oregon Supreme Court and advocated
by Respondent that question would have to then go to the
jury even if it arises in -- basically in separate
proceedings.
So as you are sentencing in that separate,
second proceeding, it would still be a jury question of
whether those facts were -- were there that would allow
the judge to impose a consecutive sentence.
The Oregon statute treats that a little bit
differently. It appears to give the judge discretion
when there is a previously imposed judgment. Other
States do it differently, though, and do require
factfinding even in those circumstances when there has
been a judgment imposed in an entirely separate
proceeding. And if I could reserve the remainder of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Lannet.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ERNEST G. LANNET
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. LANNET: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case presents yet another application
of the bright-line rule from Apprendi. Oregon law
entitles a criminal defendant to a concurrent sentence
for each offense unless certain facts are found. Here
for three offenses a judge found those facts and imposed
a greater penalty of a consecutive sentence. That
violated defendant's -- or the Sixth Amendment's jury-
trial guarantee that the judge's authority to impose
criminal punishment must be limited by the facts solely
found by the jury.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Lannet, there --
there is one significant difference, I think, between --
the-- in Apprendi it doesn't matter whether the State
labels something a "sentencing factor" or an "element."
Every one of those questions that goes into determining
the maximum length of a sentence has to go to a jury
under Apprendi.
But when it comes to consecutive versus
concurrent, it's perfectly okay if a State says, our
main rule is consecutive, but the judge, if there are
certain mitigating factors, can make it concurrent. Or
it leaves the total things to the discretion of the
judge.
And if we are looking at it from the point
of view of a defendant, the State says, well, we are not
going to make it totally discretionary because we want
to be more defendant-friendly; that is, we are putting
certain restraints on the judge. So it seems -- what
seems odd to me about this case is the Sixth Amendment
is supposed to protect the defendant's right. And here
the State is saying, we want to give the defendant more
of a right. And he can say, that's unconstitutional,
but if you give me less of a right, it would be
perfectly constitutional.
It's that enigma that I think is very
disturbing about this case.
MR. LANNET: Well, two points on that. One
of them is that historically the jury trial -- the jury
found the verdict of guilt. That, in itself, authorized
the potential penalty of a very significant consecutive
sentence.
Oregon has made a different policy choice
here. And, to understand the full backdrop of it,
perhaps the context, that before this Oregon -- before
it had this statutory system in place, it had very
liberal rules regarding merger. This was part of a
series of enactments in which antimerger provisions were
enacted so the defendant's criminal history would
represent more accurately the number of convictions the
jury had found him guilty of.
Therefore, the defendants under -- in Oregon
law the defendant must receive a separate sentence for
each offense. So the increased number of sentences gave
rise to the possibility of longer sentences through
consecutive sentencing. Because in Oregon not only does
an offense give rise to a discrete sentence, but whether
the -- the sentence is concurrent or consecutive is an
aspect of punishment for that offense.
JUSTICE BREYER: In Oregon traditionally if
a burglar had broken into a house and while he was in
the house commits a rape, traditionally in Oregon that
would not be considered two crimes?
MR. LANNET: At a certain point in time
there were judicial rules in place regarding merger that
may have resulted in the entry of one --
JUSTICE BREYER: Can you cite me an Oregon
case which says a burglar who breaks in and commits rape
is only guilty of one crime?
MR. LANNET: I would be happy to submit some
in a memorandum. I would need another day to do so.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Lannet, in -- in
connection with Justice Ginsburg's question, do you
think that Apprendi would apply differently to a statute
which, instead of imposing a higher penalty for a crime
committed with a firearm, said that the penalty will be
years for burglary unless the defendant did not
commit the crime with a firearm, in which case it will
be 15 years?
Do you think if the -- if the statute were
framed in that way, that Apprendi would not apply and we
would leave it to the judge whether a firearm had been
used or not?
MR. LANNET: I certainly it would raise an
issue about whether -- a different statutory
interpretation, of course, that if the State was merely
shifting a burden on a fact to the defendant to
disprove, I think that that would run into problems with
this Court's due process -- case law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, regardless of who
proved it, I mean, the issue is can it be left to the
judge to decide whether the -- the -- the beneficent
determination that he did not use a firearm could be
left to the judge instead of sending it to the jury?
MR. LANNET: I think it would be very likely
if this Court looked at this State's interpretation of
the statute and found that the -- that the judge had no
authority to impose the greater sentence?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't see a dime's worth
of difference between that and Apprendi.
JUSTICE BREYER: How are you to prove these?
I am always curious as to the defense policy as to why.
Stricter and stricter rules here, and I have a hard time
figuring out why. If you have an actual case and you
have to go to trial, are you prepared to put on all the
evidence that although you want to say that your client
did neither of these things, that if he did do them, in
fact they were just one thing and weren't separate
things? I mean are you prepared to go into all that
detail in front of the jury?
MR. LANNET: Well, again I think there would
be a question about whether that would be proper, if
that would be in fact shifting an element over to the
defendant to disprove. I think that that would
create --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, you are saying that the
standard they use here for a separate sentencing, that
it has to be a separate crime and so forth, has to go to
the jury.
MR. LANNET: Yes, sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So I wonder if you
are prepared to put all those facts before the jury,
say, in a case where you want to say that it wasn't my
defendant who did it.
MR. LANNET: Well, actually, Your Honor, a
decision affirming the Oregon Supreme Court at this
point would have little impact in Oregon. In response
to Blakely, the Oregon legislature enacted a statutory
scheme that gave back that enhanced sentence -- gave a
procedure by which they go to the jury, and it's either
-- and in a bifurcated proceeding that's ---
JUSTICE BREYER: That way, you have to
have two --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Booker/Fanfan as well, as
adopted, right? I mean that was what the dissenters in
Booker/Fanfan would have --
MR. LANNET: Yes. Correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are you saying it would
have to be a bifurcated proceeding?
MR. LANNET: In many instances, just based
on --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is there historic evidence
that bifurcated proceedings were required before
Apprendi?
MR. LANNET: No, but I think that this is
just a development of changing legislative choices in
identifying facts. I think Apprendi articulated the
functional path to determine the scope of a jury
trial guarantee when the State attempts to relegate a
fact to a judge rather than a jury.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could I get back to
the question Justice Scalia asked about Apprendi. Is it
-- is it your position that if the offense, based on all
facts found by a jury, carried a maximum sentence of
years, but there was a provision that the judge could
determine that if a firearm was not used in the offense,
you would lower it to 10 years, would that pose a
problem under Apprendi?
MR. LANNET: In Apprendi I am not sure
that -- that -- I mean it's a question of whether all
the facts have been found by the -- by the jury
authorize the maximum punishment. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Then it does. All
the facts authorize a punishment of 30 years. And if
it's going to be a reduction, that's for the judge. But
I would suppose it's not the problem -- we didn't
interpose a jury between the defendant and the State
with respect to every element, but only those elements
that increase the punishment.
MR. LANNET: Well, the potential penalty the
defendant faces -- and I think that if the penalty of
whether a gun is present or whether a gun is not
present, assuming that that would be enacted by a
legislature, I think that as long as -- I mean the core
question in Apprendi has been is the judge imposing a
penalty within the range authorized by the jury verdict.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The core question is is the
defendant entitled, entitled, to get no more than a
certain penalty if a particular fact is found.
MR. LANNET: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the answer would be,
yes, he is entitled if the fact is found that he didn't
use a gun to get a lesser penalty. And once you bring
in the legal entitlement, as I understand Apprendi, it
means that it has to be found by the jury.
MR. LANNET: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And in addition, it must be
true too that the defendant is entitled not to pay
restitution if the facts show that there was no money
taken. And you needn't, by the way, convict the person.
You can convict him without finding that.
So the same would be true of restitution.
We would have another jury to decide restitution,
another thing that has never been done; is that right?
MR. LANNET: Well, if only because the
legislative scheme in place doesn't give the court
authority to impose restitutions based solely on the
jury's verdict.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, couldn't impose
restitution without making a finding as to how much
money was taken. So I don't -- I don't -- I can't
imagine the legislature --
MR. LANNET: The Oregon appellate court
doesn't --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. The Federal
courts have not and I guess the same rule would apply.
Or what about forfeiture of a car used in the drug --
again, forfeiture, I guess, would take place with
another jury being impanelled to try the question of
whether there was a car; is that right?
MR. LANNET: If -- if it was a fact that was
necessary for the punishment, I think that follows
within the rule of Apprendi.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's a punishment.
MR. LANNET: Although in Apprendi there was
a concern about elements being shifted from --
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe not. Maybe it would
just be an in rem proceeding. What about the -- what
about the proceeding -- what about the determination
that a person who is going to trial goes to an adult
court rather than a juvenile court, the difference being
the extent of the punishment? You are not entitled
to -- a complete defense to the punishments that they
could impose. Do you see where I am going?
MR. LANNET: I believe --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not sure which of these
things would actual follow from your rule and which
wouldn't.
MR. LANNET: I think legislatively that the
general statutes would set the maximum penalty as being
punished as an adult and the juvenile system would be a
different type of system.
JUSTICE BREYER: But they will say no one
can get this lower punishment for the juvenile system
unless the person is indeed a juvenile. Who makes that
factual finding?
MR. LANNET: Well, Your Honor, the bright-
line rule of Apprendi as it applies in the sentencing in
this case is a question of what the judge can impose in
a proceeding that was initiated --
JUSTICE BREYER: If we are going to depart
from what the Framers did in fact foresee in this kind
of case and we do accept Apprendi as something different
from what they did apply, does that require us to depart
as well in all these other cases which have the kinds of
differences that you have listened to?
MR. LANNET: I believe that this Court
already has. For instance, in Greene, under common
law a defendant who committed a capital offense was
subject to the death penalty and it was only upon -- and
the trial court would get to exercise discretion whether
to impose it. The Arizona legislature identified those
facts and said, we are not trying to shift elements to
the jury, these were never questions for the jury, but
rather we are only merely trying to guide the court's
discretion.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you a rather
broad question?
MR. LANNET: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE STEVENS: In Apprendi the opinions
were rather lengthy and discussed precedents at great
length. Justice Thomas's opinion was quite scholarly
and I discussed a lot of old cases. If this case that
we have today had arisen before Apprendi was decided,
what case would you have supporting your position?
MR. LANNET: I believe I would have Jones v.
the United States and I think that it would be --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I didn't hear that.
MR. LANNET: Jones, where the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Jones --
MR. LANNET: Jones v. the United States,
where this Court interpreted this as a matter of
constitutional balance.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What if it had arisen
before Jones?
MR. LANNET: Then I think that it would --
that this Court, if it engaged in the historical
analysis it did and see that, yes --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And then the historical
analysis was to prove citation to what cases?
MR. LANNET: I believe the cases that were
cited -- I don't think --
JUSTICE STEVENS: All the cases in Apprendi
dealt with elements of the crime and that sort of thing.
MR. LANNET: Yes. But this Court looked at
that practice and decided that what was not at issue was
the legislative identified elements as being found by
the jury, rather the underlying concern, the core
concern, the position that this Court thought that the
framers wanted to enshrine in the Sixth Amendment is
that the judge's authority to punish is both created and
limited by the factual findings of a jury.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if under the
law the judge upon sentencing is supposed to make a
determination of where the defendant should be sent,
which facility, based on determination of which one has
the most room. Is that a determination that has to be
made by the jury?
MR. LANNET: I believe that that -- that can
be distinguished, because it was would be a
determination not based on punishment and not to impose
a punishment on defendant. However, if --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if one was, you
know, the most horrendous prison in history and the
other was one of -- a country club?
MR. LANNET: No, I believe this Court has
repeatedly stated in -- in downstream like decisions
after convictions that whenever someone was convicted of
an offense and sentenced to incarceration by executive
agency, you are subject to the policies of that agency
and there may be certain due process.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, but here in my
hypothetical it's something that a judge puts in the
sentence. It's just like you've got to, you know, make
restitution, you are not eligible for parole, you are
going to this place rather than that place.
MR. LANNET: Well, this Court has identified
a bright line rule that it's not the particular of the
fact whether it would be something that would be
historically found by the jury, but rather a fact that
functions to increase punishment. I think I have
trouble with the hypothetical saying that the
different -- the different classification is sent to a
different institution is intended as a punishment and
not within the operations of the -- of the incarceration
institution overall.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Lannet, if we agree
with your position and let's say you are engaged by the
Oregon legislature and they say to you: We don't want
to make this just be the judge's discretion alone, what
can we do to achieve Constitution of what we were trying
to achieve, that is to say encourage as the main
rule but -- that is, if we have to leave it to the
judge's discretion but we want to rein in that
discretion so that you don't have arbitrary differences
going from one judge to another?
They want -- they want to say, yeah, we
wanted this to be discretionary with the judge, but we
want to install certain controls so that the trial
judges will be operating more or less uniformly. How
could they do that constitutionally?
MR. LANNET: I think they could do as they
are doing in what this Court has decided is juries are
finding those facts, and that a trial court does not
have to impose a consecutive sentence. Rather --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The juries are find --
that's what is going on now, the juries are part of this
trial of guilt?
MR. LANNET: If ordering the bifurcated
proceeding much the way the aggravating factors under
Oregon's guidelines assumes everything handles in the
wake of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Which is it? Do they do
it in the guilt trial or leave that up to the judge?
MR. LANNET: It falls into the condition of
what is defined as offense-related or offender-related
factors. I think that these would come in as offense
related and probably be in the main trial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where -- where a defense
attorney might not want all of that stuff to come out.
MR. LANNET: Well, this Court has observed
repeatedly that -- that the right to a jury trial is one
that can be waived, and so the defendants have the
opportunity to not exercise those rights. This is just
that -- it's a right for the defendant but it's a
constitutional role that this Court has identified as
being the jury role in our system. It -- it both
authorizes, gives the arbiter authority to impose
punishment and also sets the maximum.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if the -- what
if the rule were that all sentences should be concurrent
unless the defendant has been convicted of a prior
federal offense and then the sentence runs consecutive
to the federal sentence?
MR. LANNET: Well, if that was -- if the
Almendarez-Torres prior conviction exception is a Sixth
Amendment issue, which the Court has stated that it is,
then I believe that there would not be required a jury
finding, much like if the legislature identified facts
that would be reflected in the jury's verdict, or
reverted back to the common law rule which gave the
trial court authority to impose consecutive sentences
merely on the basis of if there was a conviction. I
think that the facts identified by the Oregon
legislature here are quite different than what would
qualify as the Almendarez-Torres exception. That
exception -- the basis that it has if we rationalize
consistence with the rule is that a fact of a prior
conviction has already been established in accordance
with the defendant's Sixth Amendment rights. These are
facts about the offense for which a consecutive sentence
is contemplated. So, these are facts about the event
that is being litigated at that moment. And the Oregon
legislature has predicated the greater penalty of a
consecutive sentence on those facts, and precedence
instructs that when the legislature does so, the
defendant has a right to have a jury find that fact
beyond a unreasonable doubt before the State can rely it
on and impose that greater penalty.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Lannet, one of the --
or perhaps the driving force behind Apprendi was the
fear of abuse by a combination of the charging power and
the sentencing power. What abuse do you see if -- if
you lose this case? What potential abuse?
MR. LANNET: Well, I think that it would
send a message to legislatures that they can enact
statutory schemes that have -- that allow for many
instances where consecutive sentences are authorized
based on the facts and that those facts do not implicate
a Apprendi role, and therefore is a --
JUSTICE SOUTER: That it would --
MR. LANNET: Yes. I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, I didn't mean to
interrupt.
MR. LANNET: To set maximum punishment based
on consecutiveness rather than, as they were doing under
the guideline system, by allowing a range and requiring
facts to exceed that range.
JUSTICE SOUTER: They -- they would do by
consecutive sentencing the same sort of thing that they
were trying to do or some legislatures, Congress was
trying to do by the sentencing factors?
MR. LANNET: I believe there's at least a
great possibility of that, yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is there any room for
harmless error here? I mean, it seems to me patently
obvious that both of the statutory conditions were fully
satisfied. It was within -- put it within the
discretion of the judge.
MR. LANNET: Well, I think this Court should
not find those errors harmless beyond a reasonable doubt
for several reasons: First, the State has the burden of
proof that it's harmless beyond a reasonable doubt, and
has not attempted to do before the Oregon courts, the
appellate courts; it has not done so before this Court.
I think the Oregon Supreme Court necessarily concluded
that this --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I mean, is there any doubt
that he wanted to commit an offense twice?
MR. LANNET: I think that praises an issue
of statutory interpretation. I think that that is one
of the issues --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But statutory
interpretation questions aren't for the jury.
MR. LANNET: You are right, Your Honor, but
they are the ones for the Oregon Supreme Court in this
instance, and the Oregon Supreme Court narrowly
concluded that the findings of the jury found -- did not
establish the factual predicate to impose consecutive
sentences; however, they did not go into a comprehensive
analysis of what precisely those facts are, and in fact
the State -- the Petitioner here is actively litigating
the meaning of the statutory provisions at this point.
So it really is unclear what precisely are the facts
meant by this -- by the statutory terms.
I think it would put this Court in a
position to interpret the State statute in the first
instance, and disagree with the Oregon Supreme Court's
implicit conclusion, because it's under a State
constitutional requirement and also this Court's
requirement that it cannot reverse a lower court unless
it concludes that an error is harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It held as far as the
State constitution went, this is fine. It's only the
Federal Constitution that stops the legislature from
doing this.
MR. LANNET: Yes, I would acknowledge that
there is no analysis in the written decision, and that
is part of the problem because it didn't identify the
particular facts and conduct a harmless error analysis
for the benefit of this Court.
However, the court heard this case with a --
in a consolidated argument with State v. Gray, in which
it did address the State's harmless error argument and
recognized that, in Washington v. Recuenco, this Court
had said that a -- is subject to harmless error
analysis.
So, I think necessary in the Oregon Supreme
Court reversing the lower court's decision is that
conclusion that this error was not harmless beyond a
reasonable doubt. And subsequent to this case, the
Oregon Supreme Court decided State versus Hagburn -- and
I have a citation for that, if you like. It's -- and
that is identified -- it addresses the State's harmless
error question. The citation is 345 Or. 161, and that's
regional reporter 190 P.3d 1209. And in that case we
had sexual offenses arising out of the same general
factual scenario, where a young victim testified that
she was abused in two different rooms on two different
days, and the Oregon Supreme Court said there is no
factual default in our consecutive sentencing system
that let -- the jury was not decided that this occurred
during the same criminal episode or during a separate
criminal episode. And in light of the vague testimony
by the victim, they could not conclude that a jury would
have found that.
So I believe that the -- that to the extent
that the Oregon court has analyzed the statute, that I
think that it would -- it backs up the conclusion that
it found this not to be harmless beyond a reasonable
doubt.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: One way of -- if you are
right about the application of Apprendi -- the Oregon
legislature could say as a main rule is we leave it to
the judge's discretion. However, before the judge makes
a sentence consecutive, the judge should take account of
the following factors. That would be okay?
MR. LANNET: I believe so, if that kind of
statutory provision was interpreted like you are
suggesting, that the court has authority based solely on
the jury's verdict and is merely exercising its
discretion and there is no requisite factfinding or the
-- even the requirement to find a fact to impose a
consecutive sentence, then I think it wouldn't praise an
Apprendi issue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No entitlement to a lesser
sentence?
MR. LANNET: No entitlement to a lesser
sentence, Your Honor. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if it's subject
to judicial review for judicial review for abuse of
discretion?
MR. LANNET: I believe so. I think that
this Court has --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That doesn't give
you an entitlement to that, to the exercise of
discretion that isn't abused?
MR. LANNET: Not an entitlement that is
based solely on the facts found by the jury's verdict.
I don't believe it would.
Ultimately, this case was just an
application of the Apprendi rule. The State asked this
Court to replace that bright-line functional rule with
some yet unidentified criteria for identifying
constitutionally protected elements. It hasn't really
offered this Court with any suggestion of what those
constitutionally protected elements are except to say
that that fact at issue in this statute are not those.
At a minimum the State asks for an exception to the
Apprendi rule based on historical reasoning about an
allegation that this was only meant to control the
discretion of the sentencing court and it didn't shift
any elements. And that kind of argument was explicitly
rejected in Blakely, Booker, and Cunningham. The Oregon
Legislature authorized consecutive sentence as greater
penalty only for offenses committed under certain
factual circumstances. Those facts, not the jury -- not
found by the jury -- increase the defendant's penalty
from 7-1/2 years to over 28 years.
Affirming the decision below would adhere
the bright-line rule in Apprendi and it would preserve
the jury's role in finding each fact that authorizes the
maximum punishment. Thank you.
JUSTICE BREYER: Counsel, don't -- well, the
case that I mentioned on my account. I'm thinking about
it -- it's not going to make any difference.
MR. LANNET: Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Williams. You
have four minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MARY H. WILLIAMS
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. WILLIAMS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
What the State is advocating for here is not
an abandonment or a modification of the Apprendi rule,
but a limitation of the Apprendi rule to the cases in
which this -- the circumstances in which this Court has
applied it so far. The Apprendi rule has been applied
as a bright-line test for deciding when a sentence for a
specific condition has satisfied the Sixth Amendment.
And the way it operates is the rule itself tells us what
are the necessary facts that the jury must find, and so
there doesn't need to be a new rule to determine what
are those constitutionally protected facts. The
Apprendi rule does that for us by saying that any fact
that exposes a defendant in a particular conviction and
sentence to a greater penalty based on -- that -- based
on a fact that the jury has not found, is the functional
equivalent of an element if we had looked historically
at what the jury's role was. And so, therefore, that
additional factfinding, if it exposes the defendant to a
-- a longer penalty, a greater penalty for a specific
conviction, it must be found by the jury. And that is
how the Court has applied the rule to this point.
So all we are asking is that the Court
clarify that that is the full scope of the Apprendi
rule. And the reason for that is again, going back to
what this Court said in Blakely, that the Sixth
Amendment is only a reservation of jury power. And here
what we have here is something that is entirely a
judicial determination -- that historically has always
been a judicial determination -- and the only overlay we
now have is a legislative effort to regulate that
judicial authority through the mechanism of requiring
factfinding.
It's something that the legislature often
does, is to try to regulate judicial discretion by
requiring factfinding and by limiting the kinds of facts
the judge may consider. And that's what is being done
in this case without removing anything from the purview
of the jury. And so we would ask that this Court
reverse the Oregon Supreme Court. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 1:53 o'clock p.m., the case
