IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
SALMAN KHADE ABUELHAWA, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-192
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 4, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:07 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
SRI SRINIVASAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
ERIC D. MILLER, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
SRI SRINIVASAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ERIC D. MILLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
SRI SRINIVASAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 53
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:07 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first today in Case 08-192, Abuelhawa v. United States.
Mr. Srinivasan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SRI SRINIVASAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SRINIVASAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
A person who purchases a small quantity of
drugs for his own personal use commits a misdemeanor,
not a felony. The language of section 843(b) does not
transform that person into a felon if he uses a phone in
obtaining his drugs, rather than doing so strictly face
to face.
I would like to begin with the text of the
statute before turning to the textual history and the
statutory context. The language of section 843(b)
covers the use of the phone in committing, in
facilitating, or in causing a drug felony. That
language presupposes someone who is causing,
facilitating, or committing a drug felony, and with
respect to such a person, it makes them guilty of an
additional offense in the nature of an aggravated
offense if they use a phone in their committing,
facilitating, or causing a drug felony.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you be specific about
who those persons would be? You say not a misdemeanant
drug user. So who would be caught in the 843(b)?
MR. SRINIVASAN: It would depend on which
prong you're referring to, Justice Ginsburg. The -- the
committing prong refers to persons who are committing
the underlying drug felony.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. SRINIVASAN: And the facilitating prong
would refer to persons who are aiding or abetting the
underlying drug felony.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, suppose you had the
girlfriend phone and say: My boyfriend needs drugs;
meet him at the corner of 3rd and Main. What crime does
the girlfriend commit? It seems to me that it's pretty
clear that she's under 843(b) facilitating.
MR. SRINIVASAN: She -- she may --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It seems to me that she
may then have committed a felony, and yet it seems to me
that her culpability is certainly no -- no greater, if
you're talking about your -- the polity of your statute,
than the man who uses the drugs.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I think I'm speaking
first and foremost about the terms of the statute,
Justice Kennedy. And to the extent she fits within the
terms of the statute, it would be because she doesn't
benefit from the buyer-seller rule. The buyer-seller
rule establishes that buyers of drugs aren't aiders or
abettors of the distribution of drugs, and equivalently
they wouldn't be treated as facilitators of the
distribution of drugs. Now --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Maybe Justice Ginsburg
would like some further illustration, but I thought that
that was one illustration in answer to her question.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, I would like to --
who does this target? The girlfriend is a good law
school exam type question, but in the real world who is
covered?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I think the classic
case of somebody under the facilitating prong would be
the classic aider and abettor, for example a lookout.
If there were a lookout on the scene of a drug
transaction, and they used the communication facility to
communicate with the distributor to let them know that
buyers were arriving or that law enforcement was in the
neighborhood and the person ought to refrain from
engaging in the transaction for the time being. That
would be the sort of person that comes within 18 U.S.C.
as an aider or abettor of drug distribution and would
come within 843(b) as a facilitator of drug
distribution.
JUSTICE ALITO: The buyer -- seller rule
would prohibit the prosecution of a buyer on the theory
that the buyer aided and abetted, aided and abetted the
seller. But I don't see why it applies here. This is
not a situation like that. This is a different crime,
using a communications facility in facilitating the
commission of a felony.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, it deals with the use
of a communication facility only with respect to persons
that are committing, facilitating or causing a drug
felony.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is the purpose -- what
is the purpose of saying who uses a communications
facility? Is that purely a jurisdictional hook?
MR. SRINIVASAN: No, I don't think it's a
jurisdictional hook. There would already be Federal
jurisdiction by virtue of the underlying felony, and so
what Congress was concerned with in penalizing the use
of a phone as in the nature of an aggravated offense is
that I think Congress thought that phones were being
used to make detection of drug trafficking more
difficult, and in particular at the level of someone who
was at top of the food chain in the architecture of a
drug distribution chain, that person was able to avoid
detection because they never came into physical contact
with drugs and they didn't come into physical contact
with the persons who were engaging in the transaction on
the street.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You keep talking
about phones and you began by saying this covers phones,
but this was -- language was added in 1970?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, there weren't
cell phones of the kind you have now. I think this was
directed at the beepers, right, when those were around
then, or land-based phones or something like that. And
the technology has so expanded that the reach of the
statute has so expanded in a way that brings in a lot
more casual users than was the case before, and I just
don't know how that issue of statutory interpretation is
supposed to be resolved. Assuming I'm right that the
technology has dramatically expanded the reach of the
statute, even if you think it's covered by its terms,
how is that issue addressed? What's the right answer
there? Is it because the terms still cover it, the
breadth has expanded, or because this is something new
technologically that the statute shouldn't be construed
that broadly?
--
MR. SRINIVASAN: No, I don't -- our argument
doesn't depend on assuming that cell phone usage was
significant in the 1970s. Even in 1970 the statute
would exclude from its sweep buyers of drugs.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I know, but
let's assume I don't agree -- let's assume I agree with
that only in the context of the 1970s technology.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Uh-huh.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What's the answer
then?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, if you agree with it
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It reminds me of
these old hypotheticals. You know, before you had
automobiles, you had to have someone with a lantern walk
in front of your carriage, and they don't change the law
and it still turns out to be the law when you're driving
your car and it doesn't make any sense.
Is there a case of ours that says what to do
in that case, in such a situation of statutory
construction?
MR. SRINIVASAN: I'm not aware of a case
that speaks directly to that question, Mr. Chief
Justice. But our argument doesn't depend on that logic,
because even in 1970 certainly land lines were well in
use, and in fact the indications are that that's what
Congress was principally concerned with in this statute.
And at that time we would make the argument, just as
now, a person who used the telephone in buying drugs for
personal use wouldn't come within the ambit of the
provision because the text of the provision goes to
someone who uses a phone in committing, in facilitating,
or in causing the commission of a drug felony. And so
if you're not someone who's facilitating the commission
of a drug felony in the first place, then you can't be
charged as using a phone in facilitating a drug felony.
The reason that a buyer for personal use, whether we're
talking about 1970 or now, wouldn't be considered a
person who is using a phone in facilitating a drug
felony is because of the buyer-seller rule. Buyers
aren't aiders and abetters of the felony distribution,
and by the same token they shouldn't be considered
facilitators of felony distribution.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Your argument sort of
assumes -- more than sort of assumes; it assumes -- that
facilitating is the same as aiding and abetting. If
they meant aiding and abetting, it's a classic criminal
law term, they could have said aiding and abetting.
They didn't. They used a different term, facilitating.
Why should I think facilitating means aiding and
abetting?
MR. SRINIVASAN: For several reasons, Your
Honor. First, their definitional equivalence. Black's
Law Dictionary defines "facilitating" as "an act of
aiding or helping or making easier," and it in turn
defines "aiding and abetting" as "to facilitate the
commission of the crime." So they mean the very same
thing.
And I don't think there's anything
talismanic about the particular formulation "aiding and
abetting" and in fact the Court established that in its
opinion in Gebardi. That dealt with the Mann Act, which
barred transporting a woman for purposes of engaging in
immoral acts or aiding or assisting in that
transportation or causing the transportation. So that
statute uses a different formulation --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but I mean
it's natural to view the woman in that situation more as
a victim than as someone facilitating the crime.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm not sure that
would extend to your case.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I don't know -- the
opinion doesn't stand on the rationale that the woman
would be a victim. It stands on the rationale that
Congress when it defined the primary offense, which is
transporting --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but that was the
same word. That was "transporting" in both instances.
Here you have "purchase," one, "facilitating" with a
telephone, two. That's different.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, it doesn't use the
word "purchase," with respect, Justice Kennedy. It uses
the words "commit, facilitate or cause." Those are the
three persons who come within section 843(b). And in
precisely parallel fashion, under 18 U.S.C. 2, a general
aider or abettor provision, that provision applies to
persons who commit the underlying offense, who aid or
abet the underlying offense or who cause the underlying
offense. And that precisely parallel structure
reinforces that facilitating in 843(b) serves the same
purpose and means the same thing as aiding or abetting
and the other words that apply in section --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'll think about it,
but I think Gebardi does involve one statute, one act,
transportation. This involves two. The underlying
felony is the purchase or possession, and the second
statute is use of the telephone. So I don't -- I'll
think about it, but I don't think Gebardi works.
MR. SRINIVASAN: I don't think that's a
distinction that ultimately makes a difference, Justice
Kennedy, for the following reason. This statute does
deal both with someone who is involved in the underlying
felony and use of the phone on top of that, but it's in
the nature of an aggravated offense. It presupposes
somebody who is committing, causing or facilitating the
underlying drug offense, and then it makes them guilty
of an aggravated offense if they use a phone in the
course of doing so. So the first question you'd have to
ask is whether the person is committing, facilitating or
causing the drug felony in the first place.
And if I could use one hypothetical statute
to illustrate that. If this statute, instead of saying
facilitating, dealt by terms with use of a phone in
aiding or abetting a drug felony, you would still have
use of the phone in addition to the underlying drug
felony. But the first question I think one would ask in
looking at that provision is whether the person who's
accused of violating the law were aiding or abetting a
drug felony.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- this statute does
not just apply to facilitating a drug offense. It
applies to any of the felonies covered by subchapter 2
of the relevant chapter. I agree, it seems a little
strange to have what is a misdemeanor by a buyer
converted into a -- into a felony just by use of the
phone. What other situations under other felony
provisions would arise that create a similar oddity? Do
you have any in mind?
MR. SRINIVASAN: I don't know that there are
other provisions that would create a similar oddity. I
think this one is particularly anomalous, the use of a
statute to penalize somebody who otherwise would be a
misdemeanant, except that they use a phone in the course
of the purchase for personal use.
The classic situations in which the statute
does apply which aren't anomalous because they make
sense given what Congress had in mind, would be the use
of a phone to facilitate drug distribution, if someone
were a lookout again or if someone were a trafficker and
they instructed, for example, retail sellers where to go
to pick up stock, a stock house of drugs.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: This really isn't
the transformation of a misdemeanor into a felony. It's
a separate, separate activity and an activity that
facilitates the commission of a crime. It's much easier
to carry out your drug distribution business if people
are calling you on their cell phones than if they have
to meet you in person or call from a land line.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, two steps to respond
to that question, Mr. Chief Justice. First, in terms of
whether it makes it easier, I think one could say the
very same thing in an aiding or abetting prosecution.
Aiding or abetting means the same thing as facilitating,
and so you could make the argument, I think, that buying
drugs and engaging in the sorts of actions that
naturally accompany the purchasing enterprise make the
sale easier, including directing where the sale is going
to occur and things like that. But we know already that
buyers of drugs aren't considered aiders and abettors of
drugs for purposes of liability under 18 U.S.C. 2. And
I think by the same token they shouldn't be considered
facilitators of drugs for purposes of section 843(b),
and with respect -- I'm sorry?
JUSTICE ALITO: What if the -- the defendant
-- what if the defendant who is a buyer of -- of a
quantity for personal use does more than simply purchase
the drugs? What if information is communicated in the
telephone conversation that makes it easier for the
transaction to take place or less likely -- less likely
that there is -- that the person is going to be
apprehended? Would that person fall within the statute?
MR. SRINIVASAN: I don't think so, Justice
Alito. I probably would have to know more about exactly
what they did, but if it is a -- if what they did is a
normal incident of purchasing, then I think it would
fall within the buyer-seller rule.
Otherwise, I think the government under an
U.S.C. 2 prosecution for aider and abettor liability
could make precisely the same sorts of arguments. The
government could argue, for example, that this person
didn't just buy drugs. They instigated the purchase
because they made the first phone call. They didn't
accept the first phone call. They made the first phone
call, and so that takes them outside the buyer-seller
rule.
But I don't that argument would work under
U.S.C. 2 because making the first phone call is a
normal incident of purchasing. And, of course, someone
who purchases drugs for personal use is going to want to
take measures to make sure that the purchase goes
through. Their ultimate objective is to get their hands
on the drugs. And so --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This statute doesn't --
it doesn't differentiate between buyer and seller in
terms of who makes the call. I gather the purchaser for
his or her own use would be just as susceptible to this
statute if the dealer called and said: I've got a gram
of cocaine; I know you're interested in having it.
MR. SRINIVASAN: That's -- that's right,
Justice Ginsburg. It would apply equally in that
situation, and from our perspective that points up even
more of the anomaly in applying it to this factual
context. And that would equally be the case under 18
U.S.C. 2.
One could draw distinctions between who
makes the initial phone call and other sorts of normal
incidents of the purchasing enterprise. But I don't
think, Justice Alito, that because someone engages in a
drug -- in -- in a transaction in a way that makes it
particularly likely that the purchase is going to be
successful, that that alone would take you outside the
buyer-seller rule.
JUSTICE ALITO: What would happen in the
situation where the person who buys the drug is guilty
of -- of a felony? It's an instance of felony
possession. Wouldn't the application of your
understanding of the buyer-seller rule in that situation
lead to the conclusion that even that person could not
be convicted under this statute for facilitating the
commission of the felony of sale?
MR. SRINIVASAN: No, I don't think so,
because the buyer-seller rule deals with the
circumstance in which the way the person is -- is
associated with a felony is they're associated with the
distributor's felony. And so what the buyer-seller rule
says is that a buyer isn't an aider and abettor of the
seller's distribution, and I think by the same token
shouldn't be associated with the seller's facilitation.
But in your hypothetical, where the buyer
himself is committing a felony because his possession
because of certain characteristics associated with it
make it a felony, the buyer himself would be committing
a felony.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, that may -- that may
be true, but the buyer there still could not under your
theory be convicted of facilitating the seller's felony
of selling the drugs.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Right, couldn't be
convicted of facilitating the seller's felony, but would
fall within the ambit of section 843(b) in any event
because they would have used the phone in connection
with their own felony.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your gloss on this
statute makes -- gives rise to some difficult questions
of proof. What if it's -- I don't know -- ten pounds of
something, and the guy says, well, I was just buying in
bulk for personal use, like a Costco dealer.
(Laughter.)
MR. SRINIVASAN: I -- I don't know about
that, but -- but I think what I do know is it doesn't
create any greater problems of application than already
exist under Federal drug laws. Because the Federal drug
laws bar both possession for personal use under the
civil possession statute, section 844, and possession
with intent to distribute under 841.
And so courts and juries and the government
already have to make those sorts of decisions, and I
don't know that they've been particularly difficult to
make. They have to draw a distinction between the sorts
of quantities and other aspects of the offense that
bring it within the possession with intent to distribute
plan or whether the possession is of such a small
quantity, and there aren't other associated
characteristics of the offense that make it possession
for purposes of personal use.
That distinction is one that's already
embedded in the fabric of the drug laws, and we're just
applying the same distinction for purposes of this
statute. I don't think we're making it any more
complicated than it already is.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If the government were to
prevail here, I assume that it would then as a result
have a much larger, more expansive discretion in
charging and plea bargaining and -- and et cetera.
Other than the rule of lenity, is there anything in our
cases that indicates that we should be cautious about
giving the government that authority so that that's an
aid in our interpretation or is that just all within the
rule of lenity?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, it's -- it's
definitely within the rule of lenity, and I think that's
the principal place that it's found.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Other than --
MR. SRINIVASAN: And I don't -- I don't -- I
don't know of any background principle that one would
bring to bear on that other than the -- the normal tools
of statutory construction that I've already talked about
in the first place, which is you look at the text, and
you look at the statutory history, and you look at the
statutory context.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No background principles
either way on granting the prosecutors vast discretion
in charging --
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I think as --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- as it applies to
statutory interpretation?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I think as a general
rule we ought to be circumspect about doing that. My --
my understanding is that circumspection is given voice
through the rule of lenity. But a background principle
of particular applicability here is the statutory
history, is the statutory history. And I'm speaking now
in terms of the enacted statutory text; not legislative
history, but the history of the enacted statutory text.
And what that bears on is not the word
"facilitating," which is what the buyer-seller rule
particularly pertains to, but the word "felony," which
is another word in the text of the statute. And so
Congress could have barred the use of a phone in
connection with any drug offense, including a drug
misdemeanor, but Congress pointedly didn't do so. It
barred the use of a phone in connection only with a drug
felony. And because it chose to limit the offense to
the use of a phone in connection with a drug felony, the
effect is to exclude from the purview of the statute use
of a phone in connection with a drug misdemeanor. Now,
Petitioners --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That was changed in 1970,
wasn't it? Wasn't the text "offense" originally, and
then Congress changed it to "felony"?
MR. SRINIVASAN: That's right, Justice
Ginsburg. Before the Controlled Substances Act, the
communication facility provision barred the use of a
phone in connection with any drug offense. And in 1970
in the Controlled Substances Act Congress narrowed its
reach to encompass only use of a phone in connection
with a drug felony.
So it excluded use of a phone in connection
with a drug misdemeanor, and that's significant in two
respects. One is, even without reference to the
statutory context of the 1970 Controlled Substances Act,
it's significant because Congress excluded use of a
phone in connection with a drug misdemeanor.
Petitioner used a phone in connection with
his misdemeanor simple possession. But under the
government's argument, the very same conduct by the very
same person would be brought back into the fold of the
statute. Even though Congress excluded it, it would be
brought back into the fold of the statute by recasting
it as facilitating the dealer's felony.
And the mode of analysis the Court used in
Gebardi and the mode of analysis that underlies the
buyer-seller rule to begin with would -- would lead us
not to infer that Congress would have intended that
result.
But in terms of the history and the
statutory context which you were alluding to, Justice
Ginsburg, it is significant for that reason, as well,
because the context in which Congress narrowed the reach
of section 843(b) so that it only encompasses
facilitation of a felony and not facilitation of a
misdemeanor is one in which Congress in the 1970 act
sought to extend leniency and afford a chance at
rehabilitation to drug users.
And that's manifested not in legislative
history but in the statutory text itself, because
Congress penalized simple possession for personal use as
a misdemeanor, whereas, the receipt of drugs previously
was a felony, regardless of the purpose of the
possession, whether it was for use or for distribution.
But Congress did more than that, because in
immediately adjacent provisions to the one in which it
narrowed simple possession to a misdemeanor, it also
enacted a provision which is now found in 18 U.S.C.
07, which allowed a simple possessor who is a
first-time offender to avoid any conviction at all if
they successfully complete a period of probation.
And Congress went further still because it
also enacted in another adjacent provision further
relief for first-time simple possessors under the age of
. With respect to that person, it allowed the person
to obtain a complete expungement of the criminal records
associated with the arrest.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you would have
lost this case before 1970 because the incongruity on
which you rely --
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, the basis --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- didn't exist
then?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Yes. Before 1970 it would
have been a very difficult climb because -- not only
because the communication facility applied to any drug
offense, but because simple possession wasn't a
misdemeanor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. So the scope
of this language was changed sub silentio?
MR. SRINIVASAN: It -- it wasn't sub
silentio. It was explicit.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I know, but this
language, "facilitating," covered purchasers using a
telephone in the period before 1970, but not after 1970,
because of the changes in some other sections?
MR. SRINIVASAN: No, well, it's in part
because of the changes in this section. This section
changed from "any offense" to "felony," so it's the text
of this section itself. And the buyer-seller rule
equally applied in -- before 1970. It's just that
before 1970 you wouldn't have had to show that the buyer
was associated with the seller's felony, because the
buyer was associated with his own offense and that was
enough, because at that point the buyer's offense was a
felony. And then the law, section 843(b), didn't care
whether it was a felony because it applied to any drug
offense.
It's only after 1970 that this distinction
becomes important, because after 1970 it's clear that
the buyer for personal use doesn't use a phone in
committing a drug felony. What he's committing is a
drug misdemeanor. So you have to find some way, if
you're the government, to make him associated with the
drug felony. And to say that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That question goes
to whether or not the distribution was a felony.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Right, which is the only
avenue available after 1970. There was a different
avenue available before 1970, because before 1970 a
purchaser of drugs would, if they used a phone in
connection with their purchase, would have used a phone
in connection with a drug offense, and now the statute
is different in two respects. One, it only covers use
of a phone in connection with a drug felony; and two, in
another provision, Congress narrowed the simple
possession offense from a mis -- from a felony to a
misdemeanor.
And Congress did so with respect to the
historical context in immediately adjacent provision.
It narrowed 843(b) in an immediately adjacent provision
to the one in which it provided that the simple
possessor could avoid any conviction at all and the one
in which it provided that a youthful offender could
obtain a complete expungement of its records. And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You didn't -- I haven't
heard you question so far the government's rationale,
the reason Congress did this is it's more difficult to
detect a drug deal when it's by telephone than if it
were an encounter on the street or in an apartment. You
have not questioned that?
MR. SRINIVASAN: No, we don't question that,
Your Honor, but I would like to make two points with
respect to that. First of all, it may be more
difficult -- the use of the telephone may be more
difficult, and that may be the animating purpose that
Congress sought to address through this provision. But
that purpose is substantially served even in the context
of this case, because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand what
you're saying. The use of a phone may be more
difficult?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Use of a phone may make
detection more difficult, and that may be the animating
purpose -- excuse me. That may have been the animating
purpose behind the enactment of this provision. But
that purpose is substantially served, even if you accept
our understanding of the statute on the facts of this
case, because the seller comes squarely within the terms
of section 843(b). So because the seller comes within
the terms of section 843(b), the statute is already
operating against the seller's use of a telephone.
The question in our case is whether the
buyer also comes within the ambit of section 843(b).
And because section 843(b) presupposes someone who is
committing, facilitating or committing a drug felony,
the buyer doesn't come within the reach of section
3(b) because he's not committing, causing or
facilitating a drug felony in the first place. The
seller may be, but the buyer is not. The statutory
purposes are still served by virtue of penalizing the
seller.
If the Court has no further questions, I
would like to reserve the balance of my time for
rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Miller.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ERIC D. MILLER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. MILLER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Section 843(b) prohibits the use of a
communication facility in causing or facilitating the
commission of any act constituting a felony under the
Controlled Substances Act. The court of appeals
correctly held that the statute is violated when a
person uses a communication facility such as a telephone
to purchase controlled substances unlawfully. A call to
order drugs both causes and facilitates a felony
distribution of drugs.
There's no basis in the statute for creating
an exemption for people who facilitate or cause felony
distributions by purchasing drugs for their own personal
use.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So two people across
the park, they know there's a drug dealer on the other
side, the one waves and the dealer comes over, the other
calls on the cell phone and the dealer comes over; the
other gets four more years? The phone user gets four
more years?
MR. MILLER: The phone -- the phone user is
exposed to four more years. There's no mandatory
minimum --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Suppose he calls
three times. He's exposed to 12 more years, right?
MR. MILLER: That's right. Congress -- I
mean, those two cases are different and Congress made
the judgment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not just that, he gets a
felony on his record. Before that he would have had
just a misdemeanor; right?
MR. MILLER: That's right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The call -- does the call
have to be completed -- I mean, if he gets an answer
saying "Your call is important to us, but we're serving
someone else"?
(Laughter.)
MR. MILLER: If the call -- the statute
requires that the communication facility be used. And
if the call doesn't actually go through, it would be
difficult to see how you would use the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if he leaves a
message?
MR. MILLER: If he leaves the message and
the message in some way causes or facilitates a felony
drug distribution, then, yes, he has used the
communication facility.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In this case we have two
separate episodes, each involving one gram of cocaine?
MR. MILLER: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And there were a total of
seven phone calls?
MR. MILLER: There were six. The government
dismissed one of the counts. It was six counts that
went to trial, six phone calls.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So that would be an
exposure --
MR. MILLER: Of 24 years.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: 24 years for the one gram
of cocaine on two occasions.
Do you agree that it doesn't make any
difference who initiates the call? That is, if the
seller says -- seller calls the buyer, and says, I
understand that you are in the market for one gram of
cocaine, I'll sell it to you, is the buyer similarly
subject to this statute?
MR. MILLER: Just getting that call by
itself wouldn't subject someone to the statute. But if
you get the call and then engage in a conversation --
JUDGE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. MILLER: -- with the dealer where you
are using the telephone to cause --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, we are assuming the
purchase is made in either case.
MR. MILLER: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So what you're saying is
it doesn't matter who initiates the call?
MR. MILLER: That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, what do you do --
this case that I find pretty close to what we have here
is Rewis v. United States, which involved a statute that
prohibited interstate travel with the intent to, quote,
"promote, manage, establish, carry on or facilitate"
certain kinds of illegal activities, one of which would
have been gambling.
And we said the ordinary meaning of this
language suggests that the traveler's purpose must
involve more than the desire to patronize the illegal
activity. So it wouldn't have been facilitating a
gambling operation simply to be engaging in interstate
travel for the purpose of playing the tables.
MR. MILLER: I think there are a couple
answers to that, Your Honor. First, Rewis, as you say,
was construing the Travel Act. It didn't focus on the
word "facilitate," and it certainly didn't set out a
general --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, it certainly focused on
the word "facilitate." That was the whole purpose of
that passage. It said -- it quoted "promote, manage,
establish, carry on or facilitate," and the ordinary
meaning of this language suggests the traveler's purpose
must involve more than the desire to patronize the
illegal activity.
MR. MILLER: That's right, and -- and as --
as indicated by the passage you've just quoted, the
focus of the Court there was on the traveler's purpose.
The Travel Act requires intent. Section 843(b) is
different in that it's satisfied by knowingly or
intentionally using the phone.
So the Court in Rewis said, quite
reasonably, that someone whose only purpose is to be a
customer of an unlawful enterprise doesn't have the
intent to facilitate -- and significantly, although the
Court's quotation of the statute ends at "facilitate,"
it's not just to facilitate any unlawful activity; it's
to facilitate the promotion, management --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't you think that the
"knowingly" in this statute also requires that you are
knowingly facilitating?
MR. MILLER: It does require.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So this is the same
thing here.
MR. MILLER: But it doesn't have to be -- it
doesn't have to be that you have the purpose of
facilitating the seller. It's sufficient that you know
that the seller's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, this didn't
mention -- this statute didn't mention purpose, either,
did it?
MR. MILLER: It -- it said "intent." It
does not include the word "knowledge," and the Court in
the passage you just read construed that to require an
inquiry into the traveler's purpose.
It's also significant --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I find it pretty close, I
really do.
MR. MILLER: Well, one other difference,
then, Your Honor, is that the facilitation that has to
take place under the Travel Act is facilitation of the
promotion, management, establishment or carrying on of
unlawful activity, which is defined not as a discrete
crime but as a business enterprise involving gambling.
So you have a statute that's focused on sort of
management or direction of an ongoing enterprise,
whereas here under 843(b), it's sufficient to facilitate
a discrete act.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why are you going through
all this sort of parsing, I mean, looking at the
legislative history as well as the statute in 1970?
What is your answer to the last point that they made,
that what Congress wanted to do was to make simple
possession a misdemeanor, that's why they changed the
word, which -- "offense" to "felony." That's why they
changed the word "felony" to "misdemeanor."
And I can't imagine why else they amended
the statute, and just because I was curious I looked it
up, and that's why they amended it, right. So -- so the
legislative history makes that clear.
So what you've done is figure out a way --
the government's figured out a way to do the opposite of
what they want, to take people who simply possess and
transform it into a felony. Now, what justification is
there in the law for doing that?
MR. MILLER: Well, I think there are a
couple of answers to that. First is that section 843(b)
doesn't apply to people who simply possess. It applies
to people who possess by using a phone to facilitate a
felony distribution. And Congress -- I mean, the very
existence of the statute demonstrates that Congress
thought that the use of a phone is a separate element
that introduces a distinct evil that Congress wanted to
combat. And as to the change in the felony language --
JUSTICE BREYER: As to the first, I said
subset. I didn't say you undermined the entire statute.
I said you took a subset of people who simply possessed
and that subset you transformed into felons. Now, your
response I guess is just what you said.
MR. MILLER: Well, yes --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- second.
MR. MILLER: -- and also that the reason for
the -- as you know, as you know, the predecessor to
3(b), which was section 1403, referred to causing or
facilitating any offense. All of the enumerated
offenses were felonies. In 1970 they changed the word
"offense" to the word "felony." But that's part of the
reason for that. There is no legislative history
specifically addressing the reason for that change. But
part of the reason we can infer is that the 1970 statute
created a whole host of misdemeanors, of misdemeanor
regulatory offenses under the Controlled Substances Act.
So one good example is section 829, which prohibits
distributing a controlled substance without a
prescription, and that's an offense -- that's a
misdemeanor, and that could easily be caused or
facilitated over the phone, if somebody called a
pharmacist.
And so, where both parties to the
transaction are only engaging in a misdemeanor, that's
something that 843(b) would not apply to.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we do know that --
that Congress drew a line it hadn't drawn before between
the own-purpose users and people who were in the
trafficking business, and it expressed sympathy for
the -- or leniency, a policy of leniency.
But the difference between the
classification felony and misdemeanor is huge in terms
of consequences for a person's life. So let's take the
defendant in this case. If he becomes a felon rather
than a misdemeanant, even if it's his first time and
it's only one gram, he loses a lot of rights, doesn't
MR. MILLER: Yes. Yes, that's right. But I
-- and I think -- but one other change that Congress
made to 843(b) in 1970 that's significant is that it
eliminated the mandatory minimum. There was under the
predecessor --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but I'm speaking
about the post consequences.
MR. MILLER: Yes. Yes. It --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Like -- let's take a
young person. It has an effect on student loans,
government loans?
MR. MILLER: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And it may be that in
certain States voting rights are removed, and there is
on this person's record forever that he is a felon. It
just seems odd that Congress would have at one and the
same time, the same statute, say, we want these -- to
give these people a chance and if they are in a
rehabilitation program and they make it they won't even
get any charge, not even a misdemeanor charge, and then
say, but a whole group of them are going to be treated
just like traffickers if they use a telephone.
It's hard -- these two would seem to be
working at odds with each other. So mustn't the Court
then try to reach some accommodation, some harmonization
of these two provisions? And it's suggested that we do
that by saying facilitation, causing in this context
means the same thing as aiding and abetting, then we
have the buyer-seller rule for the aider and abettor,
and then we have made these two provisions harmonious.
MR. MILLER: I think the buyer-seller
principle and the limitation on aiding and abetting and
accessory liability, as this Court recognized in
Gebardi, doesn't apply here; because the principle that
the Court set out in that case, and it has been
recognized in subsequent cases, is that -- is that when
Congress criminalizes or punishes one party to a
transaction, that inevitably involves a second party.
The second party who is left unpunished by the statute
doesn't get swept back in under section 2 as an aider
and abettor.
That principle doesn't apply here because
although the existence of a purchaser or a receiver of
drugs is an inevitable incident of a distribution, the
existence of a purchaser who uses a phone is not. The
whole point of this statute is that the use of a phone
is a separate and distinct element that introduces a
different evil and that Congress wanted to combat that.
The other -- the other reason that aiding and
abetting --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Except that the use of a
phone in this statute is applied to the seller as well
as to the buyer. I mean, it seems to me it is parallel:
use of a phone to commit the offense by the seller, and
you want us to similarly sweep in the facilitating of
the offense by the use of the phone by the buyer. It
seems to me pretty parallel to what we've done in the
buyer-seller rule.
MR. MILLER: The -- the statute -- but by
its terms makes clear that the person using the phone
and the person committing the felony don't have to be
the same person, and I think -- I understood Petitioner
to acknowledge that. The statute doesn't say knowingly
or intentionally use a communication facility in causing
or facilitating his or her commission of a felony.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there another example in
the law, anywhere in the law, where -- and there may be,
I'm asking -- which you've come across, where we have an
illegal business and there is a customer; and all the
customer does is be a customer; and is there an example
where just because he's a customer in a statutory
provision that normally has a lesser penalty -- all
right; imagine those circumstances -- you still can
punish him as if he -- as if he ran the business?
MR. MILLER: I'm not aware of any, and I
don't think --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not aware, and why
should this be the first?
MR. MILLER: But this -- this isn't one,
Because this isn't a case that punishes people just for
being a customer. It's a case -- it's a statute that
punishes people for being a customer -- and using a
phone.
JUSTICE BREYER: The way they're a customer
-- the way they're a customer is they use the telephone,
and I guess one side thinks that's not a big deal, and
the other side thinks that, anyway, in terms of what
Congress thought, it's a tremendously big deal because
Congress was really worried about telephones. Okay,
that's possible.
So can you get a parallel that's like that?
MR. MILLER: There are -- there's a whole
host of statutes that punish --
JUSTICE BREYER: What one comes to mind?
MR. MILLER: I mean, the wire fraud statute
punishes conduct that might not be a Federal offense at
all, but for the fact that somebody used --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's jurisdictional.
What I'm looking for is there's a business and a
customer, the statute punishes the business worse than
the customer. Now, we get the customer as if he were a
business participant. That's what I'm looking for,
where it's the way he does it -- i.e., whether he uses a
telephone or whether he uses a telegram or semaphore
signals or -- where the -- where the means of
communication here or something like that suddenly
transform him?
Anything else that comes to mind? I didn't
expect there to be, but I just thought maybe you would
think of an analogy, which would be helpful.
MR. MILLER: Well, I mean, if -- we
identified on page 25 of our brief, a number of statutes
where the use of a communication facility is an element
of the offense, and the conduct covered by those
statutes in many cases might not be a Federal offense at
all.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Carry -- carrying a
weapon. A lot of statutes punish more severely for
carrying weapons.
MR. MILLER: Right. And I think, to be
clear, this is not -- this is not a statute that
punishes people, punishes customers as if they were
distributors or that aggravates an underlying felony.
This is a separate offense; it has its own penalty; it
put the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it -- can you tell me,
how does it work? The district -- the United States
Attorney in one State, one district, has a case like
this where there are four different phone calls; and he
doesn't like the looks of the defendant, or for some
reason he can charge him, and in the neighboring
jurisdiction the United States Attorney does not. Are
there guidelines? Does the Department of Justice
control this in each case? Is there some manual where
we could see what the rules are for charging? Is it all
at the discretion of the United States Attorney?
MR. MILLER: Yeah. I'm not aware of
anything in the U.S. Attorney's Manual that specifically
addresses this statute, but of course the Court
recognized in Batchelder that prosecutors legitimately
have discretion when there are different criminal
statutes that cover the conduct, and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the -- the
statement that in the manual -- maybe this is
incorrect -- but that the charging policy of the
Department of Justice instructs prosecutors to charge
the most serious offense supported by the facts? And if
that's true, then the Assistant U.S. Attorney would have
no choice. The most serious offense is not misdemeanor
simple possession, but it is the violation of 843(b).
MR. MILLER: That's if they bring charges at
all, and of course that policy doesn't require
prosecutors to -- to bring charges.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Ordinarily --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I think we know from this
case they're likely to bring charges.
MR. MILLER: Well, I mean --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that the policy, first
of all? It says that they're supposed to charge the
most serious offense supported by the facts?
MR. MILLER: Yes, and -- and a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So that means in every
--
one of these cases, whether the dealer picks up the
phone or the buyer picks up the phone for a transaction
for one gram of cocaine, the prosecutor has no choice
but to indict under 843(b)?
MR. MILLER: Well, again, if -- if there is
to be an indictment at all. There's no requirement that
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm talking about the
choice between misdemeanor, simple possession
misdemeanor, or 843 -- adding on this 843(b). The
prosecutor -- if what I read is correct -- has no
discretion, has to if he makes the charge. He cannot
make a simple misdemeanor charge. He has to charge the
felony.
MR. MILLER: That's my understanding of the
policy, but, you know, this Court has recognized that,
you know, that sort of charging decision is a legitimate
aspect of the system as long as it's not exercised for
unconstitutional reasons.
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but there's -- there's
a difference here, and that is, as these cases
illustrate, three phone calls for one trifling sale, two
for another, this gives a kind of multiplier effect
which it's -- it's hard to find a parallel for in the
law. We go from a misdemeanor to 12 years, depending on
the fact that there were -- there were a couple of cell
phone calls.
That is -- maybe -- maybe that is exactly
what Congress intended, and maybe that's good law
enforcement policy, but those are not sort of two
intuitively obvious positions.
MR. MILLER: I think the -- the text of the
statute and the fact that it covers any act constituting
a felony does demonstrate that that's what Congress
intended as well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, what about the
question?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's feel sorry for this
-- for the felon who is selling this stuff, too. I
mean, the same thing is true of him, isn't it? Every
time he makes another phone call he gets socked with
another how many years?
MR. MILLER: The -- the statutory maximum is
four, but again --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, so four times four
times four every time he makes a phone call.
MR. MILLER: Right, and I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We should feel sorry for
him, too.
JUSTICE SOUTER: He knows -- the difference,
that -- he knows that he's committing a felony, and the
possessor of a gram or less doesn't.
MR. MILLER: The possessor who purchases the
drugs using his phone knows that he is causing the
felony. The reason he calls the drug dealer is because
he wants to cause the dealer to send him drugs.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what about the
legislative history? Because I would read it -- and in
fact what it seems to me that you're suggesting, when
you read the statute, is using a telephone is -- because
Justice Kennedy came up with a good example of what I
was thinking of. If the buyer sits there with a gun,
well, that's different, he shouldn't have the gun, and
it's not surprising that he gets a higher sentence. And
you're saying by reading the text you've discovered
Congress thinks that cell phones are sort of like guns.
Okay. I grant you somebody might have thought that.
Justice Souter thinks it's not intuitively obvious, but
is there any legislative history that suggests that that
indeed is what people in Congress thought when they
passed this statute? I'll read it if there is.
MR. MILLER: Yes, and it --
JUSTICE BREYER: And what should I read and
where exactly --
MR. MILLER: I mean, beyond -- first of all,
the -- the Congress has a traditional interest in
keeping the channels of commerce and communication free
from --
JUSTICE BREYER: Normally, where that is
involved, I've learned, it's called what Justice Scalia
called it "a jurisdictional hook." They don't think the
underlying behavior is worse, but they believe there has
to be a basis and should be a basis for federal
prosecution. I started out where he was. I thought
this is just a jurisdictional hook, but now you say no,
it isn't; it's much worse than that. It's like carrying
a gun, not quite as bad as that, but on that -- in that
direction. So I'm asking you what would I read in this
history to show that what you're claiming is right?
MR. MILLER: The legislative history of the
56 act, which is the -- where the predecessor statute,
03, was enacted, shows that Congress was concerned
with the ability of drug traffickers and people engaging
in drug transactions to avoid detection by using the
phone --
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's what -- you've
cited that in the brief so I can find it?
MR. MILLER: Yes. And the initial proposal
in the initial Senate bill would have allowed
wiretapping in connection with drug investigations of
certain enumerated offenses that covered both purchasers
and sellers. That was replaced with the provision that
became 1403, which also -- which applied "causing or
facilitating" enumerated offenses, and again applied to
both buyers and sellers. And that statute was applied
to buyers in a number of reported decisions before 1970,
and there is nothing in the 1970 legislative history
that Congress intended to change that aspect.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How does it work? I
mean, I know your overall rationale about the ease of
detection -- easier to detect face to face encounter on
the streets. But here, I mean, we know that the
government tapped the dealer's phone, and that's how the
government got the list of the people who bought from
the dealer. How common is it that -- the either the
buyer or the seller is the subject of a telephone tap?
MR. MILLER: I don't -- I don't know the
statistics on that, but certainly a wiretap is only
possible when demanding standards under Title III are
met, and -- whereas a face-to-face meeting can be
observed by anybody who happens to be there.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what had to be met in
this case in order to put this tap on the dealer's
phone?
MR. MILLER: Well, among other things, I
believe the statute requires some showing that it's not
possible to obtain evidence in some other less intrusive
way. So in this case there was a wiretap on the
dealer's phone, but in a lot of cases there's not going
to be that. And certainly Congress, when it enacted the
statute, viewed keeping people from using the phones to
conceal their drug transactions as one way of minimizing
the need for more intrusive measures like wiretapping.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you would interpret
Congress -- now we're getting away from '56, when simple
possession was a felony, to '70, when simple possession
becomes a misdemeanor. And you're saying that Congress
meant to relegate the simple possessor to misdemeanor
status, but only if the encounter was face to face. So
you're reading into the -- what Congress did to sharply
distinguish between traffickers and users, and say but
that was only taking 843(b) into account. That benefit
-- that you're not going to be a felon; you're going to
be a misdemeanant -- is only for face-to-face
transactions.
MR. MILLER: For -- it's -- I mean, it
doesn't apply when -- when a communication facility is
used. It also doesn't apply, I mean, in a number of
other contexts that Petitioner acknowledges. But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I'm talking about
--
this context, the purchase of one gram of cocaine on one
occasion, nothing more.
MR. MILLER: As a first offense. I mean,
that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So Congress's design was
we treat as a less grave offender the buyer for his own
use, but only if he buys in a face-to-face encounter.
That's what -- what you would have to read -- you would
have to limit the line Congress drew between
traffickers, on the one hand, and possessors for their
own use, on the other, that it applies only to drugs
purchased in face-to-face encounters.
MR. MILLER: Yes, although I wouldn't
describe it as an issue of a less grave offense or a
more grave offense in the sense that the use of the
phone aggravates the offense of possession.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I mean, practically
MR. MILLER: But the use of a phone is the
difference --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the difference between
being labeled a misdemeanant and being labeled a felon
is an enormous difference.
MR. MILLER: That -- that's right. But
Congress, again, did recognize that there could be a
range of levels of culpability associated with the
3(b) offense, which is part of the reason that it
eliminated the mandatory minimum when it amended the
statute in 1970, suggesting that there could be
different kinds of conduct that would satisfy it.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Miller, in answer to
one of Justice Breyer's earlier questions, he -- the
premise of his question was the effect of the twin
amendments from offense to felony and from felony to
misdemeanor for possession of small quantities. And he
said, well, in effect, is that combination of amendments
really being rendered nugatory by the view that you take
of the statute? And you said not necessarily, and you
said there may be some drug transactions in which it is
a misdemeanor on both sides, so that the statute would
apply there.
Are there any other -- are there many
examples of that? I thought not. And are there any
other examples of misdemeanor-misdemeanor cases that the
-- that the statute would apply to so that -- so that
the anomaly wouldn't be quite so obvious?
MR. MILLER: Well, I mean, if you're asking
other misdemeanor offenses under the Controlled
Substances Act --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes.
MR. MILLER: I mean there is the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: In other words, how
important is this? It looks to us -- I mean, I think it
was the premise of the question and it was -- it was my
assumption coming in that your view of the statute
largely renders those two amendments, or the combined
effect of those two amendments, virtually nugatory.
And you said, well, not necessarily because
there may be misdemeanor cases. And I want to know how
many of them there are. Is that really a significant
area for the application or nonapplication of this
statute?
MR. MILLER: I -- I don't know how many
prosecutions are brought under those statutes. I
imagine that, in part because they are misdemeanors, not
a lot of prosecutions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: How many separate -- how
many misdemeanor-misdemeanor combined offenses are there
under the -- under the code?
MR. MILLER: 842, section 842, enumerates I
think it is on the order of a dozen or so, and then we
cite a couple of them in our brief. So distributing a
-- a controlled -- a prescription drug without a
prescription would probably be one of the most common
that someone would engage in.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You -- you don't have any
figures on the number of actual prosecutions under --
under the -- in the misdemeanor-misdemeanor combination
cases?
MR. MILLER: No. I mean, again, because --
because they're misdemeanors and prosecutorial resources
are probably concentrated on the more serious felony
violations of the Controlled Substances Act, I suspect
there aren't a lot of prosecutions.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So -- well, then, I guess
that leads to my last question, and that is: Isn't it
probably true that if we accept your view of the
statute, then the effect of those two combined
amendments, offense to -- to felony, felony to
misdemeanor for small quantities, the -- the combined
effect of -- of those two statutes is, in effect,
rendered worthless in -- in most cases? In a
substantial number of cases to which the -- the
communication facility statute would be applied, it --
it would render those -- those two amendments, in
effect, worthless?
MR. MILLER: Well, I think the -- the
relevant inquiry is: What -- what did Congress intend
in 1970 when it changed the statute?
JUSTICE SOUTER: That may be a legitimate
inquiry, but what about my irrelevant inquiry?
MR. MILLER: Well, I --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOUTER: It's going to -- your --
your view of the statute is going to render those two
amendments virtually dead letters?
MR. MILLER: I mean I -- I think -- I think
from the perspective of -- of Congress, that there was
no -- they wouldn't have anticipated that the amendment
would not have any consequence. I mean the fact that --
that they created this whole set of misdemeanors, the
fact that they aren't violated very often --
JUSTICE SOUTER: As you said, you -- you
don't have figures on the number of prosecutions. And
the number of prosecutions under those misdemeanors, as
distinct from the number of applications of the
communications statute to conventional buyer/seller
transactions is probably the difference between a very
small set and a very large set of cases. And in the
very large set of cases the two amendments are being
rendered, in effect, worthless; isn't that true?
MR. MILLER: If I -- if I may answer, my
understanding is that the number of prosecutions under
3(b) is -- is also relatively small, but I don't have
precise figures on -- on the comparative numbers.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Four minutes, Mr. Srinivasan.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF SRI SRINIVASAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SRINIVASAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice.
The only point I would make in closing,
unless the Court has further questions for us, is that
we think the statutory text, the statutory history, and
the context all weigh in favor of our reading. But even
if there is any ambiguity on the matter, principles of
lenity would squarely apply in foreclosing an
interpretation that converts someone who is a
misdemeanant into someone who is exposed to multiple
felony counts carrying substantial criminal
consequences.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this question as
just a matter of history? Is it perfectly clear? I
think you said that the -- the presence of the use of
the telephone was not just a jurisdictional hook.
Because back in 1970 the Federal Government really
wasn't in the criminal law business the way it has
become in the last 30 or 40 years.
At that time there was a lot of concern, the
Travel Act and other statutes, about exactly what the
Federal justification for -- justification for Federal
participation existed. And I -- I always had the
impression that that was really what was behind the
telephone aspect of this statute.
MR. SRINIVASAN: I don't think so, Justice
Stevens, because as of 1970 there were already
underlying drug laws that barred distribution, that
barred receipt of drugs, and that barred most of the
activities that are now prohibited under the drug laws.
And the telephone law presupposes that one of those
underlying acts is already going on.
And so to the extent that there was
jurisdiction over those underlying acts, which
presumably there was since the statutes are on the
books, the Telephone Act wasn't necessary to create
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE ALITO: Could I ask you this
question? I -- I understand your argument regarding
statutory history and the harsh consequences of this.
But as far as the buyer/seller rule -- Gebardi and Rewis
are concerned, what if the statute said -- made it a
crime for -- for a person to use a machine gun in
facilitating the commission of a felony? Would you say
-- you would have to say that the buyer/seller rule and
those authorities would mean that that person could not
be prosecuted if they were using the machine gun to
facilitate a -- a purchase for personal use; would you
not?
MR. SRINIVASAN: Well, I think the -- the
use of the machine gun wouldn't come within the
buyer/seller rule because what the buyer/seller rule
deals with is a substantive prohibition on distribution.
And the -- the presumption is that when Congress
prohibits distribution, it knows that there is also a
receiver of the banned substance. And by virtue of
excluding that receiver from the distribution
prohibition, it wouldn't have wanted to bring that
receiver back within the fold of the statute.
JUSTICE ALITO: Right, but --
MR. SRINIVASAN: That wouldn't apply --
JUSTICE ALITO: I'm sorry. Go ahead.
MR. SRINIVASAN: I was just going to say I
don't think that would apply with somebody who is using
a machine gun because the person who is using a machine
gun isn't necessarily part of the distribution offense
to begin with. And so the buyer/seller principle would
apply with respect to the underlying purchase of drugs
if that were at issue. But if you tack on use of a
machine gun, I don't think the buyer/seller principle
would speak directly to that.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, I don't -- I don't see
the difference between use of a phone to facilitate --
use of a phone in facilitating, use of -- of a firearm
in facilitating, unless you can say that the -- the use
of a communication facility in effecting the purchase is
such a -- a virtually indispensable element of the
purchase that it -- it -- it's swept up within it.
MR. SRINIVASAN: Oh, no, I'm sorry, Justice
Alito. If the hypothetical statute barred use of a
phone in facilitating a drug felony, if it was precisely
parallel to this one, then we make the same argument.
But it's not because the use of a machine gun falls
within the buyer/seller principle. It's because the
underlying act of purchasing drugs falls within the
buyer/seller principle. And if the prohibition is on
use of a machine gun in some underlying act, then you
have to look at the underlying act. And the underlying
act is governed by the buyer/ seller principle, and
buyers fall outside of it. And so the use of a machine
gun by someone who is already outside of the act
wouldn't bring the buyer back into the fold of the
statute.
JUSTICE ALITO: So the answer is that this
-- it would be the same.
MR. SRINIVASAN: It would be the same --
JUSTICE ALITO: The buyer/seller rule would
apply in your view in exactly the same way.
MR. SRINIVASAN: If the -- if the statute --
if I understand your hypothetical correctly, if the
statute were use of a phone in facilitating a drug
felony, then the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it could be a -- a
separate crime, the use of a machine gun in facilitating
-- in facilitating a crime, any crime. That could be --
MR. SRINIVASAN: Sure. If that were the
case, then it would be different. My -- if I could just
finish for a minute, Mr. Chief Justice.
My -- my only point is that if the theory of
prosecution were that a person comes within the fold of
the statute because they're buying drugs and that buying
of drugs facilitates the sale of drugs and, therefore,
they are someone who uses a machine gun in facilitating
the sale of drugs, well, then the buyer/seller rule
would kick in. Because the initial predicate of that
theory, which is that the person is facilitating the
sale by buying, wouldn't work. They would fall outside
of the statute at that stage.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:08 a.m., the case in the
