OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPT
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE
UNITED STATES
CAPTION: FLORIDA, Petitioner, v. KEVIN DEWAYNE POWELL.
CASE NO: No. 08-1175
PLACE: Washington, D.C.
DATE: Monday, December 7, 2009
PAGES: 1-60
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
55 CONNECTICUT AVE., NW
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036
(202) 289-2260
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
FLORIDA, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1175
KEVIN DEWAYNE POWELL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, December 7, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:15 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOSEPH W. JACQUOT, ESQ., Deputy Attorney
General, Tallahassee, Fla.; on behalf of the
Petitioner.
DAVID O'NEIL, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting the
Petitioner.
DEBORAH K. BRUECKHEIMER, ESQ., Assistant Public
Defender, Bartow, Fla.; on behalf of the Respondent
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JOSEPH W. JACQUOT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
DAVID O'NEIL, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioner 20
DEBORAH K. BRUECKHEIMER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 32
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOSEPH W. JACQUOT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 58
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:15 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next today in Case 08-1175, Florida v. Powell.
Mr. Jacquot.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOSEPH W. JACQUOT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. JACQUOT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
As courts have recognized, Miranda warnings
protect Fifth Amendment rights and promote voluntary
confessions, confessions important to seeking truth,
solving crimes, and securing justice. Yet the Florida
Supreme Court erred in two ways to suppress a voluntary
confession relied upon for Kevin Powell's conviction.
First, the Florida court misapplied the
analysis. Rather than evaluating the warning under a
reasonably conveyed standard for the right to an
attorney, the court strictly parsed the warning, seeking
certain words in a certain order.
Second, the court incorrectly found the
warning to be misleading. The court ignored the
totality of the warning. The court overemphasized the
order in which the rights were given, and furthermore,
the court applied a hypertechnical analysis of the
warning's language.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you agree that it --
suppose we accept your position and the case is
remanded. The Florida Supreme Court could say: Well,
that's very nice, but we have a Florida Constitution
with a counterpart to the Fifth Amendment, so we're just
going to have the same opinion, but we are putting it
under -- squarely under the Florida Constitution.
They could do that?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor, the Florida court
theoretically could, but the Florida court would have to
do that on State grounds, and in this case, they relied
on Federal grounds to reach this decision.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, that's what I meant.
They could do it on State grounds.
MR. JACQUOT: Theoretically. But this Court
found in Evans v. Arizona that just because of the
theoretical possibility that a court could write its
opinion differently on State grounds, this Court still
had jurisdiction because the original opinion rested on
Federal grounds.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are the Florida Supreme
Court elected? Are they elected judges?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are they elected judges,
the Florida Supreme Court?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor, the Florida
Supreme Court members are first appointed, and then they
are subsequently elected.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How -- how long is their
term? There’s a retention election when?
MR. JACQUOT: Correct. There is a retention
election every 4 years.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Every 4 years. And they'd
have to run for their retention election on the ticket
that "We've expanded Miranda for Florida purposes,"
right?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Your Honor, they are
elected.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Has the -- has the Florida
Supreme Court ever explicitly interpreted -- what is it?
Article I, section 8, of the Florida Constitution more
expansively than -- and explicitly so -- and explicitly
so, than Miranda?
MR. JACQUOT: No, Your Honor. The Florida
Supreme Court has said that the possibility is there,
but in its decisions it has found -- particularly in
the case before you --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, they did it in this
case, didn't they? Under your view, they –- their
ruling goes beyond Miranda, and they said that the
Florida Constitution requires this result.
MR. JACQUOT: No, Justice --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So they did do it in this
very case.
MR. JACQUOT: No, Justice Stevens. The
court specifically relied on Federal law. It just got
it wrong.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it also cited the --
the Florida Constitution, did it not?
MR. JACQUOT: It cited the Florida
Constitution --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And did it not also say
that this was a violation of the Federal -- I mean, of
the Florida Constitution?
MR. JACQUOT: Yes, Your Honor, it mentioned
the Florida Constitution. However, in those same
sentences, it interwove Federal law. It would say:
Under the Florida Constitution and according to Miranda.
And this Court in Michigan v. Long has found that
opinions that interweave State and Federal law are
appropriate for this Court's jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: One of your amici -- one
of the amici suggested that the Florida courts cannot
read the Florida Constitution more expansively than the
Federal requirements. Are you rejecting that
proposition?
MR. JACQUOT: We do indeed, Your Honor. The
Florida court in Powell read the warning to -- in line
with Miranda.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And it's a different
question. One of the amici suggests that the Florida
Constitution and Florida case law says that they can't
read the Florida Constitution more broadly than it is
read under Federal law.
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Your Honor, the past
cases have said that the Florida court could, but they
haven't. And in this case they particularly did not.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So this could be a
first, if we were to start from the proposition that
Justice Ginsburg did?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Your Honor, under
Michigan v. Long the test is to look at the clear face
of the opinion, to look for a plain statement that this
case relied on adequate -- adequate and independent
State grounds, and that is not there.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do -- do you see a
conflict between the language of our decisions where we
often say that Miranda rights have to be clear and those
decisions that say that whatever is said has to
reasonably convey the essence of the Miranda warnings?
Is there a difference between those two
statements, and which of our cases or statements would
control?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor, in Miranda the
Court did use the terms "clearly inform." However, this
Court has gone on in Prysock to use the term "adequately
inform" and Duckworth uses the word "reasonably convey."
So, yes, although the rights are consistent from Miranda
on --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So you would suggest
that if something is not clear and it's ambiguous, that
that's enough? Or -- or is there a difference between
reasonable and clarity? That has to be read in a
certain way; otherwise an ambiguous warning --
MR. JACQUOT: No, Your Honor, I would say
that this Court has said that clarity is judged by
whether the warnings reasonably convey the rights under
Miranda; that's the standard.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did Miranda itself -- I
mean, it set out the four requirements, but there was a
charge -- I mean there was a warning involved, am I not
right? Well, didn't they cite the then-FBI warning? It
has been improved considerably, but there was an FBI
warning cited in Miranda itself, was there not?
MR. JACQUOT: Yes, Justice Ginsburg, and
that warning conveyed only the right to attorney. It
did not have the specific --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It also said you have a
right to keep silent.
MR. JACQUOT: Correct. But on the right to
attorney warning at issue here, it said only that the
suspect has the ability to consult counsel. It did not
go into the specific -- detail, the explicit nature of
spelling out the terms "present" and the terms "during"
that the Florida Supreme Court required. And that's the
real issue here before the Court, is whether the Florida
Supreme Court applied a standard that is significantly
different than the standard that this Court has
required.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It told them: You are
entitled to confer with counsel before answering
questions, right?
MR. JACQUOT: What warning, Justice Scalia?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wasn't that -- wasn't that
the warning given -- given in this case? You are
entitled to consult counsel before answering questions?
MR. JACQUOT: Yes, the warning in this case
said you have the right to talk to a lawyer before
answering any of our questions. And, furthermore --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, "any" –- just
to make sure; you've said two different things. It says
"any of our questions," right?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, the
warning said, "You have the right to talk to a lawyer
before answering any of our questions." And then the
warning went on to say, "You have the right to use this
right at any time during this interview."
We would argue that this expresses all the
rights required under Miranda.
JUSTICE BREYER: What about the right in
Miranda that says -- in Miranda -- "We hold an
individual held for interrogation must be clearly
informed that he has the right to consult with the
lawyer and to have the lawyer with him during
interrogation." Okay?
Where does it say that? Interpret it any
way you want. You know, we are used to grand juries.
In a grand jury, he can go consult with a lawyer, but he
doesn't have the lawyer with him. So, where does it
tell him that?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Your Honor, the standard
being “reasonably convey” --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. JACQUOT: -- the warning lays out that
you have the right --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm just asking you to
point to the words that tell him that.
MR. JACQUOT: The right to talk to a lawyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Don't have you a right to
talk to a lawyer at a grand jury?
MR. JACQUOT: Yes, but a -- Your Honor, a
grand jury operates very differently than a criminal
interrogation.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, correct. And so
aren't you supposed to tell this person, that unlike a
grand jury, you have a right to have the lawyer with you
during interrogation? I mean, it isn't as if that was
said in passing in Miranda. They wrote eight paragraphs
about it. And I just wonder, where does it say in this
warning you have the right to have the lawyer with you
during the interrogation?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Justice Breyer, I would
have three responses to that. First, under Miranda the
FBI warning did not use the terms "present," did not use
the terms "with you," and --
JUSTICE BREYER: It doesn't use the word
"present," Miranda? It says right here: "We hold" --
it says -- "not just prior to questioning, but also to
have counsel present during any questioning." That's
what Miranda says. And then Miranda, after discussing
it for five pages, goes on to use the words I just said.
You have to tell him he has the right to have counsel
with him. So it does use the word "present."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It -- it used it in
determining -- in -- in stating the obligation of the
State, but it didn't use those words in setting out the
warning that the FBI then gave.
MR. JACQUOT: Correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It said, this is what --
States, this is what your obligation is, what you must
say to the defendant is. And I think the Florida court
is the same way. It said: You are entitled to the help
of a lawyer. Then it spells it out in that opinion, but
-- but what it said had to be communicated was not the
-- the full range. Just you're entitled, I think it
was, to the help of a lawyer.
So there’s -- there’s a confusion, I
think, between what Miranda spells out and many other
cases spell out as the State’s obligation, what the
State must do, and the statement that must be made to
the defendant to communicate that.
MR. JACQUOT: Justice Ginsburg, let me be
very clear and answer Justice Breyer with the three
points I began. Miranda requires that law enforcement
effectively communicate the fact that you can access
your right to an attorney present and during an
interrogation. However, in the Miranda opinion they
approvingly cited the FBI warning that only had the
terms -- the generalized warning: Consult with counsel.
Furthermore, the ability to talk to your
lawyer, which is at issue in this warning, is the first
natural step to getting your attorney.
And, third, as this Court has held in
Minnick, that it’s the representation that matters in
custodial interrogations --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what FBI are we
talking about? Because the FBI advice of rights says:
"You have the right to have a lawyer with you during
questioning." Were they -- and -- and I was taken by
the fact, "We hold that an individual must be clearly
informed."
And so, is there some other case that
says -- or some other FBI statement that they give
people that doesn't use the words "with you," that says
you don't have to say "with you during," or doesn't have
to say "present during"? Was there some other case that
said that?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor, the current FBI
warning does have that. However, there have been
several cases in the circuits that have held generalized
warnings to be sufficient, warnings that say only the
right to an attorney. And one of the issues --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the warning that
Justice Breyer has just referred to -- that’s long after
Miranda itself, and it was not the warning that the FBI
gave at the time of Miranda.
MR. JACQUOT: Correct, Your Honor. And --
and that is the issue, is what is, first, the standard
that courts must currently apply in terms of whether a
warning reasonably conveys. That is not the standard of
analysis that the Florida court applied.
And secondly, when evaluating that warning,
the -- the Florida court incorrectly finds that this
warning was misleading. Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I have a difficulty in
terms of this argument about burdening law enforcement.
This is a preprinted form that the police made up,
correct?
MR. JACQUOT: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what's the added
burden by making the form absolutely and abundantly
clear or conforming the form to the statements in
Miranda? What's the cost to the State? They’re going
to print the form anyway. They are telling their
officers to read from the form anyway. What's the added
cost?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor, there are three
reasons why the Florida Supreme Court's explicit
standard is problematic. First, the same standard
applies to written warnings as to verbal warnings. So
you’ve had situations where you have a law enforcement
officer who doesn't have his card in the field; there’s
a verbal error; there’s an inconsistency in
translations. If a suspect is asking questions trying
to get clarity, the law enforcement officer is going
outside of the card to provide that clarity. Those are
situations that may not meet the explicit express advice
standard of the Court.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, there is a
question about how much the subjective intent of the
questioner should be involved in this process or not.
There are cases where it appears the plurality of
our Court has said it should always be an objective
standard, and others where certain members have
expressed a question about subjective.
But if we are dealing with a printed form,
why wouldn't the intent of the entity at issue be placed
in question? Meaning, you could have -- the police here
could have chosen to be explicit, but instead they chose
to be -- to obfuscate a little bit and be less explicit.
Shouldn't we assume that that’s an intent to deceive or
perhaps to confuse?
MR. JACQUOT: Absolutely not, Your Honor.
The Tampa Police, in having this warning drafted, is
attempting to reasonably convey the warning, and there
is good public policy reasons why.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But why? The -- the
easy solution is to do what 90 percent of the
jurisdictions are doing: Copy Miranda.
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Your Honor, we would
claim that this warning falls within the 97 percent
cited by amici because it has the word "during" in the
warning. The Florida court ignored the totality of the
warning. It chose to place the order of the warning's
rights in a way that this Court in Prysock and Duckworth
has found is not the proper analysis.
Furthermore, this court used a
hypertechnical approach. It took the words "before
answering any of our questions," turned that into an
exclusive statement to say, "only before questioning"
and then, as a result of that, attempted to discount the
last sentence of the warning. That's the kind of
parsing, that's the kind of precise formulation, that's
the kind of construing warnings like a will or defining
terms like an easement that this Court has rejected.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the danger
that Tampa, if you should prevail, will go back to the
old way? Now, it has a clearer form -- whether this
form was adequate is one thing. But now, it has the
form that the -- like the one the FBI currently uses.
If you prevail, then Tampa can go back to what it had
before?
MR. JACQUOT: Your Honor, you are correct,
in that Tampa has a new form now that does have the
words "present" and "during" in a different formulation.
However, there’s no indication that they
would go back to the other form, for several reasons.
One, law enforcement has an incentive to have Miranda
rights properly given because they desire there to be
confessions and for those confessions to be admissible.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, once we say this is
properly given, my goodness, here's -- here's an
instruction approved specifically by this Court. I
mean, I think they should use that, don't you?
I mean, the other one they are going to have
to guess about, but this one is approved in a case
involving Florida by this Court. So you -- it's pretty
attractive to use that one.
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Your Honor, law
enforcement agencies will look to courts for approval of
this -- of their warnings. The warning at issue in
Powell --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you have to say it's
okay. You are arguing that it's perfectly okay, so why
do you hesitate when you are asked, you know, could the
State go back to doing it? You should say, yes, of
course, they -- they might; we don't think it's likely,
but they might, and if they did, it's perfectly okay.
Isn't that your position?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Justice Scalia, as a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not your position?
MR. JACQUOT: Justice Scalia, they
theoretically could, because the warning was reasonably
conveyed. It was sufficient. However, it’s unlikely
they would. Law enforcement agencies modify their
warnings when they become issue. So when a litigation
begins on a warning, they often modify it at that point.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me -- let me ask you
one question. Isn't it the case that this particular
warning is used in one judicial district, and the
warning that was approved in Traylor was used in the
rest of the State? And so there is an interest -- the
Florida
Supreme Court has, in effect, required the same warning
throughout the State. And if you prevail, there may be
one standard warning in one judicial district, and the
other districts may continue to use the one they have
used in the past. Isn't that right?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Justice Stevens, it is
not true that every jurisdiction in Florida uses this
same warning. There are varieties of warnings.
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's true, but if you --
if they all followed the Florida Supreme Court in this
case, then they all would use the same warning?
MR. JACQUOT: Well, Justice Stevens, if they
were all following the Florida Supreme Court here, they
would have to explicitly state certain terms in their
warning.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Which most of them do
already.
MR. JACQUOT: Well, not necessarily. In --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Not all, but some.
MR. JACQUOT: Some -- some do, some do not,
and one of the fears in having an express advice
standard is that you will have continuing terms that are
required. For instance, the term "before" is lacking in
of 90 jurisdictions in Florida.
There is nothing to stop the Florida Supreme
Court, if this Court was to allow an express advice
Standard, from then requiring the term "before
questioning" in addition. That's the kind of danger in
having an analysis that is much stricter, that
essentially looks at words that should be in a warning,
rather than looking at whether the right to attorney is
reasonably conveyed to the suspect.
Mr. Chief Justice, if there are no more
questions, I’d like to save the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. O'Neil.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID O'NEIL
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. O'NEIL: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
I’d like to go directly to Justice
Ginsburg's question about what would happen if this
Court affirmed the warnings in this case, and I think
Respondent's amici make the argument that it will
somehow promote a race to the bottom.
And I think that history and experience are
the best answer to that question. Respondent's amici,
who have carefully studied this issue, have found that
some police officers have attempted to evade Miranda by
interrogation techniques, but there is no indication
that police have tried to accomplish that purpose by
changing the language of the warnings, and that is not
because they couldn't do so. For the last 20 years,
Duckworth and Prysock have been on the books, and have
made clear that no standard formulation of the warnings
is necessary and that variant warnings will be upheld.
And if it were true --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Except that Justice
Scalia just pointed out, if we approve the language of
this, then -- of this particular warning, it becomes the
new sort of floor.
And if we make it the new floor, it --
doesn't it provide an incentive for police departments
to move away from the explicit warnings that say “during
and” -- “before and during” interrogations; now we're
saying -- you know, generalize them more.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, Justice --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Aren't we encouraging
that?
MR. O'NEIL: Justice Sotomayor, I have two
responses to that: The first is that this Court upheld
the warning in Duckworth, which said, we have no way of
providing you an attorney, but one will be provided if
and when you go to court.
Now, if you -- if it were true that police
were looking for every way to get around the warnings
and if changing the warnings were an effective way to do
that, we should have seen every jurisdiction adopt those
warnings.
In fact, of the 900 warnings that are
included in the survey that Respondent relies heavily
on, only 5 have that formulation. Second, four
circuit courts have held --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How many after
Duckworth? Do you know?
MR. O'NEIL: I don't -- it doesn't indicate
when they were adopted, but I think it's fair to say
that, if police did have that incentive, that we would
have seen at least some jurisdictions adopt that
warning.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So we don't know how
many --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But your case has to be
that, if we adopt the Petitioner's petition, it's
perfectly fine for every jurisdiction in the country to
use this warning, right?
MR. O'NEIL: We agree that this warning is
adequate, and our position is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And every jurisdiction in
the country can use it, so we can -- we can talk about
whether or not it’s adequate.
MR. O'NEIL: They can, and we think that’s
unlikely, and if the concern here is that it will
destroy the uniformity that the Federal government
thinks is a good thing as a matter of policy, we think
that that concern is simply not warranted. But, yes, we
do agree that these warnings adequately convey the
substance --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Excuse me. You think lack
of uniformity is a good idea?
MR. O'NEIL: No, we think that affirming
these warnings will not disrupt the uniformity that
seems to be in place around the country, and -- for
exactly the reason that I said, Justice Kennedy, because
Justice Sotomayor mentioned general right to counsel
warnings, that if we upheld a general right to counsel
warning, that jurisdictions would begin to drop the more
specific language that’s contained, for example, in the
FBI form. Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where -- where is
that? Is that set forth in the -- in the briefs? The
FBI form? Where -- where is that set forth?
MR. O'NEIL: I don't believe the FBI form is
set out in full. It's on pages 383 and 384 of Miranda,
and the description of the court's discussion is on page
of our brief.
And I think, Justice Sotomayor, it’s
significant that four circuit courts have upheld general
right to counsel warnings of the kind that were in the
FBI warnings in 1966. But the police departments in
those jurisdictions have not abandoned the more specific
language that is contained in the FBI formulation. In
New York City, the Second Circuit has held in Lamia --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What -- how do we deal
with the fact that, if the purpose of Miranda is to give
clear warnings, and your adversary says -- not your
adversary -- your co-counsel -- Petitioner's counsel
says that means -- "clear" means does it reasonably
convey?
We've got a split of circuit courts and
State courts on whether this reasonably conveys or not.
Shouldn't that be enough of an ambiguity for us to
conclude it can't reasonably convey, if there's this
many courts holding that it doesn't?
MR. O'NEIL: No, Justice Sotomayor. This is
not like a qualified immunity inquiry, where grounds for
debate among reasonable jurists would invalidate the
warning.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you calling the
Florida State Supreme Court majority unreasonable
jurists?
MR. O'NEIL: No, I think -- I think the
problem with a standard that permits of no ambiguity is
that, as Florida just said, this standard will apply,
not just to printed forms -- and it is easy enough to
create a printed form in advance that includes more
specific language -- but it will also apply to
inadvertent departures from the standard forms as a
result of mistake.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What happens now is that
we are dealing with the exception rather than the rule,
and -- but this was the rule, meaning this was the form
that they were reading. And if it has some significant
ambiguity in it, sufficient for at least one court to
say it wasn't sufficiently clear, it wasn't explicit
enough, should we worry about the exception as an
exception?
MR. O'NEIL: Well, I think -- I think the
exception is -- needs to be captured within the rule
that this Court adopts as -- as the standard.
I -- I also think that it -- it is -- it's
simply not the case that if this Court, as I said,
adopts a standard that permits a less explicit, less
precise warning than the FBI wants --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. O'Neil, isn't one of
the problems here that Florida had two different printed
forms before this case arose, and that Florida Supreme
Court has said they’ll all have the same one
hereafter?
MR. O'NEIL: Justice Stevens, I'm not aware
that Florida had two printed forms. I mean, each
jurisdiction used its own form, and this was the form
that was in place --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So at least two of them?
MR. O'NEIL: Well, every jurisdiction
adopts a slightly--
JUSTICE STEVENS: And isn't it -- isn't it
wiser generally to have the same form used throughout
the State?
MR. O'NEIL: It is. The government believes
it is wiser to do that, and the Federal law enforcement
agencies do that because it avoids --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the Constitution
requires it, right?
MR. O'NEIL: Well, no, the Constitution does
not require the precise words of Miranda.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, Miranda supposedly
says the Constitution requires this warning, and if the
warning must be in a standard form that everybody uses,
the Constitution must require a standard form that
everybody uses.
MR. O'NEIL: Nowhere in Miranda does it say
that a -- a standard form is necessary, and this Court
summarily rejected exactly that argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: Excuse me. Can you just
devote one minute before you finish –-
MR. O'NEIL: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- to the question of why
these are adequate? If you remember my question, I
tried to explain why I thought they might not be
adequate.
MR. O'NEIL: Justice Breyer, these warnings
state three rights: The right --
JUSTICE BREYER: But there were four.
One is to have during, in the presence of, the right to
have a lawyer during the interrogation, in the presence
of, with him at the time.
MR. O'NEIL: Absolutely.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, that's one of
the four. That's one of the things they devote two
pages to Miranda, and they repeat it when they summarize
what you have to say. I just want to know where in this
statement does it say that?
MR. O'NEIL: Justice Breyer, there is no
reason to think that a suspect who hears that he can
talk to an attorney before answering any questions and
during this interview would infer the unstated
restriction that he can talk to an attorney but only by
phone or only remotely --
JUSTICE BREYER: Really? I guess anybody
who has had prior experience with the law, as this man
might have done, might be familiar with a grand jury
proceeding.
MR. O'NEIL: But for the same reason we
don't ask whether the suspect has sufficient knowledge
to supplement the information he needs.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, no. But I tell
you: Here's your right to talk to a lawyer before
questioning.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, it --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, you then repeat, you
can assert that right whenever you want, to talk to him
before questioning.
MR. O'NEIL: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: And my question is, how
does that tell him he has a right to have a lawyer with
him during questioning, that the questioning he has a
right to have take place from beginning to end in the
presence of a lawyer, a matter that the Miranda Court
repeated three times in the summary and wrote eight
full paragraphs about why that was important?
MR. O'NEIL: Well, first, as Justice
Ginsburg noted, Miranda went out of its way to -- to
specifically approve an FBI warning that said, quote --
JUSTICE BREYER: Where does it say it
approves that?
MR. O'NEIL: It said this pattern of
warnings is consistent with the decision that we
announced today. And I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: It wasn't though, actually.
MR. O’NEIL: -- it couldn’t have been
clearer.
JUSTICE BREYER: It isn't -- it isn't
consistent with it. That's interesting.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, that argument was made by
Justice Clark in dissent, and the Court did not agree
with that. And I think it is clear that the Court
thought that --
JUSTICE BREYER: They didn't say anything
about during.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, no, they didn't.
JUSTICE BREYER: So anyway -- then they
don't need to mention “during” at all because if that's
right, the FBI warning at that time, J. Edgar Hoover's
letter or whatever it was, just talked about telling
you, you have a right to counsel. It doesn't say
anything about “during.”
MR. O'NEIL: Well, I think that's exactly
the point, that you don't assume that a suspect is only
capable of understanding --
JUSTICE BREYER: So then you think that, in
fact, going by that warning, that there is no
constitutional right to have them say a word about
during. This would be okay if they said nothing at all
about it.
MR. O'NEIL: I think a -- a -- advice of the
right to counsel or, as the Court put it in a different
place in the Miranda opinion, the right to obtain the
services of an attorney of his choice, that would be
constitutionally adequate. The Federal Government does
not use those warnings because they create a list -- a
risk of litigation.
We think that's the correct reading of
Miranda, but that, of course, is not guarantee that
other courts would read it that way. And, indeed, 2
years after Miranda, the Fifth Circuit had gone the
other way and decided that, in fact, a right to counsel
warning is not sufficient.
But, Justice Breyer, I think that the answer
to how these warnings convey presence is that a suspect
is not going to draw the highly counterintuitive
assumption that if he is told that he can have an
attorney not only before answering any questions but
during this interview, that he is going to need to walk
in and out of the room each time he wants to talk to an
attorney. It may --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Just so I get the
bottom line -- if all this warning had said was, you
have a right to a lawyer before questioning --
MR. O'NEIL: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You have a right to a
lawyer before questioning --
MR. O'NEIL: Well, we think that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- it would be your
position that standing alone that would be enough?
MR. O'NEIL: We think that -- that -- that
was the warning that this Court confronted in Bridgers,
and we think that would be a much closer and more
difficult case, but we think that, yes, we -- we agree
with the decision cited in our brief that a suspect
would not assume that that attorney will become
unavailable the minute the first question is asked. We
think that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. O'NEIL: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Brueckheimer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DEBORAH K. BRUECKHEIMER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
Clearly, Miranda could not have been more
specific when it said an individual held for
interrogation must be clearly informed that he has the
right to consult with a lawyer and to have the lawyer
with him during interrogation. That’s --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So the --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: -- at 471.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So the FBI
warning that was specifically approved in Miranda was
inconsistent with Miranda?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I disagree with that
representation that it was approved of. What this Court
said --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It says consistent
-- consistent with the procedure which we delineate
today.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Consistent with is not
the same. At -- in the few pages beforehand, the Court
specifically set forth these Miranda warnings in what it
required, including the presence of counsel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could you tell us where
that is? I think you mean page 479, but I'm not sure.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right. Correct, at page
9, this Court set forth the warnings that it wants to
have read to every --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It set forth the substance
of what had to be conveyed --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- but it set forth, on
page 484, its belief that the FBI warning adequately
conveyed that substance. It said this warning is
consistent with our opinion today. And -- and that
warning said --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Yes, I have the warning.
Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You want to read it?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Yes, I can read it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Good.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: The -- the warning says
that -- let's see -- at the -- at the outset of the
interview that he is not required to make a statement,
that any statement may be used against him in court, and
that the individual may obtain the services of an
attorney of his own choice. And, more recently, that he
has the right to free counsel.
However, the purpose --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I mean, that’s so
much worse than -- than --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Yes, and the purpose
of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- what you have here.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: -- of saying this was
because the question was, is this going to be burdensome
to the government, to the police to issue these
warden -- these warnings? And the very beginning of
that sentence, right before they said it, was they --
that the FBI has compiled --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What page are you on now?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: We are still on 483. We
are in the sentence right above it. Over the years the
FBI has compiled an exemplary record of effective law
enforcement while advising any suspect or arrested
person at the outset of the interview that he is not
required to make a statement -- and then I just read it.
So, the -- that was to counteract whether it
was too burdensome. Not that they were approving --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, maybe, but it
says -- it says the -- what the FBI -- the pattern
of warning -- well, let me make sure I get it exact.
"The present pattern of warnings and respect for the
rights of the individual followed as a practice by the
FBI is consistent with the procedure we delineate
today."
And the FBI warning says nothing about
presence or with -- or with counsel with him.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Consistent with but not
identical.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, okay. I’ll
take "consistent with." That means that it complies
with the rule in Miranda.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, I -- in all due
respect, Mr. Chief Justice, I believe that this Court
went a little further and required the presence of
counsel. And then --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Then how is the FBI
warning consistent with the procedure the Court
delineated in Miranda?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It doesn't say that
the -- the attorney has to be present with --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I said how is
it --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: How is it consistent?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It -- because it -- it
gave three of the basic -- you know, you have the right
to remain silent, you have the right to an attorney, the
services of an attorney; and that you have the right
to -- or any -- any statement you make will be used
against you. So they just didn't go far enough in the
FBI warnings.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I would say that
it's not consistent with Miranda.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It's -- it's consistent
to a point, but it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: And just as if -- and --
and they have added in, more recently, the right to free
counsel.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, while you’re
looking at whether it would be an undue burden on law
enforcement, it was -- it has a burden that’s consistent
with the ones that Miranda required expressly.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I'm sorry. The --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I say when you were
inquiring, as you were at that part of the opinion, into
how burdensome it would be on law enforcement to give
these warnings --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- you are saying the
burden would be consistent under the new warnings with
those previously given by the FBI.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Correct. It's -- it’s
not any more burdensome by adding in the -- an
additional requirement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What it says is that
the respect for the rights of the individual followed
in the FBI is consistent with.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Uh-huh. The rights of
the individual, right.
And the -- the Miranda Court just made sure
that they’ve added in the additional requirement, and
the FBI did change their warnings, and has continued to
modify and change their warnings to be consistent with
Miranda.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The bottom line in my
mind -- the question is, whether these warnings are
substantively or otherwise different than the FBI
warnings that some believe were approved in Miranda.
Are these equivalent?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I don't -- I believe
that -- that requiring the presence of counsel during
the interrogation goes a little bit -- a lot further.
And it -- it is not equivalent to the FBI.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't disagree with
you, but that wasn't my question. My question was, did
the FBI warning at issue or --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: At issue in Miranda?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Not at issue because it
wasn't at issue.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It wasn't.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that was reviewed
and approved in Miranda, did it give that --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, it did not. And that
why -- and that's why I don't believe the Court in
Miranda ever said we -- it's consistent with, but they
never said, we approve. They never said, we are
adopting that language.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is -- is there since
then -- I mean, as I read it now I see that, as I said,
it seems very clear that they intend you to have to say
that the counsel has to be -- is present with you.
Present, okay? Now the FBI warnings, which they did say
is consistent, don't say that.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, they don't.
JUSTICE BREYER: They don't.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: They do not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, since the time
of Miranda, has this Court ever talked about that? Has
there been any lower court or have there been -- has the
practice of the departments to any great extent been
--
such that they stopped talking, or did not talk, or
never spoke about a right to have a counsel with you
during -- during -- “during” just dropped out. They
just said forget about “during.” It wasn't --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, the case law has
always referred to both, both by this Court and then --
and then the circuit courts. And the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This Court said in Miranda
JUSTICE BREYER: This Court has referred
to “during.”
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Has -- has -- in many
opinions, it talked about before interrogation and
during interrogation the right to have counsel present.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But I must say I -- this is
–- this is angels dancing on the head of a pin. You
want us to believe that your client, who decided to
talk, even though he was told he could consult an
attorney before any question was asked, and he could
consult an attorney at any time during the interview,
and he went ahead and -- and confessed -- you are
saying, oh, if he had only known. Oh, if I knew that I
could have an attorney present during the interview,
well, that would have been a different kettle of fish
and I would never have confessed.
I mean, doesn't that seem to you quite
fantastic?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, Your Honor,
especially not with a reasonable suspect that's being
questioned.
There -- there -- we are not talking
about reasonable lawyers or reasonable justices; we are
talking about --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, how about the
reasonable defendant in this very case? Powell's lawyer
questioned him and asked him: "You waived the right to
have an attorney present during your questioning by the
detectives?"
Answer: "Yes."
This is at appendix page 80. So,
apparently, counsel understood the warning to have
conveyed the right to have an attorney present during
questioning by the -- by the detectives. Counsel
understood that?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, counsel --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did she ever --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: -- never -- never asked
him did you knowingly waive; did you intelligently
waive? She was trying to set up the fact that the
client had waived his rights before he made a statement
in order to get to his -- his argument that his
statements were coerced.
But she was never giving up the argument
that she had made previously to that -- that testimony
that -- that the waiver was knowing and intelligent.
She just had already lost that argument in front of the
judge, and now she was addressing the jury.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was she asking her client
a legal question? You waived the right to have an
attorney present during your questioning by detectives,
is that what you are telling the jury?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Yes. Well, he did waive
his rights, but he didn't knowingly and intelligently
waive his rights, and he did sign the form. Because
that was the next question: Did you sign the form?
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think that the
average person hearing this warning would envision the
sort of procedure that occurs before a grand jury?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I don't --
JUSTICE ALITO: That's what it would be
taken to mean?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I -- I don't think most
-- most people have been in front of a grand jury, so I
don't envision that they would have that kind
of reaction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But do --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I think they would focus
on the “before.”
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you think that a
suspect would think, now, I'm in this custodial room,
they want me to stay put, that they’re going to have me
hopping in and out of the room to talk to my lawyer?
Wouldn't the assumption be, I'm stuck in this room, they
are holding me here, and if I have a right to talk to a
lawyer, it's got to be there and not my walking in and
out of the holding room.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: And a right -- but they
never told him that he’d have the ability to talk to a
lawyer during the interrogation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there -- is there
any -- I'm not sure this is pertinent -- but is there
any malevolent reason Tampa police would adopt this
warning? I mean, someone says, well, here's what the
FBI uses. And they say, well, I tell you what, if we
just say you have a right to an attorney before
answering any questions and then later say you can
exercise this right any time, maybe we'll be able to
trick some people who don't think they can actually have
the lawyer there. In other words was this just --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It's -- it's hard for us
to be able to delve into the minds of the Tampa Police
Department and the people who create these forms.
However, in the Thompson case, which is before you in
the briefs, in 1984, they had it right. They said you
have the right to talk to an attorney beforehand and to
the presence of an attorney during interrogation. This
was in a death case, and there was something wrong with
the right to free counsel. They either didn't give it
to them or not.
So why they went and changed the part to the
right to an attorney before -- before the questioning,
and then during questioning, we don't know.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- and you can't
think of any bad reason they might have done it.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, Professor Leo
could, and there is a memo he attaches at the end of his
appendix in the amicus brief, but I -- I would just say
that it doesn't really matter what the motives are, and
that it all depends on how the defendant or the person
in custody is -- is perceiving these warnings and
whether he's getting the information he or she needs to
be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What do you do with the
-- the Court’s decisions in Prysock and Duckworth that
dealt with the right to appointed counsel and the
suspect was not explicitly told that he had a right to
appointed counsel at the pre-arraignment stage. It said
something about a court would give you --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right. The -- the
language in those cases had something to do with -- you
know, the idea being that, it was almost
informational -- too much information, additional
information as to when you’re going to get your
counsel. But the four core --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You wouldn't have to have
any additional information; you just tell them, you have
a right to have a -- have counsel now. That would be
fewer words.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, they -- in Prysock
it was a matter of the order, but in Duckworth it was,
we can't get one for you at this moment kind of thing.
And no State is obligated -- or agency -- to provide
counsel on demand.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Didn't one of them say
"court," and the suspect was not in court at the time?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Was not in court?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. That the court will
appoint counsel for you.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right. And that would be
sometime in the future. But -- but they did -- but they
did tell them that if you’re going -- if you’re going to
be questioned, you have the right to counsel with you at
that time. And that was the important thing. Even if
we had to wait, they couldn't question him until he had
his attorney with him.
JUSTICE ALITO: If this warning is read the
way we might -- lawyers might read a statute or a
contract or something like that, then I don't know why
saying, "You have the right to remain silent," isn't
potentially misleading. It says you have the right to
remain silent. But once you break your silence, there
is nothing in there that says you have the right to
resume your silence.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No.
JUSTICE ALITO: Would you agree with that?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Except for that -- that
catch-all phrase that they used at the bottom, which is
you have the right to use any of these at any time.
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think that is
defective, too?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, I think that it --
it's probably okay as far as reinforcing the right to
remain silent and informing him that any of your answers
can be used against you, but I don't think it salvages a
right that's not there, which is the right to presence
during interrogation.
JUSTICE ALITO: So once you break your --
you have the right to remain silent, but once you break
that right, the fact that you have that right to use
that right to remain silent in the future doesn't mean
you can stop answering questions.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, the -- the
catch-all phrase might inform them that they could stop,
but, clearly, if they had the right to presence of
counsel with them, that might --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: We could write that down.
It could be the next case.
(Laughter.)
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right. And I do -- I
also contest the language that the opposing counsel uses
that says that we have somehow locked in everybody with
-- with what the -- what the decision below said.
The decision below held that, and I quote at
1, "We hold that Powell should have been clearly
informed of his right to the presence of counsel during
the custodial interrogation." It's not magic language.
It's not so -- so written in stone that -- it's not
explicit language.
There’s -- there’s -- this language follows
what this -- this Court has said. The reasonable
language, the clearly informed language. It isn't
locking everyone into these exact words down the line.
And there are hundreds of ways that this could be said.
So -- and then the court noted that the catch-all phrase
did not effectively convey to Mr. Powell his rights to
presence before and during and that the last sentence
could not effectively convey a right that he was never
told he had.
As far as whether or not this case should
even be here, even though the Florida Constitution and
the Florida court has gone along the same road, traveled
a parallel road with this Court, and it hasn't seen a
need to deviate, they -- they may see a need to deviate
here, should this Court disagree with what --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, they are -- they
are free to do that. I mean, politically, they might
consider it risky, but if we say that the charge was
good enough, the Florida court could say, but it's not
good enough under our Constitution.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Correct. And -- and I
believe they would.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm -- I'm not sure
that's the case. The remand in Long was only to address
another issue. The Long Court took its determination as
being binding on the issue that was before the Court in
Long --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- in that case.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: -- the Florida Supreme
Court must have referred to its constitutional
provision, Article I, section 9, at least five times.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And in each time, it said
that it was by extension from Miranda. It always linked
it, and that was the question that was presented in the
State court --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right. And the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that it certified.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It's almost like Miranda
is being used as a generic concept for warnings -- you
know, we’re complying with Miranda --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's the whole reason we
have jurisdiction, so that Miranda will not be confused,
and so that it won't be a hazard on the landscape when
people say "Miranda" and they mean something else.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right, but -- you know --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And it's not at all clear
that the Washington -- that the Florida Supreme Court
could in this case go back to the Constitution. That's
-- you can't get that out of Long.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: You can't go lower than
the Federal Constitution, but they can give more rights.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's -- maybe in some
other case. Not necessarily in this one, because Long
leads to -- to the contrary.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, in -- in Traylor,
which is the court that -- it’s the case that the -- the
Florida Supreme Court and the decision below relied
heavily upon, they said that we are the ceiling and the
court is the bottom, and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you have no case in
which the Florida Supreme Court has explicitly said that
we have a warning that is more strict, more rigorous
than what Miranda requires? You have no case?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No, and they -- they
didn't feel like they had to -- to deviate, because they
felt like their definition of presence of counsel, which
was the right to consult with an attorney before and the
right to have counsel present during the interrogation,
was consistent with the holdings in Miranda. So they
didn't feel the need to deviate.
But they did say that that is our definition
as we set forth in -- in Traylor, and that is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm curious: When this
goes back to them, do you think they can deviate? They
were answering a certified question, which was simply
whether this -- this warning complied with Miranda.
That was the only certified question.
So when it goes back, I assume they, having
said no, will now have to say yes. Can they go on and
say: Oh, and by the way, even though it doesn't violate
Miranda, we think it violates the State Constitution?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I believe they can,
because as long as they are not going below what this
Court mandates --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but that --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: -- if they provide more
protections.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that wasn't the
question asked of them. The only question asked of them
was whether it complied with Miranda.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right. And they --
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's really not --
that's really not quite accurate, because they used the
term "Miranda warnings" generically --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Generically, and --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- as opposed to a
category of warnings which are required by both the
Federal Constitution and the State constitution, and
they said it violated the State constitution.
--
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Yes, they did. And they
did -- they did say we have our standard under Traylor,
that we defined the right to the presence of counsel or
to the help of counsel as requiring presence during, as
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, except the words
that it quoted from the lower court opinion -- that is,
we are talking about the -- the Fifth Amendment, and by
extension, Article I, section 9.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So that seems to me to
indicate that it’s incorporating, not going further.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, if -- if --
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's not in the question
they -- they took.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: No. No, that's not in
the question.
But there is a way to -- you know, they
repeated all along the way, Article I, section 9. They
kept repeating it. They didn't have to. If they were
just going to say, oh, by the way, our Constitution
goes along with this, they could have said it in
passing. They could have also said that we -- we
choose not to interpret this other right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think the opposite. I
think the repeated linkage shows that they think they
are the same.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well -- and, again, I
would say that they -- they agree that we are traveling
along the same road, but they have -- they have -- they
are stressing the fact that they have set a line in the
sand as far as what they're interpreting the right to
presence --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, the question asked:
Does the failure to provide express advice of the right
to the presence of counsel during questioning vitiate
Miranda warnings?
Okay? That's the question. They have a
footnote after Miranda, which reads, “Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436.” I take that to mean that the
question is whether this warning violated Miranda.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: And, of course, if they
did violate the baseline, the minimum standard set forth
in Miranda --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: -- then it would be
unconstitutional.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Absolutely.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: So -- which is why
Traylor and the Florida constitution kept making --
because they didn't have to really get to what the
bottom or the baseline or the minimum standard was, as
long as Florida had set forth a standard.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's true, but --
but if they -- if they felt the authority to go beyond
Miranda, wouldn't they have had to say no to this
question, if we find that way, and then go on to say:
But it does violate our own? And that's beyond the
question that they -- that they -- that was certified to
them.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: And I believe the idea
that they didn't think it was deviating from the Miranda
case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right. I --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: But if this Court finds
that it does, then they -- they will probably -- and I
feel confident that they would fall back on the
constitution -- of the Florida constitution.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But they did say over and
over again -- one was the certified question; another
was the issue before the court is whether the failure
to provide express advice of the right to the presence
of counsel during custodial interrogation violates the
principles espoused in Miranda, with the citation.
I mean, they said many, many times that the
question was -- what did Miranda mean was the issue, not
what -- what did Florida's extension of Miranda.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Well, they do have a
section in looking at, you know, other circuit courts in
the Federal system, and all -- what our Florida courts
are doing, and -- which is when they get into the
concept of -- well, they start out talking about Traylor
and our constitution at the beginning, and they -- they
repeat it at the end because they believe it is
consistent with. They believe it is following along.
But they never say that -- that our
constitution isn't insignificant or that it's not
important. If they did, they wouldn't have felt the
need to cite Traylor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I think you would have
had a much weightier argument if it hadn't been for
Michigan v. Long. If you could have said --
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: It -- it would have been
nice.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We could have then
remanded to ask the Florida Supreme Court: Was it
independently ruling under its constitution?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I -- I will keep that in
mind.
(Laughter.)
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: The -- the idea of clear,
reasonably clear -- whichever the standard is,
Justice Sotomayor, I believe the Florida Supreme Court
used the correct standard and used the one by saying
that it was clear -- you know, whether or not Mr. Powell
was clearly informed.
So no matter which standard you use, as far
as functionally equivalent or whatever, I believe that
this falls within the four corners of that.
The obligation -- let's see, I'm looking to
see what other cases -- general cases.
They -- the opposition cites to the
fact that there’s this great conflict going on among the
circuits. I don't believe that such a conflict is –-
whatever those cases were deciding, I don't believe they
would have approved of this language.
This language, because of the "before"
limiting language and excluding the "presence during"
language, became misleading. And the -- the general
cases that like -- just the plain language, you have the
right to the presence of counsel, they -- they are not
inconsistent with -- with what Florida has required.
They -- they would not disagree that there --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, you said that the
average person wouldn't take this warning to mean --
to -- wouldn't envision a procedure like the grand jury
procedure. What does it mislead the average person to
think?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: That he -- that once
questioning starts, that he -- he has no right to
consult with a lawyer anymore, and it certainly
doesn't -- and tell him that he has the right to the
presence of an attorney with him in an interrogation
room, where the coercion takes on a highly new meaning.
I mean the coercive practices that are --
that are --
JUSTICE ALITO: But the latter part of that
is the grand jury question. You have a right to consult
an attorney, but you don't have the right to have an
attorney present.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I don't -- I don't
believe -- any -- any of the normal reasonable suspects
are -- would probably be even aware of what the grand
jury proceeding was about.
JUSTICE ALITO: Okay. So then your argument
is that this -- that what -- what a normal -- an average
person would take this to mean is that you -- you can
talk an -- to an attorney before starting to answer
questions, but not once the questioning begins. That's
what you take it to mean?
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Correct, and I'm not the
only one. There were five supreme court justices, a
majority on the second -- the majority of the second
district judges in Powell and seven judges on the second
district level, who all found that to be the case, and
we’re talking someone who doesn't have that level of
intelligence.
And he may have had a prior record -- he did
have a prior record, but that doesn't mean --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, all of those people
are lawyers, and lawyers are known to read legal
documents very precisely. The average person may read
them very differently.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Correct, and in this
case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Sometimes, a little
knowledge is a dangerous thing.
(Laughter.)
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: Yes.
And I do believe that, if this Court were to
reverse, that would set a new floor for these forms and
that there would be the danger of the fact that -- I
mean, if -- if the Tampa public -- police department is
always changing its forms -- which they have shown to be
the case -- they have changed these forms in the past --
why wouldn't other agencies decide to change their forms
and make things more --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You -- you think
it's a good thing, though, that they changed their forms
to track the FBI form after -- after this litigation
started.
MS. BRUECKHEIMER: I -- I -- yes. I do
believe that, when they changed the form to comply with
the decision below and with what's going on in 97
percent -- or 96 percent of the jurisdictions -- it
doesn't have to be exact language; it just has to be
there. Then -- then the -- then the system runs
beautifully.
I can't tell you the last time I had a
Miranda warning case, and I have been doing this for
almost 30 years.
There is no litigation when it's done
correctly, and it's mostly done correctly.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Counsel, you have a minute remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOSEPH W. JACQUOT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. JACQUOT: Mr. Chief Justice, let me make
three brief points, after responding to a question that
Justice Stevens asked.
In terms of independent and adequate State
grounds, in our brief, we relied on the Florida court
citing Miranda, the case, not Miranda, as the
phraseology, that the Florida Supreme Court interwove
the Federal law based on Miranda, the case itself, and
there is no plain statement to the otherwise.
Three quick points: There is no
manipulation behind this warning. This warning is the
result of litigation in Thompson v. State. That was a
91 decision by the Florida Supreme Court.
The -- the Tampa police had changed its
warning. The previous warning had 148 words. This
warning is simpler, with 79 words. The previous warning
had arcane and redundant language. This language is
more straightforward.
Those are the reasons behind the change in
the warning, not any kind of inference, as amici makes,
towards manipulation.
Second, what Respondent is asking for is
exactly what this Court chose not to do in Prysock.
It told the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the case in the
