IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
UNITED STUDENT AID FUNDS, :
INC., :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1134
FRANCISCO J. ESPINOSA. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 1, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MADELEINE C. WANSLEE, ESQ., Phoenix, Ariz.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
TOBY J. HEYTENS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioner.
MICHAEL J. MEEHAN, ESQ., Tucson, Ariz.; on behalf of the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MADELEINE C. WANSLEE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
TOBY J. HEYTENS, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioner 18
MICHAEL J. MEEHAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MADELEINE C. WANSLEE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 08-1134, United Student Aid Funds
v. Espinosa.
Ms. Wanslee.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MADELEINE C. WANSLEE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. WANSLEE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Congress has precisely delineated three
types of debt in bankruptcy: those that are
dischargeable, those that are dischargeable unless the
creditor timely objects, and those debts that are simply
not dischargeable. Student loans fall within a subset
of this third category. Their exception from discharge
is self-executing unless a debtor proves that
repayment will cause an undue hardship on the debtor and
the debtor's dependents. The Ninth Circuit rewrote
Bankruptcy Code section 523 to reduce those three types
of debt down to two. Allowing debtors to discharge
their student loan debts by mere declaration opens the
door to recategorizing every category of
non-dischargeable debt, and that includes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Only -- only -- only if the
bankruptcy court disregards the law. I mean, it's --
it's clear that the bankruptcy court should not have
done what it did here. The only issue is, it having
made that mistake, can it -- can it subsequently be --
be undone in the manner that's -- that's sought here?
They haven't reduced three to two. The
three -- the three remain three. The bankruptcy court
should not do this.
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, this case turns
upon the effect of section 1328. And the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Before -- before we get
to that, the Ninth Circuit did say, now, bankruptcy
judges, we don't want you to -- to intermeddle in this.
So -- so the first step -- it wasn't clear to the Ninth
Circuit that bankruptcy judges should not say, now, I am
not going to let you do this until you prove hardship.
MS. WANSLEE: Well, Justice Ginsburg, the
Ninth Circuit said that bankruptcy courts have no
business involving themselves in this dispute if the
creditor fails to object.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MS. WANSLEE: And the problem here is that
28 specifically says that the effect of the discharge,
the discharge that every debtor is looking for in a
chapter 13 case, that discharge shall not include
non-dischargeable debt. And the language is very, very
important, Your Honor. It prescribes the statutory
effect of the discharge order, and it says that after a
debtor completes their payments under a plan, open
quote, "the court shall grant the debtor a discharge of
all debts provided for by the plan, except any debt of
the kind specified in paragraph 8."
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It was wrong. Let's
assume --
MS. WANSLEE: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- the circuit -- the
district court judge, the bankruptcy court judge, got it
wrong, legal error. Should not have been discharged, a
given. Neither -- the confirmation plan should not have
been approved, neither should the discharge order have
been entered. We will go back to what was entered
and -- and -- and the effect of that, because I'm not
sure of it -- it's an error.
How does that give you a right to undo that
judgment 7 years later -- was it 5, 6, 7 years later?
That's the question here. Why is something that's in
error become a void judgment?
MS. WANSLEE: Justice Sotomayor, it's not
mere error. It's in fact void because of the plain
language of these particular specific statutes. They
have very precise words, very precise meanings.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But so does -- most
error committed by courts, inadvertently or otherwise,
are in contravention of some statutory command. This is
no different.
Voidness, as I've heard it described by many
others, appears to mean that the court is acting either
without jurisdiction over the people, and that's not at
issue here -- there was jurisdiction over the parties
here -- or without jurisdiction over the res. But the
bankruptcy court does have jurisdiction, albeit in
some -- in all circumstances, it had jurisdiction over
the student debt. The issue is what could it do with
it. But this is not a case involving a lack of
jurisdiction by the court over property.
So why is this more than mere error?
MS. WANSLEE: Because Congress's statutory
scheme must be enforced as written. And it's -- it's
unequivocal here what Congress wants. Congress has 19
categories of debts that are excepted from discharge,
important exceptions: Alimony, child support --
JUSTICE BREYER: What's the strongest case,
I mean, that you can muster in favor of this
proposition, my question being the same as Justice
Sotomayor's? What’s the strongest case where you can
find any court that said a matter is void -- it’s void,
not -- not just legal error, so you can attack it 90
years later -- it's void just because the lower court
that made the error didn't apply a clear statute?
MS. WANSLEE: Rule --
JUSTICE BREYER: Give me your strongest case.
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, Rule 60 says that
void orders can be attacked, and the passage of time
does not transmute a void order into a valid order.
Once void, it --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I’d like an answer
to my question, because I can -- I have read the
treatises, which I have in front of me, and they say
that it's void only if you show a -- the same thing that
Justice Sotomayor just said. And so, since I don't
think there is some kind of constitutional due process
error here, and there’s clearly jurisdiction over the
parties, I guess you are saying there wasn't subject
matter jurisdiction, which is a little vague.
And so I want to know what's the clearest
case, strongest for you, where a court has ever said
that a failure of some -- of some other court to apply
the language of a statute properly, no matter how clear,
is a lack of subject matter jurisdiction? What is your
strongest precedent? That's all I'm asking.
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, we did cite a
number of cases in the materials. One of them is the
Vallely case, in which --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MS. WANSLEE: That was the insurance company
case. Congress said that insurance companies could not be
afforded the protections of bankruptcy. And in that
case, the president of the company, the secretary of the
company, all participated in the bankruptcy. But the
Court found that the bankruptcy court had no authority
to -- to issue orders and to have that insurance company
within the bankruptcy context.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that -- that goes back
to something more fundamental. There’s no issue here
that the court had jurisdiction over these parties,
unlike the insurance company. And there’s no issue that
the court didn't have jurisdiction over this res. They
could decide that a student loan was dischargeable.
They just had to follow certain procedures. It's a very
different set of circumstances in that case.
MS. WANSLEE: Well, Your Honor, if -- if
this order is merely voidable, then why do we have
section 523(c)? 523 -- a very specific code provision:
All debts not included in 523 are as a matter of course
discharged through bankruptcy. Those that are
specifically enumerated, except for (2), (4), and (6), are
excepted from discharge -- (2), (4), and (6), the
creditor must timely file objection.
Why do we have that scheme? Why do we have
the tripart ordering?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can a -- can a creditor
say, oh, skip it, I know this bankrupt is going to be
able to prove hardship, why go through unnecessary
expense? Can a -- can a creditor waive the hardship
determination?
MS. WANSLEE: No, Your Honor, a creditor may
not waive the undue hardship determination. 523 says
that student loans are only discharged upon a finding of
undue hardship.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So he can't -- he can't
stipulate to -- he will say: I want the deal that is
being proposed; I think I am better off getting the
principal, skipping the interest. I can't make that
deal? We have to go through this hardship procedure,
whether the creditor wants it or not?
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, within the proper
context of an adversary proceeding in which the issue
has in fact been raised. Here, there was never any --
any allegation of undue hardship, never.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, would the case be
different if there had been such an allegation in the
petition?
MS. WANSLEE: I think not, Your Honor,
Because, once again 523, requires a finding.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It would not have been
different then? What if it had been not only an
allegation but an affidavit? Would the case be
different?
MS. WANSLEE: Once again, I -- I think you
go back to the language of 1328, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I’m kind of curious to
know what your answer to my question is.
MS. WANSLEE: I apologize.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Would the case be
different if the Petitioner had filed an affidavit of
undue hardship with the papers? Same notice, everything
else exactly the same.
MS. WANSLEE: Certainly a harder case, Your
Honor. However, I don't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why is it a harder case?
MS. WANSLEE: I don't think -- there would
not have been an adjudication of undue hardship,
however. Just because the debtor stated it doesn't mean
there was then --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And I say it's supported
by an affidavit.
MS. WANSLEE: Correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Supported by -- would then
the case be different?
MS. WANSLEE: No, Your Honor. There has to
be --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There has to be an
adversary hearing under your view?
MS. WANSLEE: Under our view, the creditor
is entitled to the protections of 7001 to say --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Okay. So if there's not
only an affidavit, but an offer of proof, and then
there's no answer filed and nothing in response to the
notice of the -- the lender did exactly what it did
here.
MS. WANSLEE: No, Your Honor. I -- I don't
believe that undue hardship would be established under
those facts. Our facts, of course, are a little bit
easier. There was never even an allegation of undue
hardship --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MS. WANSLEE: -- much less proof.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But your legal theory
would be the same if there had been an affidavit filed
and the same -- the same response by the -- by the
company?
MS. WANSLEE: That's correct, Your Honor.
And I would -- I would note --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, what -- what if
the creditor is sitting in the courtroom and has
actually made arguments and appeared in some other
aspects of the case? Then they come to the student loan
and the -- and it's ordered discharged without any
hearing, with the creditor sitting there. The case
goes to judgment, there’s a final decree of discharge.
Can the debtor -- pardon me. Can the creditor come in
years later and say, oh, this is void?
MS. WANSLEE: I think they can, Your Honor.
And I think we can look to this Court's own precedent in
the Stoll case. The Stoll case said that it's important
to know when litigation begins and when it ends. And
usually this Court's opinions talk about the ending of
litigation. What we are talking about here is the
beginning. We want to know --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, what about -- what
about my question?
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, at that point the
litigation has not commenced. There is no summons,
there is no service --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no. No, no, no. My
hypothetical is there is -- it has commenced.
It’s a big hearing. There's lots of issues. The
student loan creditor is there, actually participates in
some of the hearings on other issues. Then, while they
-- while they are still there, still represented, the
judge says: Now, I'm going to discharge the student
debt; I'm not going to have any hearing. The creditor
does nothing. Can the creditor come in 10 years later
and say this is a void judgment?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That’s this case. The
creditor was there. The creditor put in a proof of
claim. The creditor knew that the plan gave the
creditor less than the proof of claim.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, my case is just a
little different in that the creditor is there in the
courtroom represented.
MS. WANSLEE: Okay. And a proof of claim is
merely for distribution purposes under a chapter 13
finding. It's not for discharge purposes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What about my --
MS. WANSLEE: It --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What about my question?
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, in your case, once
again, we -- we do believe that that is not the
appropriate constitutional notice, constitutional
practice. Notice and opportunity are just but one part
of access and due process. Due process also requires
compliance with whatever --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think --
MS. WANSLEE: -- Congress --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think that's an astounding
-- an astounding conclusion, that there -- that you
simply are writing out the doctrine of -- of waiver
altogether.
MS. WANSLEE: Well, Your Honor, the
exception to discharge is self-executing. And if it's
self-executing, how can we waive it? If there is no
duty to object --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What -- what provision
was this discharge under?
MS. WANSLEE: The debtor's discharge was
entered under section 1328(a)(2).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And 1328 says: "The
court shall grant a debtor a discharge." That doesn't
sound self-executing to me.
MS. WANSLEE: Well, but 1328 further goes on
to say: "A discharge of all debts provided for by the
plan" -- as this debt was provided for by the plan --
"except any debt of a kind specified in paragraph 8 of
section 523."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: (a), and section
3(a) does not refer to a discharge under 1328(a). It
refers to a discharge under 1328(b).
MS. WANSLEE: That's correct, Your Honor.
28(a)(2) is the discharge in play here, and 1328(a)(2)
brings in the discharge provisions of 523.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, no.
28(a)(2) brings in the definition, the kind of debt
specified in 523(a). It doesn't bring in the discharge
under 523(a), which is limited to 1328(b).
MS. WANSLEE: It brings in the enumerated
debts of 523.
And I think it's important to -- to remember
that back in 1990 student loan debts were fully
dischargeable in chapter 13 plans. In 1992, when this
plan was proposed, Mr. Espinosa sought to claw back what
Congress had taken away 2 years earlier.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well -- we're conceding
that they violated the statute, the bankruptcy judge.
The question is whether it's void. And void, as you
just said, was three categories: One, was there a
violation of basic due process for your client? I don't
see it. Two, did the bankruptcy judge have jurisdiction
over the parties? It seems the answer is yes. And,
three, did they have subject matter jurisdiction? Which
we started by saying was vague.
So I asked you for your strongest case. You
said Vallely. I have only looked at it quickly, but
it's only four pages. And what that case seems to say
is that there is a statute which says there is
bankruptcy jurisdiction over all commercial businesses
except for insurance companies and two other categories.
This party here is an insurance company, and
and therefore they can attack it later, because there
was no jurisdiction over an insurance company.
Now, if that's your strongest case, I don't
know what the others are going to say, but it seems to
me you don't have much precedental support to put this
in a category of lacking jurisdiction.
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, we are talking
about a statutory right here, and the fact that Congress
has specifically provided that certain categories of
debts, for very important public policy reasons, are
carved out from discharge. And the reason it's void is
because it violates the plain language of the statute.
Again, even if it's provided for by the plan, the
discharge this debtor got under 1328 --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But why -- why should it be
void, looking at 1327? We have a confirmed plan. You -
- you have -- 1328 does include -- except 523(a), as you
pointed out. But 1327 says "Effect of
confirmation," and that says, "The provisions of a
confirmed plan" -- the provision here is you get 13,000,
not 17,000 -- "bind the debtor and each creditor,
whether or not the claim of such creditor is provided
for by the plan" -- which it wasn't in full here -- "and
whether or not such creditor has objected to or has
accepted or rejected the plan."
That seems to say at the end of the line,
you get that final determination confirmed, that's it.
That's as final as you come and whatever mistakes were
made on the way there, you can't look behind at the
confirmation.
MS. WANSLEE: Your Honor, I’d like to
reserve some time.
But, Justice Ginsburg, to answer your
question, 1327 is the more general -- general
provision. Statutory canons provide that the more
specific shall control. But there’s three other quick
reasons I’d like to give you.
If this case relies just on 1327, it
deprives the Bankruptcy Code and the rules of a coherent
effect. There are four other provisions implicated:
22, 1325, 1328, and 523. A ruling in Mr. Espinosa's
favor undermines the will of Congress in this regard.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If -- if you’d
like to reserve time, it's probably time to wrap up.
MS. WANSLEE: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Heytens.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF TOBY J. HEYTENS
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. HEYTENS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Section 1328 and section 523 are best
construed as self-executing limitations on the effect of
the bankruptcy court's discharge order rather than as
directives to the bankruptcy court. There are two
reasons for --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't -- sorry to
start -- stop you at the beginning, but I don't see
that. I see in 1328(a) it says the court “shall
grant” the debtor. And that is not self-executing. It's
a directive to the court. And I see that 523(a) is
referred to later on, but only for purposes of
definition, not for purposes of discharge.
MR. HEYTENS: Two responses to that, Mr.
Chief Justice. First, if we are looking just at the
language of 1328, which is reproduced at the page 3 of
the appendix to the blue brief, it states, as the Chief
Justice notes, that: "The court shall grant the debtor
a discharge" of certain debts. There is then a comma,
and it says "except any debt" -- now, I can see that
that language is subject to a degree of ambiguity. But
I think even that language is susceptible to being read
as a legal limitation on the effect of the discharge
order that the provision has just told the court to
grant. In other words, the reason that –-
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then the key
distinction you draw in your brief is totally
meaningless. You say on page 18 that this -- the issue
is whether the provision is, quote, “framed as a
directive” to the bankruptcy court. And here it is
framed as a directive to the bankruptcy court, and
therefore doesn't -- isn't self-executing.
MR. HEYTENS: Mr. Chief Justice, I think the
provision before the comma clearly is framed as a
directive to the bankruptcy court. What I’m suggesting
is that the language after the comma is at least capable
of being read consistent with --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There are a lot of commas.
What comma are you referring to?
MR. HEYTENS: Excuse me, Justice Scalia. I
am referring to the comma in -- in 1328(a), the last comma
right before the (1), "except any debt."
And the reason that we think that has to be
construed as a limitation on the scope of the bankruptcy
court's discharge order is twofold. First and foremost,
there has been no suggestion whatsoever that there is a
different rule for chapter 13 plans, which is covered by
28, than there is for chapter 7 bankruptcies, chapter
bankruptcies, or chapter 12 bankruptcies. But the
consequences of saying that 1328 alone is not a
limitation, that is the consequence that that would
have.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what about the
consequence of -- there happen to be -- well, I counted --
different kinds of things that follow that comma,
including criminal fines, sentences. There are all
kinds of things. And is it the consequence of my
accepting your argument that anybody who is a creditor
in respect to any of those 14 things can come in at any
time and announce under Rule 60(b)(4), even if it's 10
years later, that the district court -- the bankruptcy
court made a mistake?
MR. HEYTENS: Well, Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, that would be quite --
to me -- extraordinary. So I hope the answer from your
point of view must still be no.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, Justice Breyer, it
wouldn't be under Rule 60(b)(4), because if you
understand this is a limitation on the effect of the
discharge order, the original discharge order never
covers it in the first place. And I think quite the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Wait a moment. What would it
be in the case where you have a discharge order and it
says things in it which somebody feels fall within 1
of these 13 categories? Now, are you saying that that
somebody can come back and make his argument 15 years
later, because he will say that, since it falls in that
category, the judgment is void insofar as this language
covers what I don't want it to cover?
MR. HEYTENS: Well, Justice Breyer, there
are three very specific categories of somebodies who
can't do that, and Congress has specifically identified
those three categories.
In 523(c), Congress specifically identified
three categories of non-dischargeable debt for which the
onus is on the creditor to request a hearing and obtain
a determination by the bankruptcy court.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it's not -- it's not
that it is not dischargeable. It's only dischargeable
under certain conditions.
MR. HEYTENS: That is true with regard to
student loan debt, Justice --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So -- so
you’re almost begging the question, because it's
possible to argue that if a debt is not dischargeable at
all under any circumstance, your argument might have
more legs because then the court has no jurisdiction
over that property.
MR. HEYTENS: That was --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's not the case
with these exceptions. They can all be discharged.
It's just a matter of whether the conditions have been
met or not.
MR. HEYTENS: That would certainly be the
argument that would be made in future cases, if the
Court were to accept Mr. Espinosa's argument. And to be
clear, the consequences of accepting it and not
accepting that limitation would be that this would not
be limited to student loans.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, but you see, it's the
same problem that’s bothering us. I would like a yes
or no answer.
MR. HEYTENS: The answer is --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it the case if somebody
feels the conditions were not met with in the 13
categories that -- or 14 -- that follow the comma, he --
you feel that they were met. The other side says, they
weren't met. I sent him a notice, but it was in a
balloon, okay. You know, was the notice a real notice,
wasn't it? People argue about that.
So in any case where you have a person who
says, no, they weren't met, and the other side says,
yes, they were met, that first person can come back
years later and say that the judgment was void? Is
the answer of the government yes or no?
MR. HEYTENS: With the exception of the
three categories in (c), the answer is yes, Justice
Breyer, and we think that follows straightforwardly from
the --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Is there any --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is (c)? You have
been talking about 523(c). I can't find it in any of
the materials.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Scalia, we discussed
page -- 523(c) on pages 13 to 14 of our brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why don't you put it
in an appendix if it's going to be part of your case?
I’ve got to search through your brief for it?
What page in your brief?
MR. HEYTENS: Pages 13 and 14. I apologize,
Justice Scalia.
The language of 523(c), which I also have, I
can read it. It states "the debtor shall be
discharged from a debt of a kind specified in paragraphs
(2), (4), or (6) of subparagraph (a) … unless, on request
of the creditor to whom such debt is owed, and after
notice and a hearing, the court determines” that such
debt is to be excepted under (2), (4), or (6).
So for those three categories of otherwise
non-dischargeable debt, Congress has specifically
provided that the onus is on the creditor to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Can I just get your answer
to a similar question --
MR. HEYTENS: Sure.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- I asked your colleague?
If the facts of this case were changed by the -- the
creditor had come in and stipulated to the plan before
the court and explained at the time, we think it would
be better to get what money's available now rather than
waiting for the interest to be collected later on, if
they had stipulated to it, and then the order was
entered, you would still say, 10 years later, they could
charge it?
MR. HEYTENS: With -- with one caveat,
Justice Stevens, which I -- I don't mean to fight the
hypothetical. I just think I need to clarify. The
creditor can certainly stipulate to the underlying facts
that the debtor alleges in support --
JUSTICE STEVENS: He stipulates to the entry
of the plan. That's all he stipulates to.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Stevens, in that
situation, there has not been an undue hardship
determined --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So you -- you would have the
same position then?
MR. HEYTENS: We would say yes, and we think
that follows naturally from this Court's decision in
Hood, where the Court clearly described 523(8)(a) as a
self-executing limitation. The Court specifically
said it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the only way to do it
is to go through an adversary hearing with full notice,
and every -- and nobody wants to incur that expense.
This is a bankruptcy. You are trying to save assets.
The bankruptcy judge thinks this makes no sense. The
creditor says, okay. But you -- you agree with your
colleague that, under this 523 whatever, you must have
the full adversary hearing, notice, complaint, the
works?
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Ginsburg, you don't
necessarily need to have the full adversary hearing.
What you have to have is what Congress provided for in
3(a)(8). You have to have an undue hardship
determination that is made by the bankruptcy court.
Now, the parties can stipulate to the
underlying facts. But as this Court said in Hood, even
if the creditor does not show up for the adversary
proceeding, if the creditor completely defaults, this
Court said, on pages 453 and 454 of Hood, the bankruptcy
court still cannot discharge that debt --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But the irony of your
position is it's in the creditor's interest to get what
is available at this time, rather than waiting 10 years
hoping to get interest later on, and even though that's
the fact, you cannot give relief in this situation.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, Justice Stevens, the
creditor certainly does have interests. But I think the
reason Congress would provide for this regime is that
there is an important public interest at stake here,
too, which is that the Department of Education is
reinsuring all of these student loans.
And there is a powerful interest in ensuring
the integrity of the student loan system as a whole,
that, regardless of the decisions that an individual
debtor and perhaps an individual creditor are willing to
make in particular cases, Congress has an overriding
policy that student loans should not be discharged
unless there is a determination that this is the
extraordinary case, rather than the ordinary.
Now, there’s a very practical reason why
this matters. There were 374,000 chapter 13 filings
last year. There is no such thing as a standard form
chapter 13 plan.
The logical consequences of affirming the
Ninth Circuit's judgment in this case is to tell every
single chapter 13 debtor who has a student loan debt to
include a provision like this in his plan, in the hopes
that the creditor will not object and he will be able to
obtain a discharge in the absence of any finding by the
bankruptcy court.
It won't just be limited to chapter 13
debtors, either. It will apply to any debtor who has
a non-dischargeable --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't bankruptcy courts
read the law?
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you’ve got to assume that
every bankruptcy court is going to violate the
provisions of the statute.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, first and foremost,
Justice Scalia, the Ninth Circuit has specifically
forbidden bankruptcy courts from doing that on pages
a --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, they may not have said it
right, but they -- but they -- that’s a different
problem. But the -- the -- why doesn't the Treasury
just say to people: We’re not going to insure your
loans where you don't object.
MR. HEYTENS: They -- the Department of
Education --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Then the
government is harmless.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, it’s not harmless,
Justice Stevens -- I'm sorry, Justice Breyer, excuse
me -- because the question is: Who does it make sense to
put the onus on? Now, to your question -- the
bankruptcy judges can do it.
There were 374,000 filings last year. There
are less than 350 bankruptcy judges in this country.
That means more than 1,000 chapter 13 plans for every
single bankruptcy judge in the country. The idea that
bankruptcy judges are going to be policing every single
chapter 13 plan, it's just not realistic, and I don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why, of course, they
are supposed to police --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the idea that they
have to have a charade hearing is -- is equally
off-putting.
MR. HEYTENS: I don't think it would be a
charade hearing, Justice Kennedy. It would be
consistent with the normal rules of civil litigation
that if a party wishes not to contest a factual issue in
a properly noticed hearing, they can make that choice.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Meehan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL J. MEEHAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. MEEHAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Last term, in Travelers, this Court held
that, if the plain terms of a confirmed 11 plan
unambiguously apply to a particular issue, they are
entitled to their effect. That is this case, I submit.
Now, the case did go on to acknowledge that
there can be some situations in which the finality is
not going to be found -- it said subject matter per se
is not one of those -- but that if the court's action
was so plainly beyond its jurisdiction as to be a
manifest abuse of authority -- and this was not
necessary to the holding, I suppose, but it was
described in kind of where we would be in terms of
exceptions -- then perhaps finality would not apply.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you acknowledge that
what the bankruptcy court did here was wrong? Do you
acknowledge that?
MR. MEEHAN: I acknowledge that it did
violate the statute. And I would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. And it should not
have done it, and future bankruptcy courts shouldn't do
MR. MEEHAN: I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It makes a big difference
to how I’m going to look on this case. I mean, if you –-
MR. MEEHAN: I would agree that that is
correct, Your Honor. The reason I hesitate is this:
Mr. Heytens said that there are, on average, 1,000
chapter 13 plans filed per bankruptcy judge every year.
The bankruptcy judges do and are entitled to have
creditors make objections. Indeed, I think that Justice
Stevens was right that if a creditor and a debtor wanted
to come in and stipulate that there would be a discharge
of a portion of the student loan without a finding of
undue hardship, then certainly they can do so.
I don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it -- is it easy for a
bankruptcy judge to identify a particular debt as a
student loan debt? I mean, would the bankruptcy
filing -- filing show it -- you know, student loan debt?
MR. MEEHAN: As far as I know, it would.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It would?
MR. MEEHAN: And there may be circumstances
in which there is student loan debt which is not one of
the two plans that are guaranteed by the Department of
Education because Congress --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. MEEHAN: -- has broadened it, so that may
be the case. But I think this case obviously was such a
case. And I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It was the only debt.
This -- there was no other debt.
MR. MEEHAN: It was the only debt, yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So I take it that you do
think the Ninth Circuit was wrong when they said:
bankruptcy judges, don't stand in the middle of these
arrangements. Because you -- your answer was you think
the bankruptcy judge does have the obligation to bring
out this requirement that -- of a hardship showing?
MR. MEEHAN: If I used the word
"obligation," perhaps I was a little imprecise. Let me
put it this way: Number one, I am not here to say, nor
have we ever said at any stage of this litigation, that
this plan complied with 523(a)(8). That's clear.
Number two, if there had been any objection
raised whatsoever at any time, then it would obviously
have been wrong for the bankruptcy judge to confirm the
plan.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if there’s no
objection? The bankruptcy judge sees a chapter 13 plan,
and it -- it provides for the discharge of student debt;
it covers student debt. It's labeled "student debt."
Is it improper for the bankruptcy judge to
say you can't do this by this mechanism, you have to
start an adversary proceeding?
MR. MEEHAN: I do not think it is improper
for the bankruptcy judge to act that way, because under
section --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I didn't hear. Proper --
MR. MEEHAN: I do not think -- I'm sorry. I
do not think it would be improper. I think, under
section 105 of the code, indeed, the bankruptcy court
has what I would analogize as sort of the All Writs Act,
which says that the bankruptcy court may act sua sponte
to enforce --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That -- that's not enough for
me, that it's not improper for him to do it. I want you
to say that that is what he ought to do.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you’re not willing to
say that. You’re willing to say that bankruptcy courts
can do that if they like, but, you know, if they have a
kid that has a lot of bankruptcy debts, he has a soft
heart for student loan debts, he sees this as a student
loan debt, all right, let's give this kid a break. And
he enters -- that's okay?
MR. MEEHAN: No, I balance -- I balance your
question against Justice Stevens's hypothetical, and
only in the circumstance where it is clear either
through extensive notice, and I say waiver here, or
through an actual stipulation -- only in those
circumstances would it be appropriate for a bankruptcy
court to confirm a plan.
And even then, I submit, under section 105,
if the bankruptcy court said I will not do so, the
bankruptcy court need not do so, and in fact -- in fact,
the bankruptcy judge here, Judge Hollowell, when she
denied United relief under Rule 60, said that she as a
bankruptcy judge would not have done so. And that is
certainly within their authority to do. And Justice
Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you would say it's wrong
for the bankruptcy court to do it without a waiver, and --
but you’re leaving open if there is a clear waiver,
despite the fact of no adversary proceeding -- you’re
not -- you’re not necessarily willing to say that the
bankruptcy court can't do that?
MR. MEEHAN: Yes, because -- let me back up
and talk perhaps a little more generally.
I mean, in litigation in general, parties are
free to stipulate away or to decide not to litigate an
element of a claim. If they, in fact, do that, most
judges would say that's fine. Now, in this instance,
again -- and I don't want to be too repetitious -- but
in this instance, the bankruptcy judge does have that
extra “well, no,” I read this as being something that's
too important for me to let the parties stipulate away.
That's the only reason that I don't go completely with
your hypothetical.
JUSTICE ALITO: Was the Ninth Circuit
correct in saying that an attorney can't be sanctioned
under the bankruptcy rules' equivalent version of Rule
, for attempting to sneak through a discharge of
student debt in a chapter 13 petition?
MR. MEEHAN: Justice Alito, number one, we
don't have a case here of sneaking through. I do want
to make that point. This was clear notice.
Number two, I think the bankruptcy court --
excuse me, the Ninth Circuit was not wrong, because in
the Ninth Circuit, there was binding precedent, the Pardee
case.
JUSTICE ALITO: No, I understand that. But in
the absence of circuit -- controlling circuit precedent,
is it -- can an attorney be sanctioned for attempting to
get the discharge of student debt through a chapter 13
petition, knowing, as I assume every bankruptcy attorney
knows, that that is not the proper way to attempt to get
discharge of a student debt -- student loan?
MR. MEEHAN: I'm not able to tell you as a
matter of settled Ninth Circuit law that that is or is
not the case.
JUSTICE ALITO: I am not interested in what
Ninth Circuit law is.
MR. MEEHAN: Then, Justice Alito, I thought
that you had been asking me under Ninth Circuit law.
You're saying as a matter of --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, I'm asking you -- I'm
asking you, under -- under Bankruptcy Rule 9011.
MR. MEEHAN: My position would be that if it
is up front, clear notice -- in effect, a proposal that we
just don't have a Federal case out of an undue hardship
determination for $4,000 -- that it does not violate
Rule 11 or 9011 to make that proposal.
If there is some sort of lack of candor or
if there's some sort of weaseling, one might say
perhaps. And I think it's interesting that those
courts which have said that this is not something that
bankruptcy lawyers should do have not, so far as I was
able to find, invoked Rule 11 or Rule 9011.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But did you -- the net
effect of this is if you have taken a debt that is
non-dischargeable and put it into the category that it
is dischargeable unless the creditor objects.
MR. MEEHAN: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the code puts the
onus on the debtor to raise the hardship question.
Your reading is, even if the debtor is
silent, totally silent, says nothing about hardship,
unless the creditor objects, then the discharge will be
proper; the plan can be confirmed. So you are taking a
burden that Congress has put on the debtor and switching
it to the creditor.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I would
say that it doesn't shift the burden. It -- it does
shift the going forward, I suppose, in the sense of
making an objection.
But let's remember that this is something
that would obviously have been reversed on appeal had
the --
JUSTICE BREYER: But why would it not be a
sanctionable matter under Rule 11? If -- the lawyer
knows that he is supposed to make this special claim to
get this kind of discharge -- he knows an ordinary claim
won't do it. He submits a paper that asks for the
ordinary discharge, but he has to sign it, and that
sign -- that signature, is a -- is a certification that to
the best of his knowledge, the claims and other legal
contentions are warranted by existing law.
So if he signs it knowing that that isn't
the way to do it -- indeed, there is not even an
argument for doing it that way, for modifying the law --
then why isn't that a sanctionable matter under Rule 11?
MR. MEEHAN: I am not here to say absolutely
it is not, Justice Breyer.
What I'm saying, I think, is that some of
the bankruptcy courts in some of the circuits have said,
at least without invoking Rule 11, that it -- that it is
improper. Others have not had that difficulty. I, as a
lawyer who has litigated for 39 years and is very
conscious of Rule 11, have never thought that if --
--
again, if it was something that was plain and not
obfuscated, that a proposal to simply omit one element
of a claim violated Rule 11.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, the reason I ask that
MR. MEEHAN: I think it's debatable --
JUSTICE BREYER: The reason I ask that is I
think the argument on the other side is that it's so
clear in the law that this is not the way to go about it,
that you have to make a separate piece of paper saying
you have special hardship; that that’s so clear what
Congress wanted, that 40 years later you can come back
and attack it, if they didn't do it. I mean, that's
basically, in my mind, their argument.
But I think a simpler way would be to say if
it's that clear, if it really is that clear, the bar
itself will enforce the rule by not knowingly deviating
from the way that Congress set it out, to which there is
no legal objection. Now, is it really -- what do you
think of that?
MR. MEEHAN: I think that -- I think that,
again, in the context of what this case -- the issue of
this case, I think that's right.
I think -- and this Court said in Taylor v.
Freeland & Kronz that we are not going to adopt a rule
respecting finality that is going to take on the onus
of policing the bar, and noted that rule in criminal
bankruptcy fraud and the requirement that a petition be
signed and filed on a verification. And I think that's
-- I think that's absolutely right. I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If that’s the price of
your winning this case, it's clearly worth it now --
agreeing with Justice Breyer on that point.
MR. MEEHAN: You mean that the bar may have
further scrutiny?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. I mean, if indeed the
Court would not be willing to go along with -- with your
assertion that you can't undo it later, once it's been
done, unless it is clear that it should not be done and
that the bankruptcy judge shouldn't do it, and that a
lawyer shouldn't propose it -- if that's the condition,
then you should accept it, right? Because you want to
win this case --
MR. MEEHAN: I would accept -- I would
accept --
JUSTICE BREYER: I wasn’t making any
conditions.
MR. MEEHAN: I would --
(Laughter.)
MR. MEEHAN: I would accept that condition on
direct review or on a Rule 60. Or even --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I was going to ask whether
or not in -- on the facts of this case, the client could
have waited until the final judgment, not appeal, but
then come in under Rule 60?
MR. MEEHAN: I think that they could have.
Rule 60, as it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So then the client is not
required to -- the creditor is not required to appeal?
MR. MEEHAN: Well, they take the risk,
Justice Kennedy, that they could fit within 60(a), (b),
or (c): surprise, inadvertence, mistake, excusable
neglect, fraud, et cetera.
In this instance, I think they might have
had a hard time, because at most stage --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right. So I don't
think they could have -- and of course, you don't think
it's void. It could come in under 60(b) if it's void,
but you don't think it's void.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, void, under those
circumstances, I think would throw us into the due
process issue and I don't think so. No, I do not think
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right. So you have to
show mistake or surprise, and you doubt that there was a
mistake or surprise here.
MR. MEEHAN: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let me just ask this and
maybe I have bankruptcy law wrong. My -- my
understanding is that if creditors are not listed, they
are not discharged, correct? I think that's right in
most cases. If you don't list the creditor, the
creditor is not discharged.
MR. MEEHAN: Um --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm -- if you're having
problems with this --
MR. MEEHAN: I hesitate because rule 13 --
excuse me, section 1327 says the plan is binding upon
creditors whether or not they are listed. But generally
speaking that is correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I’m just wondering,
doesn't it happen all the time that creditors are not
listed and then they come in later and say the debt is
not discharged? I mean, doesn't that happen all the time?
MR. MEEHAN: I think that does happen
frequently.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And is -- is the rationale
that that -- that that discharge would be void as to
them, or that they are just not covered?
Suppose the bankruptcy judge makes a mistake
and lists a creditor by name as being discharged, but
that creditor never received notice. Is it void?
MR. MEEHAN: I think it is. I do think it
is. I mean, bottom line, about the only thing, I
submit --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, is this -- is this
case all that different, then?
MR. MEEHAN: Well, in this case, the creditor
got fulsome notice, submitted to the jurisdiction of the
court, filed a proof of claim, accepted --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: He got notice of something
that was void.
MR. MEEHAN: No, I may be misunderstanding
your question. He was --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, that -- that --
that assumes that he got notice of something that was
legally improper.
MR. MEEHAN: But not void. To go -- to
proceed without the adversary proceeding, I submit is
not void, and what the Petitioners had to try to do is
to ask you to interpret the statute, whether it's 1328
or 523(a)(8), to make this some sort of a -- there’s no
way you can touch it; if you didn't do the adversary, it
just didn't happen kind of a thing.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it’s in a category
that’s labeled “non-dischargeable.” There were other
items in that -- that category, so let's take it that --
the child support arrears --
MR. MEEHAN: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The debtor says, look, I'll
pay half of what I owe, and the spouse says, I need
something for the children, I'll take it. And then the
plan is confirmed, with only half of the child support;
and then the caretaker spouse has a second thought and
says, 2 years later, I need that money, I'm going to go
after the debtor for the rest.
MR. MEEHAN: Justice Ginsburg, the child
support or domestic support has a number of additional
protections surrounding it. Number one, not only does
the petitioner for chapter 13 have to notify the
creditor of the domestic support obligation, but under
section 1302, the trustee has to do so. And my --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But let’s suppose -- this
is my hypothetical. It's right in there, and the -- the
creditor haven’t gotten all the notices -- I want what I
can get right now. So I'll make this deal.
MR. MEEHAN: There are additional notices
that would go into your hypothetical, and I think it
makes a difference in this --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, there are supposed
to be additional notices here. There’s supposed to be a
summons and complaint and all that. And let's go down
the list of the others. How about taxes?
MR. MEEHAN: Well, I think that the
principle that we are -- that we are bringing to the
Court does have broad application. And I don't want to
-- I’d like to come back, if I get a second, to the
domestic --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So you’re saying any of
these things that are listed as non-dischargeable can
become dischargeable unless the creditor --
MR. MEEHAN: If the creditor --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- objects?
MR. MEEHAN: -- does not object and if the
court does not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So then, why do we have
this third category, then? Nothing is non-
dischargeable.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, may I submit, Justice
Ginsburg, that the argument proves too much, and that is
to say that if one can wait and make a voidance argument
under Rule 60(b) 6 years after the discharge and
years after the filing of the petition, and if that
could happen to anything, then what we have is that we may
as well just worry about litigating Rule 60 motions
whenever they come up.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess I don't understand
your position, because I thought you had said that this
should not have been discharged and now -- now you’ve
answered to Justice Ginsburg that so long as the -- as the
creditor appears they can all be discharged. Now, which
is it?
MR. MEEHAN: Well, Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even if the creditor
appears, it shouldn't be discharged. I thought that
that's what you had said before. But now you are saying
that so long as a creditor appears, all of these are
dischargeable.
MR. MEEHAN: What I had tried --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which is it?
MR. MEEHAN: The position that I had tried to
explain -- and, again, I think it balances your point
with Justice Stevens's point about waiver -- is that:
Should? Absolutely, unless there is an affirmative
waiver. But let's remember that when we talk about
"should," I think we’re talking about appellate issues.
We’re talking about error on appeal. We’re talking
about what ought to happen. And the reason I say that,
the point about the same effect occurring for taxes and
breaches of fiduciary duty et cetera, et cetera, proves
too much, is that if we are going to say that none of
those is finally put to rest, even though there was
notice, even though there was acceptance of benefits, as
occurred here, even though there was a submission to the
jurisdiction of the bankruptcy court, as occurred here
-- even though there was, you know, just bypassing the
early, if I may say "early" Rule 60 remedies -- if we
are going to say that none of those --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But your answer to me was
that if the creditor doesn't object, even to a
non-dischargeable debt -- if the creditor doesn't
object, it's discharged. That's what you answered, I
thought.
MR. MEEHAN: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And it doesn't matter
whether it's child support, taxes, or student loans,
right? Anything in the category -- you’re saying the
creditor must object; otherwise it's covered by the
discharge.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, my position, I think,
first is, is that, as I think Justice Breyer said,
this is a -- this is a clear waiver, and I think the
Court could rule on that basis. But, number two, I think
if this is a judgment -- a final judgment, proper
notice -- we do not have a due process concern, we do not
have a notice issue -- and the creditor has had plenty
of opportunity to -- to raise the error --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm not sure there
was proper notice. There was not a notice that there
would be a contested hearing. Or that there would be an
adversary hearing.
MR. MEEHAN: Justice Kennedy, I think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm -- I’m not sure that
there was a proper notice.
MR. MEEHAN: I think you must look at it
this way: The notice that was given was for the
confirmation of a plan. That is the notice then that is
required under the bankruptcy rules, and it was noticed
in accordance with the bankruptcy rules.
Is it right to do it in a bankruptcy plan
confirmation? If objected to, no, it's not. If not
objected to, the plan says what the plan says, and the
notice that must be given is notice of the plan.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, of course that's the
problem in the case. Sometimes we decide cases that
don't make a lot of difference and that once we decide
the rule everybody will know what the rule is. But in
this case, the Petitioners say that if we adopt the rule
that the Ninth Circuit adopted, it's going to be
extremely burdensome and costly on -- on municipalities,
on -- on those who give student loans, et cetera. And
that -- and that you are just creating a tremendous
burden on an already overburdened system.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, the argument that was
made by the Petitioner and its amici on that point, I
think, as -- as was pointed out in one of our amicus
briefs, overlooks the electronic notice, the
instantaneous notice, the fact that under Federal
regulations, which, by the way, do also require the
guarantee and lenders to do these things and to exercise
due diligence before they can get repaid --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's -- that’s what why
it’s a -- this is actually -- the part that is a lack of
understanding or a complete understanding on my part, is
-- is how Rule 60(b) works, because -- because it does -
- the law does have the three categories -- the three
categories that your friend described. And this third
category is supposed to prevent a discharge even where
the creditor doesn't object, unless certain things are
filled out, and they weren't.
So the three are there, made an objection.
If at any point the creditor had come in and objected,
not to the discharge but, you know, just said, hey, it's
the wrong form; you’ve got it wrong. It's like an error -
- they win.
MR. MEEHAN: They win.
JUSTICE BREYER: But -- but they waited a
very long time.
MR. MEEHAN: They did.
JUSTICE BREYER: So now they have to come in,
I guess, under 60(b), and it must be either 60(b)(4) or
(b)(6) --
MR. MEEHAN: And it was only --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and I take it there’s a
time limit on that, and the time limit is “a reasonable
time.” Is that how we are supposed to do, that we have
to say they didn't file -- if fact they never filed
-- it's your side that filed the 60(b)(4), I
gather. So this is good and mixed up.
MR. MEEHAN: They responded with a 60(b)(4).
JUSTICE BREYER: It’s good and mixed up. So
what is -- how is it supposed to work?
MR. MEEHAN: Well, the crux of it is, is
that there are other subparts of Rule 60, of course,
as -- as we all know, that give broader potential relief,
but they have time limits on them.
And there is also the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. MEEHAN: -- provision in section 1330
that allows revocation for fraud, but also has a time
limit upon it. But Rule 60(b)(4) does not have that
time limit on it, but Rule 60(b)(4), which is the
only basis upon which Petitioners sought relief in the
bankruptcy court -- and they made that very clear in the
district court -- the only basis would be if it is void,
and that means one of two things: Number one is the due
process issue, which we haven't spent a whole lot of
time taking about, but I submit is clearly not viable
because they had actual notice, and this Court has held,
and so have --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's not -- their
position is that 528(a)(8) -- or 523(a)(8) makes this --
it puts it outside the discharge order. The discharge
order does not cover this kind of debt. It doesn't
discharge student -- student loans absent a hardship
determination.
So, what they are saying is the discharge
discharged other things, but it could not discharge this
particular debt, so it's not discharged.
MR. MEEHAN: To be precise, if I may,
28(a) says, "The discharge shall not" and then defines
the categories. And as Chief Justice Roberts said --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, may I interrupt
for just one moment, because I -- there is something
niggling at me that I do need an answer to before you sit
down --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And I'd like him to
answer the question that I asked him first.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry.
MR. MEEHAN: 1328 is the operative statute
for the discharge of a chapter 13, and it says “shall
discharge” except for those categories that are listed.
The argument has been made that there is
some significance to the 523, which says "does not
discharge." But as -- as the Chief Justice observed,
that applies only to the subpart (b)’s in 1328, which is
discharges even if the plan has not been fully performed
by the debtor. And the -- and this is not that
circumstance.
So the "does not" language is simply not
applicable to our case, because it is not a 1328(b)
discharge that we are involved with.
And so, Justice Ginsburg, I -- I think your
question, again, comes back to an argument of law, of
procedure that would be dealt with on any appeal or
perhaps on the -- on the more expansive subparts of Rule
if they had been properly brought. But I do not
see -- I have always had a hard time grappling with the
argument that somehow the fact that a statutory
requirement was not followed falls into the category of
acting so plainly beyond the court's jurisdiction that
its action was a manifest abuse of discretion, and I
think that's what you would have to conclude –-
JUSTICE KENNEDY: On the practicality point,
you talk about electronic notice. I suppose that
that -- that the creditors for student loans could have
the automatic electronic thing where they say, we insist
on a hardship hearing. But that doesn't solve the
problem, because they’d then have to go back and see
whether or not there was a hardship hearing in the case.
So that -- that means they have -- they
have -- they have to -- they have to inquire into every
case whether or not the proper hearing has been made.
MR. MEEHAN: Well, Justice Kennedy, they
have to inquire, in any event, because the Federal
regulations require them to, number one, determine that
there was a filing; and, number two, even before there is
an adversary proceeding, to make its own assessment, the
lender or the guarantee -- the guarantor to make its own
assessment whether it’s likely that there would be an
undue hardship in the given case, and there are other
circumstances which are set forth in the -- in an amicus
brief --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Oh, you mean they can't ask
for a hearing unless there is a reasonable ground to
believe that there is no undue hardship -- can’t even ask?
MR. MEEHAN: No, I don't mean to say that.
What I mean to say is that -- is that I submit that the
hardship argument is a little bit overblown because they
have the obligations -- even though they say they don't
have even an obligation to open the envelope, they
have an obligation to look at the petition, to see what
the situation is, to see whether there’s likely an
undue hardship.
They don't have to forbear from making an
objection to a plan unless they have a basis to
determine that there was undue hardship.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, if they had
come to the court at the time the discharge order was
about to be entered and said we object, there has been
no undue hardship found, would the court have been
obligated to alter the plan at that point? The
confirmed plan proposed a discharge, but at the time
that the discharge order was being entered, there’s an
objection.
MR. MEEHAN: Justice --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What would have
happened?
MR. MEEHAN: Justice Sotomayor, I think that
the result would not change, because at that point we
have a long final plan, and we do have -- you know, the
issue that is real important that we don't spend a lot
of time talking about because it’s sort of ingrained in us
is finality. There are chapter 13 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that's the question.
What's final? Is it the plan that’s final or is it the
discharge order that’s final?
MR. MEEHAN: It's the plan, I submit,
because the plan is what determines what’s going to
happen. The discharge is like giving the release after
the plan has been fully --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but -- but here we
have a discharge order that on its face appeared to be
proper. It excepted out the student loan from the
discharge.
MR. MEEHAN: The original --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And your other -- the
other side has sort of given up on that as a --
MR. MEEHAN: They have.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- as a point, because
that, interestingly enough to me, would have been the
stronger due process argument, whether the Ninth Circuit
and the district court could have amended that discharge
order illegally to except something it didn't except,
that was -- shouldn't have been excepted to start with.
But that argument seems to have been put aside.
MR. MEEHAN: It definitely was put aside.
It was not raised.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But -- so, it might have
been the stronger due process argument. But having put
that aside, then your belief is that there is no point
in time between the confirmation in the plan and the
discharge order in which a party can object for -- to an
error --
MR. MEEHAN: Well, of course --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- except as permitted by
(b) and 1330?
MR. MEEHAN: Well -- and as permitted by just
simply appealing the order. They could have done that.
They could have appealed. They could have done 60 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Which order could they
have -- they could not have appealed --
MR. MEEHAN: The confirmation -- the
confirmation -- the -- the order confirming the plan.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They could not have
appealed the discharge order?
MR. MEEHAN: I can't answer that one. I
don't know that they could have appealed it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, going back to
Justice Kennedy's point, I mean, some people are listed
in discharge orders that were never discussed in the
plan, or otherwise some people are excluded that should
have been included. Those people can't appeal?
MR. MEEHAN: Well, I am not prepared to say
that they cannot. I certainly, if I were representing
them, would try -- try it, but it's just something that
I have not seen, and in working up this case, I am not
familiar with it, but it may very well be an appealable
order.
My point is simply that, the bottom line, we
have something here that is very final; there are
literally billions of dollars of disbursements made by
chapter 13 trustees in reliance on the these plans; and
it would be very, very upsetting to the bankruptcy
jurisdiction, exceedingly upsetting, to make a very broad
exception to finality.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Wanslee, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MADELEINE C. WANSLEE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. WANSLEE: Briefly, just on this last
point, no upset whatsoever to bring this matter back
before the bankruptcy court. Mr. Espinosa is still free
to come back to bankruptcy court and argue that he has
got an undue hardship.
The distributions that are made through a
chapter 13 plan are a matter of statutory right, every
single adversary -- every single plan that had this
illegal plan language could come back and it would not
upset anything, nothing would change, no distribution
whatsoever. I think that's an important point.
And to be clear, the chief judge's -- Chief
Justice's question, 523 by its terms brings in 1328(b),
which is a different kind of discharge.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MS. WANSLEE: But 1328(a)(2) specifically
then incorporates 523. It is applicable. It is in play.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I -- my -- I'm
not -- I'm not sure it does. It refers back to 523(a)
to define the debt. I don't think it incorporates
all -- all of 523. It's simply referring to the kind of
debt that should not be discharged.
MS. WANSLEE: Certainly, 1328(a)(2) provides
the laundry list of exceptions to discharge. And that's
the point, is that student loans are within that 19
categories of debts that Congress said are excepted from
discharge.
In this case, there was really no basis to
appeal the discharge order. It was proper. It was
appropriate. It excepted the student debt, and that’s
found at page 46 of the record, Your Honor.
In terms of what happened when the matter was
on its limited remand, it was a very limited remand,
and this issue was already teed up with the Ninth Circuit.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you go back to the
fundamental part of my question to your adversary? The
plan order included a discharge of the student
interest -- of the interest on the student loan.
MS. WANSLEE: It did not so specifically
state, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It just proposed a
discharge of a certain amount lesser than the principal
plus interest.
MS. WANSLEE: It had a predicate of
discharge of interest, no predicate of undue hardship.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Right. That's the plan.
And then you have a discharge order. And the two are
not congruent. So what's the final judgment?
MS. WANSLEE: The final judgment, Your
Honor, is the effect of 1328. Think of bankruptcy as --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no. Is it the
confirmation order or is it the discharge order? Are they
different judgments? What -- what controls? And what
were you --
MS. WANSLEE: The controlling order here is
the discharge order. And the reason why is because
bankruptcy is a continuum of events all leading to the
discharge. The discharge is the goal. That's what the
debtor wants. But only Congress can tell a debtor what
he gets to discharge.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, what does the notice
of -- the time for a notice of appeal run from?
MS. WANSLEE: Pardon me?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What does the time for the
notice of appeal run from -- the discharge order?
MS. WANSLEE: Well, for the plan itself,
from the plan entry. Now, once again, we never got a
copy of the plan entry.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Now -- now, just in the --
in the general run of the bankruptcy, how do you calculate
when you have to file your appeal -- from the time of
the discharge order?
MS. WANSLEE: Well, if we were going to
appeal from -- from the plan, it would be the plan or --
but there’s no reason to appeal from the plan, because
once again, 1328 excepts our debt specifically from
discharge through the plan.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
MS. WANSLEE: Thank you, Your Honor.
(Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the case in the
