IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
BRUCE WEYHRAUCH, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1196
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 8, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:19 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DONALD B. AYER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DONALD B. AYER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD B. AYER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:19 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear argument
next in Case 08-1196, Weyhrauch v. United States.
Mr. Ayer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. AYER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. AYER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
When counsel for the United States defended
the McNally prosecution before this Court in 1987, the
first thing he did was to acknowledge that many of the
existing intangible rights cases contained what he
called “extravagant” language that, on its face,
extended the doctrine far beyond the principle that one
can be guilty of fraudulently denying others the
performance of a clear legal duty that he owes.
I know that because the government lawyer
was me --
(Laughter.)
MR. AYER: And that was the only thing I
said that day that the 7-2 majority agreed with. But 22
years later, and one 28-word statute later, the United
States is now pressing to take that extravagant language
of the pre-McNally cases to the bank.
It does that by contending that a public
official commits honest services fraud simply by failing
to disclose an arguable conflict of interest, even
though he has no legal duty to disclose apart from the
words of 1346.
And it -- and it is possible to do that
under the extravagant words of the earlier cases by
relying on a supposed Federal common law fiduciary duty
of loyalty that is owed by all public officials,
including State officials, to their constituents.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if the --
there were a State law that said you must disclose
anything that could reasonably be viewed as a conflict
of interest, then -- then you would lose?
MR. AYER: Your Honor, you are now asking me
the question about the outer perimeter of the statute.
My argument is that a duty -- some duty clear in the law
is absolutely necessary.
What kind of a duty would be sufficient is a
much more difficult question, and it's a difficult
question for -- for, essentially, two reasons.
One is, the duty must be clear and not
vague. That's one point.
The more complex point is a point relating
to this Court's clear statement rule and related
concepts concerning particular duties. If a State
creates a system of contractual duties, those duties
have certain consequences.
Generally speaking, contractual duties have
a consequence of paying damages. People conduct
themselves in certain ways in a contractual system.
They don't expect to go to jail, usually, for breaching
a contractual duty. Similarly --
JUSTICE ALITO: I mean, the mail fraud
statute carries a very heavy penalty, and are you -- you
are arguing that Congress intended to impose this
penalty on individuals who breach some Federal or State
disclosure requirement, even if that is viewed by the
body that is responsible for the disclosure requirement
as a very minor thing.
MR. AYER: Oh, I'm -- I'm -- Your Honor, if
I left that impression, let me completely reject it.
That is not at all what I'm arguing.
To the contrary, I am arguing that -- that
ultimately, the task this Court may decide it must
pursue -- which, I think, frankly, is quite separate
from our case, because our case is a case where there is
no duty, period, in the law, which I want to explain
procedurally why that's true -- if you are going to
decide that some duties are enough and other duties are
not, it is a very challenging thing to do, and a very –-
JUSTICE ALITO: But that's what you’re
asking us to do. I understand you are saying that --
that there cannot be a conviction without the violation
of some duty.
But if we agree with that, then we are going
down the road of deciding what sort of duty suffices,
and does it have to be a duty that is backed up by a
State criminal sanction?
What if -- what if it's a 1-year felony?
What if it's a misdemeanor? What if it's a -- simply a
civil penalty? What if it's simply some sort of
precatory code of ethics --
MR. AYER: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- for legislators?
MR. AYER: Well, Your Honor, I -- let me --
I want to repeat again that -- that in -- in my view,
our case doesn't turn on my ability to satisfactorily
draw this line which no court has driven -- drawn
effectively in 50 years.
But I would -- I would say this: There are
two approaches that have been suggested that -- that
have fewer problems than others.
And one -- if you begin with the question of
duty and say, what duties will suffice -- and I'm not --
I'm not endorsing this; I'm simply saying it -- it pares
the covered duties back significantly to a point where
this Court might find it preferable to some other
approaches -- would be the one Your Honor mentioned,
criminal law duties, duties as to which the conduct
breached already is criminal.
There’s a subsidiary question, I think:
Whether, in fact, you might want to require felony
duties, because there are different penalties with
regard to different duties.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The real problem with
your approach, which I take it is you have to find these
duties in State law, is that some States will classify
the same conduct as a felony that another will classify
as a misdemeanor. So that line won't work. And then
some States will make something criminal that other
States won't.
So you’re going to have, depending on
geography, people potentially subject to a 20-year term
because of the particularities of -- of a -- the State
law.
MR. AYER: I agree, Your Honor. That is --
that is a problem with it. And I am not -- I am not
here to endorse that as a satisfactory alternative. I’m
simply saying it’s preferable to some of the others.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you are asking us to
say State law is the reference.
MR. AYER: No, Your Honor, I'm not. I'm
asking the Court -- and that's a confusion in the
question presented. This is a case in which the
government very clearly, and the trial court found, made
no attempt to produce anything other than 1346 as the
source of any Federal disclosure duty. There was no
Federal disclosure duty that they could point to
specifically dealing with disclosure.
The court -- the trial court ended up
focusing -- in fact, I'd like, if I could, to take a
couple of minutes on the procedure to establish sort of
the posture of this case, because I think it may
otherwise be confusing.
Essentially, what we had here was an
indictment that, when filed, in the vaguest of terms, it
alleged as the purpose -- and this is at joint appendix
page 35 -- the purpose of the scheme was for Company A
to agree to provide things of value to the Petitioner to
cause Petitioner to misuse his official authority for
the benefit of Company A. A traditional, simple
allegation of -- of bribery.
And there has never been a question in this
case that if the government thinks it can prove that
case, they are welcome to try. And -- and they can do
that, and in the course of doing that, they have -- it's
certainly open to them to show that the defendant didn't
specifically stand up and make an announcement that he
had submitted a job solicitation to Company A, as he had
submitted solicitations to a half a dozen other
employers, as is perfectly legal under Alaska law. So
all of that is fair game.
But a few days before trial, what ended up
happening here -- and this is where this case comes
from. A few days before trial, first in a trial brief
and thereafter in a motion in limine dealing with
submission of evidence, the government announced that it
wanted to -- to pursue what it called -- what the trial
court called its alternative theory; frankly, we think,
because they couldn't prove their bribery case.
And what they said their theory was, was
that when a public official -- this is in the trial
brief. There’s an almost exact quote, similar, at J.A.
in the joint appendix. "When a public official fails
to disclose the existence of a conflict of interest,
whether required by law to do so or whether required by
fiduciary duty to do so, the public official can be
found guilty of honest services fraud, irrespective of
whether the public official took any action thereafter,
much less a fraudulent or harmful act."
In other words, Mr. Weyhrauch -- Mr.
Weyhrauch sent a solicitation letter, and that's about
the size of it. He sent a solicitation letter to a
number of people. He is a part-time legislator in a
State that has a citizen legislature that has made a
decision specifically not to have its -- its disclosure
rules be unduly burdensome. That's their own specific
language: They don't want them to be unduly burdensome.
They have required certain disclosures. They have not
required others.
The trial court here looked at the
government's motion, which was to put in evidence about
Alaska ethics rules in support of this alternative
theory. And, indeed, the court said -- and the court of
appeals, at 3a of the -- of the Pet. App. said that the
evidence was exclusively to pursue this alternative
theory that all you needed to do was fail to disclose in
breach of a fiduciary duty, and, bingo, if you go on
doing your job, you have committed honest services
fraud.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you have no objection
to what they call the quid pro quo theory; that is, I --
I want you to hire me after I leave the legislature, and
in return, I'm going to see what I can do to keep the
tax level low on the --
MR. AYER: Absolutely right, Your Honor.
And, in fact, if there is any doubt about that, all you
need to do is read at page 36a in the -- in the petition
appendix, where the court says exactly where the case
stands after his ruling.
He says at the end of his order, "This
leaves the United States to prove the honest services
fraud charges in this case based on violations of the
law other than a duty to disclose defendant's dealings
with VECO."
They can pursue any theory they want that --
that is a legitimate theory. They just can't come in
and say: You breached a duty to disclose. Alaska law
doesn't require that you disclose. There’s no Federal
statute saying you have to disclose. It's just implicit
in the concept of honest services that you needed to
disclose this. Now, basically, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's what the statute
says.
MR. AYER: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's what the statute
says.
MR. AYER: Well, it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It says "honest services."
MR. AYER: Well, what happened here is that
the Ninth Circuit reversed the court of -- the court of
appeals excluded the evidence, which was offered only in
pursuit of that theory. Why? Because it said: I don't
have a State law violation; I don't have a clear Federal
law violation; the only way I can do this is by
invocation of Federal common law. And then he said, for
a variety of reasons, citing some cases: This is not
something I'm going to do; I think it's inappropriate.
The Ninth Circuit reversed, and the Ninth
Circuit essentially said -- and it's very much like what
I heard this morning from government's counsel -- that
section 1346 reinstated the pre-McNally law, including
all of its wonderful dicta and -- and wild phrases about
duties that exist, that nondisclosure -- and I think
this is even highly dubious; in fact, I think it’s
flatly wrong -- that within that body of law,
nondisclosure of material information -- and this is
just standing alone. It's not nondisclosure in the
context of, I'm defrauding you; I'm tricking you out of
money, or I'm tricking you out of some duty that I
really -- sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I understand them to be
saying nondisclosure of a conflict of interest, so they
are a little bit more --
MR. AYER: Well, I think that's right. I
think that's -- I think that's what -- and obviously
there is the materiality requirement, as the government
has said. But -- but as --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why don't you take
them at their face, which is, they are saying it has to
be a nondisclosure of a conflict of interest that's
material?
MR. AYER: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I think that's what --
MR. AYER: Well, that’s right.
MR. AYER: -- they said earlier, and that's
what I'm understanding them to say now.
MR. AYER: No, I think you are right, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So let's take it from
there.
MR. AYER: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why is that --
MR. AYER: Well, I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- not a limiting
principle?
MR. AYER: I think the -- the problem is
that if you -- if you ask the question in the context of
this pure nondisclosure theory, the materiality, as the
-- as the government articulated it here today and as I
think they have articulated it in their brief, was
whether it's reasonably likely to affect the decision of
the relevant whoever, the relevant person.
Now, as -- as Justice Breyer, I think,
indicated, it's very easy to talk about materiality when
you are talking about deception or concealment as a –-
as a method of doing someone out of another thing.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's -- it's much easier
in the public sector, I agree with you, to --
MR. AYER: But I'm -- but --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- to talk about it in
the -- I'm sorry. In the private sector, it's easier to
talk about.
MR. AYER: But I'm talking -- I mean,
I -- I can -- I can well understand the concept of
bribery, say, where a public official has a duty to
award contracts to the lowest competent bidder, and
instead, he takes a bribe, and he awards the contract to
someone else. He -- you know, I can accept the notion
easily that he has defrauded -- in those terms, he has
defrauded the public out of its right to have him do
that job.
The materiality of a nondisclosure in that
setting is -- is coherent in the context of what he did
wrong. In other words, I hid the fact that I took a
bribe. I took the money in cash. I -- I put it in the
freezer.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I’m not sure that --
that whether he did it with disclosure or nondisclosure,
what would make the nondisclosure more meaningful?
Meaning, it's taking the bribe, whether he discloses it
or not --
MR. AYER: Well, but there are also --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- and if he gets up on
the floor of -- of the legislature and says: You know,
I am going to vote for this bill because somebody paid
me money, he disclosed it. It doesn't make it any
better.
MR. AYER: Well, I don't know if it does or
not. I mean, I guess there is a fraud requirement here.
And if somebody actually does that openly, I don't know
if you can argue that he didn't -- that he didn't commit
fraud. But I don't want to push that, because that’s
not something I have any interest in -- in promoting.
(Laughter.)
MR. AYER: But, in -- in any event, he
certainly took a bribe. But the -- but the point I am
making is that the nondisclosure, in the abstract --
and that's what the government is charging here -- is
impossible to evaluate the materiality of. So --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I think they’re
saying -- which I am getting gradually --
MR. AYER: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: I think what he’s saying
is: First, we know what bribery is; we can deal with
that one. Second, we know what kickbacks are; we can
deal with that one.
And what he means by the honest services
other than that is, imagine a list of 5 million bits of
honest service that a workman has to perform for his
employer. Now, on that list, there might be 35
requirements to disclose something where the interest of
the employer goes -- employee goes the other way.
And he's saying it violates the statute not
to do that in circumstances where the employee knows
that the failure to disclose will, in fact, lead the
employer, to whom he should have disclosed it, to make a
significant decision; namely, that decision to avoid
which was the reason he didn't disclose it.
MR. AYER: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, I think what he is
saying is that’s rather precise. That fits with what
was there before, and therefore, all the government is
saying is: Now we have those three things. If you
didn't quite -- I didn't quite get that out of the
brief, but that may be my fault. All right? So anyway,
it was probably there; when I go back, I'll see it. And
those are the three things.
So he's saying: You see? It doesn't matter
the source as long as there is a clear legal obligation,
which could come from corporation law, for the employee
to disclose the conflict in this situation. I think
that's what it is.
Well, and so what's your response to that?
MR. AYER: Well, I think -- I mean, I could
argue with that, but I don't need to, because our
principal submission, Your Honor, is that -- that we win
this case because there is no clear duty to disclose.
And we win it because --
JUSTICE BREYER: You are saying, I take it,
that there was no duty in Alaska criminal law,
disclosure law, to disclose. I think you might find in
a treatise on agency that there is a duty to disclose.
MR. AYER: Well, there is no Alaska law --
it’s absolutely clear and it is not disputed here. The
the trial court ruled there’s no duty in Alaska law to
disclose whatever --
JUSTICE BREYER: Not even in the Uniform
Commercial Code or the --
MR. AYER: Well, one of the things -- well,
the government certainly didn't offer anything other
than what it offered, and the court looked at it and the
court said there’s no duty -- he went through several
pages of saying there is no duty to disclose here, and
the government did not appeal. The government didn't
challenge that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me just ask you --
MR. AYER: The government said: Well, it
doesn't matter.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I’m learning something
about the case that I didn't understand before. Are you
agreeing that if there were a duty to disclose exactly
what happened in this case, that then the statute would
have been violated?
MR. AYER: I'm not -- I'm not, Your Honor.
What I would do is bump the -- bump the inquiry to the
next level, which is where the Court was earlier today.
You then have to go to the question about what kinds of
duties would suffice.
My point is quite simple, and I don't think
it's evasive. You must have some duty --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I thought you were arguing
that a duty to disclose could never qualify.
MR. AYER: I -- well, I -- you could argue
that. I don't think -- you certainly don't need to
assume that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm trying to figure out
what your position is, not what you could argue.
MR. AYER: Well, my position is that you
must have some duty, and there’s no duty here other than
46.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But if you then -- but if
you do have some duty, would the statute have been
violated on these -- on these facts?
MR. AYER: You --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If there were a duty to
disclose the negotiations of this prospective employer
or --
MR. AYER: Well, would you have -- you would
have to ask -- you would have to ask a couple of
questions, I think, further. You would have to ask:
What kind of a duty is it?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, it's a duty to
disclose those facts to the legislature.
MR. AYER: With a criminal penalty attached?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I --
MR. AYER: Well, I think it matters, Your
Honor, because I think what you get into, when you are
evaluating whether a duty is sufficient, is you get into
a clear statement --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But your position is not
that there’s no duty; it's that there is not a duty with
sufficiently severe penalties? Is that what your
position is?
MR. AYER: No, the point I’m making is
all about -- it's all about this Court's clear statement
rule. It's all about, when are we going to take
Congress, by using 28 very vague words, to have decided
to mix up and confuse an existing system of rules.
Let's say it's a State ethical process where
there’s an administrative penalty. Maybe the maximum
penalty is a $100 fine; maybe the maximum penalty is
censure. I talked about contracts earlier. There’s
all kinds of regimes of rules and duties that we create
in society. Some of them are not even created by
government. Some of them are created by professional
associations, where if you are a member you owe a duty
to the professional association.
Which of these are we going to say are
duties of sufficient moment -- and then there’s all of
the -- the common law corporate fiduciary duties. There
-- there’s a whole array of duties. And the question of
which will suffice is not an easy question.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But that is not a -- your
position is not that there be no duty to disclose; you
are saying there is not a duty to disclose of sufficient
moment to justify criminal penalties.
MR. AYER: I -- I don't -- that's one way to
say it, sufficient moment, or of a character that makes
it appropriate.
I would say this: I think if the Court were
to go down the road and think in terms of, well, the
duties need to be criminal, and if they are criminal,
then they at least are duties that the entity that
created them -- it's (a) a government entity, it's a
government norm, it has criminal consequences, and that
-- that government body thought this conduct was
important enough to give criminal penalties to, maybe –-
I don't -- I can't judge this, but maybe the Court would
look at that and say: Well, certainly, maybe we are
comfortable with thinking that Congress, with these
wonderful 28 words, actually meant to make the breach of
that criminal duty punishable under this statute.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: One of your arguments --
an important argument in your brief is the -- the
Federal balance, apart from vagueness for a moment --
MR. ESTRADA: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- which was the lurking
problem here. You say it should be State law, because
--
then the Federal courts would at least tell States that
they can't enforce their own law strictly enough.
But if it's Federal law, then the Federal
government tells the States: Well, regardless of your
standards, we have our standards. I don't see much to
choose from in this --
MR. AYER: Well, I’m not sure I understand
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- in those -- those two
alternatives.
MR. AYER: -- your question, Your Honor. I
-- it’s certainly not our position that, for example, it
would be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You say if there’s a
State law prohibition --
MR. AYER: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- then this statute
applies. But then -- then the Federal government is
telling the States: Well, we don't like the way you
enforce your laws; we're going to do it.
MR. AYER: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So it seems to me there's
not much to choose between -- between the two arguments.
MR. AYER: Well, I guess the one thing I
want to make real clear is that -- that we are in no way
arguing that, for example, someone who violates the
Hobbs Act and -- and does it by using the mail and
otherwise satisfies the fraud provision, the fraud
requirement of the mail fraud statute and the mailing
requirement, we are certainly not here contending that
you couldn't prosecute him if you wanted to under this
statute. We’re not arguing this is only State law
violations, in any way.
The point is, there's got to be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then I don't
understand your question presented. I thought the
question presented is: Must the government prove the
defendant violated a disclosure duty imposed by State
law?
What you've been arguing isn't in sync with
what I thought the question presented was: Must you
look for the duty to State law?
MR. AYER: Your Honor, there’s a story
there which I won't bore you with much of, but that's a
question that the government rewrote and the Court
adopted and I actually filed a motion. We filed a
motion suggesting a small insert, and the small insert,
which was not adopted, was the point that when there is
no Federal statute requiring disclosure -- in other
words, the facts of this case, if you take them and
internalize them, make that an accurate question
presented, but it's only an accurate question because
the government made no effort to come up with a Federal
disclosure requirement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you are asking for a
State law reference, and that brings up the problem of
the variety of State law. And we do have in the mail
fraud property area a decision, the Cleveland
decision --
MR. AYER: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- that says: Don't look
to how the States define property.
MR. AYER: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There should be a uniform
Federal definition. Why -- if we have done that, the
mail fraud statute in -- in connection with property,
why shouldn't we do it also with honest services?
MR. AYER: Well, Your Honor, I think -- I
think this is the situation -- it’s certainly true --
the government cites the Jerome case as well for the
general proposition that you don't take a Federal
statute and just leap off and start applying State law
norms.
But -- but when the inherent nature of the
statute, like this one, which says -- we’re talking
about public officials; mostly we’re talking about
State officials; we’re talking about rights, and
therefore, we’re talking about duties -- most of the
legal duties -- if you are going to be requiring legal
duties, most of the legal duties that a State official
owes are State law duties. He owes them on account of
his role in the State government.
Plus, we are talking about the Federal
government, the Federal criminal statute, injecting
itself into the relationship of State officials with
their citizens and their government. And so the notion
that you -- you know, there's the De Sylva case from
56, there's the Kamen case, the Brosnan case -- these
are all cases where the Court has recognized a
sensitivity about there are times when it makes sense
to look to, or at least consider as one of the elements,
State law norms.
And that's really all we are saying here, is
that State law rules, perhaps, could be sufficient. But
I want to just emphasize, again, we are not here -- I’m
-- I’m less helpful to you than perhaps I should be, but
we have a case to argue.
And our case should win on the simple ground
that the government has cited no real direct, you
know, disclosure obligation. All they have cited, and
all they want to rely on, are the words of 1346.
Now, that violates this Court's clear
statement rule, going in and messing around with
Alaska's existing rules of when you have to disclose and
when you don't.
Can Congress really have thought about that
and meant to do that? I'm sure not.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if there's a statute
that prohibits a legislator from engaging in certain
conduct and attaches a significant penalty to it, but
there is no statute that requires the disclosure of the
conduct?
MR. AYER: Well, there's -- there's an
argument to be made that the -- that the government
could pursue, and I don't want to say they could, but if
it's a criminal statute, there’s an argument the
government could pursue their case on that theory.
It's not a disclosure theory. It's a theory
about -- you know, it's like a bribe. It's like, the
State said you can't do X; you did X, and you
fraudulently did X --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me give you this
example: Take the Judge Holzer case we all know about.
Suppose, in 49 States, it always violates State law, but
there’s some State that has a special rule that, unless
the bribery exceeds $1,000, there’s no violation.
Would -- could he be prosecuted in the 49th State?
MR. AYER: Well, I think -- the first thing
I want to say is that I think that is counterfactual,
and they were talking about bribery. Bribery is
basically flatly illegal in every State.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But if it's not illegal
MR. AYER: If it's not illegal --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- in the State I'm asking
you about?
MR. AYER: If it's not illegal, then I would
say that there has to be -- the conduct he engaged in
must be illegal under some law or it -- he didn't breach
a duty.
JUSTICE STEVENS: It does not have to be
Alaska law, then?
MR. AYER: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE STEVENS: In this case, it does not
have to be Alaska law, then?
MR. AYER: It wouldn't have to be Alaska
law. It has got to be some law, and it can't be 1346.
The other problem with it, I want to say
quickly and then sit down, is -- is this is making
Federal common law. This is courts coming in and
saying: You must disclose this and this and this, in
these circumstances and not in those.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But I'm just trying -- if
it's -- it’s illegal in 47 States, but not in the State
in which the prosecution is brought, you say the Federal
rule could not apply?
MR. AYER: I would say that -- that -- yes,
that is my answer. And my answer is that because what
you have to find is that this person breached a duty.
If what he did was perfectly legal under the State law
where he was, just hypothetical -- hard to imagine -- if
he's committing bribery. Hard to imagine. Not true in
reality, but if that were true, he hasn't violated any
duty there.
Is there a Federal duty that that act of
taking a bribe violates? Well, if there is, then you
can prosecute it, and if there is not, then you can't.
And what I'm saying is, you can't make up a duty out of
words in 1346.
If I could reserve the rest of my time, Your
Honor?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Dreeben, welcome back.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL R. DREEBEN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. DREEBEN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
--
It's good to be back.
(Laughter.)
MR. DREEBEN: The one thing that I think the
parties, the cases, and this Court, in its description
of section 1346 in Cleveland, agree on is that the
purpose of the statute was to restore at least some part
of the pre-McNally doctrine of intangible rights.
It, therefore, makes sense to take a look at
the theory of intangible rights violation that Mr. Ayer
very ably argued for the government when he argued the
McNally case.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Before we do that,
Mr. Dreeben --
MR. DREEBEN: And that case -- that theory
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Dreeben, I would like
to ask you about this case particularly: One thing that
the prosecutor did, one thing that the Ninth Circuit
did.
So before we get to your larger theory of
anything, we have a particular case to deal with. We
have an Assistant U.S. Attorney who came to the judge
and said, we have alternate theories of this case. One
is the quid pro quo theory; the other -- and I am
reading from 42 of the appendix -- is that "a public
official can be found guilty of honest services fraud,
irrespective of whether the public official took any act
thereafter." Just the bare nondisclosure.
That was what the Assistant U.S. Attorney
was asking for.
MR. DREEBEN: That's what the document that
you are reading from said, Justice Ginsburg. One week
later, the government filed a clarification of its -- of
its position in response to Petitioner's briefing of the
issue, and this appears at pages 68 and 69 of the joint
appendix.
And in that filing, the government made
clear that its theory, consistent with the theory that I
am arguing here today, is that when the legislator takes
official action having an undisclosed conflict of
interest, that's when he violates the honest services
statute under the nondisclosure theory.
We are not here to urge that there is a
general duty of disclosure that is separate and apart
from any official act that the official takes. We are
not here to argue that there’s a free-standing Federal
duty of disclosure that applies in all cases, regardless
of the other elements of the mail fraud statute.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then you must agree that
the Ninth Circuit was wrong, at least in this
particular -- this -- I'm now reading from 19a. One is
bribe, and that's -- everyone seems to agree that that
could come within the statute.
The second is (2) nondisclosure of
material information. Period. That's got to be wrong.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
think that’s -- that’s a shorthand summary of the
nondisclosure theory. The more accurate summary of the
government's theory is on page 20a, on the first full
paragraph that begins with the bracketed 9.
And it says, "Here, Weyhrauch allegedly
voted and took other official acts on legislation at the
direction of VECO while engaged in undisclosed
negotiations for future legal work from VECO."
And then it goes on to say, "These
allegations describe an undisclosed conflict of interest
and could also support an inference of a quid pro quo.”
Furthermore, Petitioner --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. I have been
trying to find out what you were referring to on pages
to 69.
MR. DREEBEN: On the bottom of page 68,
Justice Scalia, there’s a italicized word, "first."
And it describes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. DREEBEN: -- the more detailed theory
that the government is elaborating, and then on page 69,
it says, quote, "By introducing amendments to and voting
on legislation that each defendant knew would affect
Company A, an entity with whom each defendant either had
or was negotiating for a financial relationship, each
defendant knowingly breached that duty of disclosure."
So I think the government tied up the
nondisclosure to the official act and that the Ninth
Circuit was not under an incorrect impression about
that. And more fundamentally, Petitioner says -- I
believe it's in footnote 6 of his opening brief -- that
that's not the issue before the Court, how to instruct
the jury on the duty of disclosure.
That's an issue that will arise, and I think
Petitioner's counsel said this to the district court --
it's in a page of the joint appendix that I don't have
at my fingertips -- that's a matter for jury
instructions. And we agree.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But this is an opinion
that’s going to govern district judges in the Ninth
Circuit. So I take it that your answer is that
nondisclosure of material information certainly is not
enough --
MR. DREEBEN: No, it's not enough, Justice
Ginsburg, not standing alone. It's when the official
takes action that furthers his undisclosed interest
without telling the decision-making body to which he
belongs that he becomes a fraud.
It's just like O'Hagan, Justice Ginsburg.
When O'Hagan, the lawyer, took the information from his
firm, posed as a loyal employee, the partner who comes
to work every day just doing his job, it became a fraud
when he took that information and used it in his own
securities trading.
Here, too, this is not a pure nondisclosure
theory. This is another form of corruption. It's the
kind of --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What if he had voted
against the legislation?
MR. DREEBEN: If he did not further his
undisclosed interests, then he does not breach the duty
that the government alleges.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it's not merely the
taking official action; it's taking official action that
benefits him?
MR. DREEBEN: Correct. And --
JUSTICE ALITO: I imagine -- I'm sorry. I
imagine legislators must vote on all sorts of things
that have a -- an impact on their own financial
interests or the financial interests of their family or
associates.
For example, suppose this -- the Petitioner
was a practicing attorney. Suppose he’s voting on an
overhaul of the rules of civil procedure, and some of
them may benefit him and his practice. Or suppose he’s
voting on a new tax code, and the provisions may benefit
him or his family or his associates in a -- in a variety
of ways.
Don't you need some kind of a disclosure
code to separate the things that have to be disclosed
from the things that don't have to be disclosed, because
they are just too common?
MR. DREEBEN: You -- you could do it that
way, Justice Alito, but the way that the mail fraud
statute does it is it looks for the kind of personal
conflicting financial interest that, in the universal
view of the common law, raised a problem.
Those are interests that are different from
the public at large and that are not widely held by a
large segment of the community.
JUSTICE BREYER: And this is supposed to be
something that the average citizen who works there just
knows all about?
MR. DREEBEN: I think that when we are
talking about State legislative officers, when we are
talking about public officials, they know that they are
fiduciaries. They have a set of fiduciary obligations.
But to answer most directly, Justice Breyer, your
concern, which I believe goes to notice, and whether a
State legislator can be held criminally liable for
violating a standard stated as I have just stated it,
the government must prove in a criminal case an intent
to defraud. That means that the government must show
that the defendant sought to deceive the body to which
he belongs.
JUSTICE BREYER: He intended not to disclose
something, right.
MR. DREEBEN: And that he knew he was
breaching a duty. He does not need to know the legal
source of the duty. That’s conventional law as in
Bryan v. United States. You can know that you are
acting illegally without knowing that it’s Federal law,
State law, or local law --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, okay. I see.
MR. DREEBEN: -- but the government needs to
show that. And that means that in the typical case, the
government will point to some external standard, be it a
State criminal law, a State civil law, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But what if -- what
if that external standard imposed penalties vastly
different from the mail fraud statute? For example,
what if Alaska had a law here that said you must
disclose this, and if you fail to disclose it, you are
subject to 6 months in jail or a $500 fine?
MR. DREEBEN: Well, there’s --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's a light
sentence because the disclosure obligations are
confusing, but -- and then the Federal prosecutor comes
along and says, well, you -- you are going away for 20
years because this violates 1346.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, we would have to show,
first of all, that he knew that he was breaching a legal
duty.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, he knows that
he should disclose this, and --
MR. DREEBEN: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. DREEBEN: Then my answer is we live in
a dual system in which citizens are governed by and
accountable both by their States and by the Federal
government.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, you have no
problem with the idea that the State law, the source of
the duty to disclose, imposes a penalty of 6 months,
and the Federal law you say you can still go after him
not only 20 years but an additional 20 years?
MR. DREEBEN: But this is fundamental to the
government's position here, Mr. Chief Justice. It's not
imposing a criminal penalty for violation of the State
law duty. There is an independent Federal duty.
Congress was well aware that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Please articulate it
again for me. I -- I am -- I don't think I'm being
thick. I’m trying to understand exactly what that duty
is, because I think I just heard something that doesn't
make sense to me. You are saying if there’s a State
duty to disclose, a Federal duty to disclose, if they
are legal duties, that would violate it, and now
something else?
MR. DREEBEN: Well, Justice Sotomayor, what
I am trying to say to this Court this morning is that
what 1346 reinstated was the notion that if fiduciaries
have a duty not to further their own personal
conflicting financial interests by taking official
action, it becomes a Federal crime only when there is
both materiality and intent to defraud.
And to prove the intent to defraud element
that the individual intended to deprive the citizens of
their right of honest services, the government has to
know -- show that he knew he was breaching a fiduciary
duty. And the government can do that by offering
evidence, for example, that State law precluded the
action that he took -- the underlying action in this
case by Mr. Weyhrauch was prohibited by State law.
You are not permitted to vote on legislation
when you were negotiating for employment.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask you right at
that point: Does the prohibited action, namely, voting
-- does that vote have to be contrary to -- serve the
interest of the other party?
MR. DREEBEN: Yes, it does, Justice Stevens.
He has to be furthering his undisclosed interest. And
in this case he did it --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, now -- now think of
that answer -- complete that answer, if you can.
MR. DREEBEN: He did it in violation of a
State substantive duty, and the government's burden
will be to show he knew he was acting wrongfully.
And often we will do that by pointing to State law and
saying he violated State law or he violated an ethics
code that attached to him as a fiduciary. If not, we
are going to have to find some evidence of
circumvention, structuring transactions, nominee
accounts, surreptitious meetings, things that indicate
that an individual knows that he is acting fraudulently.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, go back to -- I'm
trying to get you back to your general answer that you
wanted to give. And I -- I -- remember my list of 6,000
things --
MR. DREEBEN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which I made up, and
these are all the things that --
MR. DREEBEN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- an employee owes an
employer.
MR. DREEBEN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, some of them -- you
have taken out three -- no bribes, no kickbacks and no
conflicts of interest where that’s defined in the
narrow way you’ve defined it. You have to know you
are not disclosing, you know you have the obligation,
you know action will be taken on it, and the action will
be taken to help somebody else or to the detriment of
the employer or something like that. Right?
MR. DREEBEN: Something like that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Something like that. Okay.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: So, now, I think, well, I
go back to Justice Scalia's language of that statute.
And I say, oh, my goodness, why did you pick these
three? I mean, I can easily -- I make up comical
examples because they illustrate the point.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, Justice Breyer, I --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I don’t mean them to be
comical. Look, think of a person who is really angry at
his employer and he changes all the direction signs
around in the building to mislead him so that the
employer will miss the key meeting and make the wrong
decision.
MR. DREEBEN: Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, why not that one?
MR. DREEBEN: -- I really don't think that
this Court needs to worry about that as a type of honest
services prosecution, because this was a defined
universe of cases --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no. That's not my
point. I don't believe the way you’ve interpreted the
statute that you could or would -- could prosecute what
I just made up as a funny example.
MR. DREEBEN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I can make up thousands
of examples from the list, and I think Justice Scalia's
original point was something like, well, you've taken
some words, 28 words that cover 6,000 things, and out
of those 6,000 things, you have picked, perhaps
randomly, 3 which --
MR. DREEBEN: Well, I -- I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- you say it covers.
MR. DREEBEN: To say that we picked them
randomly --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, you picked them --
all right.
MR. DREEBEN: -- ignores the story of
McNally. And I think that if I could take a minute to
walk the Court through the legal history that brought us
to this, I think it would be helpful.
Before McNally, there was a body of case law
that made very clear that there was a substratum
fiduciary duty -- and I’ll limit this to the public
official context for now, because that’s the most
critical and important context. If you look at the
common law in every State, public officials are
fiduciaries. The core obligation of a fiduciary is the
duty of loyalty, the duty not to advance your personal
interests at the expense of the government who you
serve.
That core understanding of the duty of
loyalty informed the honest services cases that arose in
the courts of appeals, and for the most part, they
involved, as their core set of violations, bribes, in
which somebody is selling his office, so he’s clearly
not serving the public; kickbacks, where the individual
is profiting at the expense of the government,
oftentimes in his official capacity, and sometimes not
profiting at the expense of the government, because the
government couldn't be harmed in a pecuniary way by the
kickback; and undisclosed conflicts of interest when the
official takes action to further that interest. And
that’s --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why didn't Congress say
that instead of -- instead of -- of setting up this mush
of language that doesn't even mention McNally, does not
use a phrase that any opinion pre-McNally used? That --
that phrase does not appear, as I understand, it in any
of the cases.
MR. DREEBEN: Justice -- Justice Scalia, the
phrase "intangible rights" is at the center of the
McNally majority opinion. The language "honest
services" is in the McNally dissent and in many of the
pre-McNally opinions. For those --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is a citizen
supposed to do? He’s supposed to go back and read all
those pre-McNally cases?
MR. DREEBEN: Well, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why would it have been so
difficult for Congress to say no bribes, no kickbacks,
and -- and -- and the third thing, however you want to
describe it?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, I think it's --
if -- if -- if you have a -- a principle that the
citizen is supposed to know when he’s violating a
criminal statute, this is -- I mean, it is just too
much.
MR. DREEBEN: I think we would all agree,
Justice Scalia, that had Congress taken your counsel, I
would not be here today --
(Laughter.)
MR. DREEBEN: -- defending what the Congress
attempted to do. But I think that Congress viewed it as
a permissible and in some ways clearer way of getting to
the result it wanted, to point to the body of case law
with the recognition that it was understood in its core
aspects to cover what I have just described. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought there was a
principle that a citizen is supposed to be able to
understand the criminal law that was around even before
Justice Scalia.
MR. DREEBEN: I understand that, Justice
Breyer --
(Laughter.)
MR. DREEBEN: -- but this would not -- this
is not an isolated area where the Court has recognized
that criminal sanctions need to take into account
decisional law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought the
principle was that a citizen has to be able to
understand the law, and if he can't, then the law is
invalid.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, I think the principle is
that the Court has recognized -- and it has done so most
prominently in the Sherman Act and in the civil rights
statutes, 18 U.S.C., Section 241 and 242, that these are
broad statutes with general language, and in order to be
made susceptible of criminal punishment, you need two
things.
You need clarifying judicial decisions that
articulate the rights, and you need a standard of
scienter that will allow the government to convict only
those people who are on fair notice and act with a --
the bad purpose --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Number one, I am -- I am
not going to draw any generalities from the civil rights
statutes. I mean, this is an area unto itself, and,
number two, the Sherman Act explicitly --
"explicitly" -- clearly confers upon courts a common
law, a common law ability to define the crime.
And that doesn't appear from this statute.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, I wasn't citing the
Sherman Act as an example of formulating a common law of
crimes, but there is only one Due Process Clause,
Justice Scalia, so if it is constitutional to prosecute
under the civil rights statutes and under the Sherman
Act, then it is constitutional for this Court to divine
from the pre-McNally case law principles and to
articulate them.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the Sherman Act
criminalizes price fixing. You see, I can say that in
two words, intentional price fixing.
Do you think what we have been talking about
this morning can be reduced to anything like those two
words?
MR. DREEBEN: I think I’ve got it down to
around eight.
(Laughter.)
MR. DREEBEN: Let me -- let me just mention,
in the civil rights area, it may not answer your
concerns, Justice Scalia, but I think the Court should
know that, in the United States v. Kozminski, the Court
recognized -- and I am going to quote here -- that,
"Congress intended the statute to incorporate, by
reference, a large body of potentially evolving federal
law."
And the Court recognized that that was a
dilemma because you cannot have citizens criminally
prosecuted for evolving law of which the citizens have
no notice. And the Court's response was to say that,
when the right has been made specific by a decision of
this Court and there’s the requisite level of scienter,
there is no due process problem in prosecuting --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There’s no such thing as a
vague law, so long as this Court says, oh, what the
law -- the law -- it’s absolutely unclear what the law
means, so long as this Court says, oh, we think the law
means -- what do you want to pick -- bribery, then --
then it's okay. Right?
MR. DREEBEN: Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that the system we have,
that Congress can say, nobody shall do any bad things?
MR. DREEBEN: That's not what this --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it comes to this Court,
and this Court says, bad things means bribery. And that
law is a valid law, right?
MR. DREEBEN: That's not what this law says,
and that's not what this Court has done in response to
other criminal law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The principle that you’re
arguing for, that -- that a law that is, on
its face, inherently vague can somehow be rendered
valid to the citizens by a decision of this Court?
MR. DREEBEN: But that’s common. This
Court takes common law terms of art, such as fraud, and
it reads into them elements that are not on their face
on the basis of the common law.
Take, for example, 18 U.S.C. 1111, which is
the federal murder statute. It uses the phrase "malice
aforethought."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that’s a
familiar common law term. “Honest services” is not.
MR. DREEBEN: But it is a term of art that
had reference to a specific body of case law that could
not have been given a higher degree of prominence than
it was by this Court's decision in McNally, which
acknowledged that body of law, rejected it because it
said the mail fraud statute did not protect intangible
rights.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm not remembering.
Was the phrase "honest services" used in Lemire?
MR. DREEBEN: I don't recall, either,
Mr. Chief Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MR. DREEBEN: -- whether the phrase --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you say it was a body
of law. It wasn't about a body of law. We said it was
wrong. So Congress is not here referring to some
established common law crimes at all.
It's referring to a mistaken series of
decisions by the courts of appeals.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, I can't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's quite different
from -- from harking back to a common law term, such as
fraud.
MR. DREEBEN: In McNally, this Court said
that body of law was not a valid implementation of the
mail fraud statute, and it invited Congress to come back
and legislate if it wanted to protect intangible rights,
and Congress did that in a way that doesn't have the
commendable clarity of the statute that you just drafted
for us, Justice Scalia, but it does refer -- and I
think, for those members of the Court who read
legislative history, legislative history was replete
with references to the key cases on which we rely here,
such as United States v. Mandel and United
States v. Margiotta.
And it said this is a term of art. We know
that this is a term of art. It's been shaped by the
judiciary, but it doesn't just sit there as a
pre-standing duty that had no antecedents in the law
whatsoever.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The problem is that --
that, even if the U.S. attorney got it right in the end,
if the U.S. attorney could think that all that's
involved is nondisclosure, even if no action is taken
thereafter, the U.S. attorney could write that down
twice, that suggests that this statute is open to a high
degree of interpretation.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
don't think that the Court should decide whether
Congress validly accepted this Court's invitation to
reinstate an important public corruption principle by
looking to what one United States attorney, one set of
federal prosecutors said in a pleading that was filed on
very short notice and that was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it's -- it's not --
it's not just one. One of the briefs in one or the
other of these cases describes the great variety of
“pushing the envelope” prosecutions that the Justice
Department has, indeed, pursued, and they are all over
the place.
And if the Justice Department can't figure
out what -- what is embraced by this statute, I don't
know how you can expect the average citizen to figure it
out.
MR. DREEBEN: Well, this body of law evolved
post-McNally, without this Court's intervention and
guidance to provide clarification. I think that the
core understanding of what honest services is may have
been strayed from in some of those cases, and some
courts of appeals affirmed it.
That doesn't mean that the statute is vague.
This Court accepted review in Cleveland v. United States
because the courts of appeals were divided on whether
defrauding a government agency of a license constituted
a deprivation of money or property. The U.S. attorneys
on one side of the split were very aggressively pushing
that theory. This Court held that it wasn't a valid
interpretation.
I think that it's the role of this Court and
the -- within the proper disposition of this Court's
authority to attempt to figure out what Congress did,
and then to implement it in accordance with doctrines
that are standard tools of the trade here -- rule of
lenity, concerns about federalism -- and recognize that
there is a core that Congress was looking at in the pre-
McNally cases, and that that core can be implemented
consistent with concerns about notice and clarity of
definition, without either creating a statute that is
totally freeform or without invalidating Congress's
effort to respond to the Court's invitation in McNally.
And, if I could turn to the question
presented in this case, which is whether State law
duties need to be violated, State law disclosure
obligations need to be violated in order to sustain a
valid mail fraud prosecution.
The pre-McNally cases and McNally itself
answers that because, in the McNally decision, this
Court acknowledged that the government's theory of
prosecution was that McNally and his cohorts were
accepting kickbacks in the form of commissions on
insurance contracts.
And the courts recognized that the
government's theory was they failed to disclose their
interest to persons in State government who were in a
position to take action with respect to that
information.
And the Court specifically said: We should
assume that there was no violation of any State law
obligations in holding those interests or no violation
of any State law duty to disclose.
That was the theory of prosecution that the
Court recognized the government was pursuing, and it was
entirely consistent with the pre-McNally cases, Mandel
and Margiotta, which were repeatedly cited in the
legislative history.
And I won't take the Court's time to read
language -- we’ve cited it in our brief -- where those
cases clearly said no State law duty was required to be
breached in order to state a prosecution.
There is still protection in this statute
against prosecutions of citizens without notice because,
as I said earlier, the government has to prove a
violation of the duty to disclose by the officials
taking action to further his undisclosed personal
interest, and the citizen cannot be prosecuted and
convicted without the government being able to show that
he knew that he was violating a duty to disclose.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, let me ask a quick
question here. I notice, in the Skilling case, the
first question is whether the statute requires the
government to prove the defendant's conduct was intended
to achieve private gain, et cetera, and if not, whether
the statute is unconstitutionally vague.
Now, does that first question give the
government an opportunity sufficient to say whatever it
wants in its brief about the constitutional question?
MR. DREEBEN: Justice Breyer, until
Mr. Skilling files his brief and explains the kind of
argument that he wants to make, I can't answer you that
question. All I know is that in one of --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So we could
assume that, if you need time, at that time, you could
ask for whatever you wanted to ask for?
MR. DREEBEN: Certainly. And I don't –- the
government is not shying away from the question of
vagueness. The question of vagueness has been raised by
members of this Court as a legitimate concern.
I think it's a legitimate concern. That is
why the government has offered to this Court a theory
based on the prototypical and paradigm pre-McNally cases
that explains what Congress said when it effectively
pointed at that body of law and said those are the
intangible rights that we want to protect.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I have one --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you this
question? You -- you have described the issue in this
case as not merely a nondisclosure, but as you spell it
out, it seems to me it is actually a quid pro quo
theory.
MR. DREEBEN: It doesn't have to be quid pro
quo, Justice Stevens, because even if Mr. Weyhrauch had
not made an agreement with VECO that he was going to
vote the way that VECO wanted him to, and the government
does allege that, but even if he didn't do that, he knew
that he had a personal financial interest in securing
employment with VECO.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but you say that in
order for the violation to be complete, he must follow
up by voting in the interest of the company rather than
the polls?
MR. DREEBEN: He has to take official
action. That's where the breach of his duty and loyalty
–-
JUSTICE STEVENS: And it has to be a
specific kind of official action.
his undisclosed interest. And to criminally prosecute
him, he has to know that’s what he is doing, and just
to top it off, there are materiality ingredients both in
the conflict of interest and in the implied
misrepresentation of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you say he violated
State law? I -- I thought that the -- that the court
found that he didn't. You say he violated State law
when he voted.
MR. DREEBEN: Substantive State law
prohibited him from taking official action with respect
to a company whose interests would be benefited when he
was negotiating employment --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought they -- I thought
it was accepted in this case that -- that there was no
violation of Alaska law.
MR. DREEBEN: It’s accepted Justice Scalia
that there’s no duty to disclose under State law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I see.
MR. DREEBEN: That is solely what Petitioner
argues as being the deficiency in the government's case;
there’s no State law duty to disclose.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. DREEBEN: My response is naturally
there’s no duty under State law to disclose as a matter
of express State law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, even --
MR. DREEBEN: State laws prohibit --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even after he
discloses he still couldn't vote that way, so he's
supposed to vote against it even though he thinks it's a
good thing for the State to do?
MR. DREEBEN: He's supposed to abstain.
When he has a conflict of interest, he is supposed to
note that conflict and he's supposed to abstain. And we
argued --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what if a
public official -- you said in response to Justice
Stevens that this actionable conduct has to benefit the
defendant's interest. What if his interest is a
particular policy contrary to that of his employer? In
other words, he is a subordinate official. His employer
says, I want you to do this and this to advance our
policy. He doesn't like the policy, so he does
something you can characterize as dishonest that
undermines the policy or advanced a different policy
that he agrees with.
MR. DREEBEN: That's not the sort of theory
of honest services that we're arguing for, Mr. Chief
Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why? Because it
doesn't involve tangible --
MR. DREEBEN: A personal, conflicting
financial interest. It may involve --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Financial.
MR. DREEBEN: That's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It has to involve
financial --
MR. DREEBEN: That's right. These -- the
core of public corruption is about adverse pecuniary
interests or benefits that an official is taking at the
expense of the citizenry by virtue of his position.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, where does the
right to honest services say “financial”?
MR. DREEBEN: I think it says it,
Mr. Chief Justice, by looking at the body of case law
that involved violations of the right of honest services
and seeing that that's what the government was after,
personal conflicting financial interests.
And this is not a subtle or obscure
principle of fiduciary law -- if I might finish my last
sentence.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. DREEBEN: This is a bedrock principle of
the common law that exists in all 50 States, and the
mistake that the lower courts made in the pre-McNally
era was in thinking that the mail fraud statute
protected it, but there was no obscurity whatever that
the fiduciaries owe an obligation of undivided loyalty
to their principal.
That's what this statute is about.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Now, Mr. Ayer, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. AYER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. AYER: Thank you, Your Honor. I have
four quick points I'd like to make.
The first one is that McNally is a case --
there were issues about the jury instructions, but the
basic fact pattern was clear. It was a kickback scheme.
It was illegal under the Kentucky constitution. There’s
no question that if it were charged properly, it
could be convicted, and that's clear I think at page 11
of our yellow brief.
The second point I want to make is that this
talk about whether or not Petitioner violated the
statute about voting when he was in negotiations --
number one, the first answer to that is the government
is perfectly free to prove that case if they want to;
that's not before the Court. That's -- that's a
different theory that they can pursue. It's not the
disclosure theory.
But just by the way, he didn't violate it,
and the reason he didn't violate it, particularly in
light of what Mr. Dreeben has said -- first of all we
don't think he was in negotiations. He sent a letter.
There was never an offer either way. There weren't
negotiations, and that's been something that has been
talked about in the court.
Secondly, he voted; when he voted he
actually ended up voting twice on the bill in a form
that -- that VECO didn't want. So he actually -- and I
learned today -- and this is all, you know, shifting
sands -- that he has to have voted for the -- the way
that the conflicting interest would have had him vote.
So there’s not, I think, a problem there.
If they want to pursue that, go to it. They have every
right to.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You're saying that you’ll
win on the facts, not the theory.
MR. AYER: Yes. Yes, and they have the
right --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But that’s not what we
have to decide.
MR. AYER: -- to pursue it.
And -- and the third point I want to make is
-- is that there is absolutely no doubt about this
question with regard to what -- what the issue was in
the court below. And I would simply direct a few
references to the -- and I’ll read them very quickly.
But 23a -- these are all the district court opinion:
a, the district court says he is dealing with the more
general proposition -- the government's more general
proposition -- that honest services fraud may be proved
by showing a violation of the duty to disclose. Then on
a, the district court says “the proposition advanced
by the United States, that honest services may be proved
by establishing that a public official knowingly
concealed a conflict of interest,” period.
Then, on 36a, at the end the court says, you
can bring any other theory you want other than the
nondisclosure theory. Now, did the government object?
Did the government at any time say, oh, no, that's not
our theory? No. They didn't; they adopted that, and
that's the theory they argued on appeal in the Ninth
Circuit. And that's exactly the theory that the Ninth
Circuit talked about when it has these two forms of core
conduct, one of which is -- is the conduct about failing
to disclose material information, period. Not in doing
anything else, just failing to disclose material
information re a conflict.
Finally, the government in this Court has
itself argued the case in a way that I think concedes
the point. And -- and that is, essentially, if you look
at the main heading in their brief on page 13, their
point is -- they finally say this, and then I think they
contradict themselves elsewhere, but they say in their
heading a "State official's violation of the honest
services statute by taking official action while
intentionally concealing a material conflict of
interest." That's it. No action for --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this question?
We might then say the theory that they described there
is inadequate. But would we then send the case back and
say decide it on the theory that Mr. Dreeben has
explained today?
MR. AYER: No, I think they made their
argument. They lost in the trial court. They are
pursuing this extreme, overreaching theory that -- that
they only can get to by the -- by the extravagant
language in the -- in the pre-McNally cases.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the case in the
