IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MILAVETZ, GALLOP &
MILAVETZ, P.A., ET AL.,
Petitioners
v. : No. 08-1119
UNITED STATES; :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
UNITED STATES, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1225
MILAVETZ, GALLOP & :
MILAVETZ, P.A., ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 1, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR., ESQ., Hartford, Conn.; on behalf
of Milavetz, Gallop & Milavetz, P.A., et al.
WILLIAM M. JAY, ESQ., Assistant to the
Solicitor General, Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; on behalf of the United States.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of Milavetz, Gallop &
Milavetz, P.A., et al. 4
WILLIAM M. JAY, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States 31
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of Milavetz, Gallop &
Milavetz, P.A., et al. 59
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-1119, Milavetz,
Gallop & Milavetz v. United States and United
States v. Milavetz.
Mr. Brunstad.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR.
ON BEHALF OF MILAVETZ, GALLOP &
MILAVETZ, P.A., ET AL.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Section 526(a)(4) is unconstitutional
because it proscribes truthful information about
entirely lawful activity, it whipsaws the attorneys who
are trying to apply it, it creates an impossible
situation for them, and it harms the client.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If it were confined to
unlawful activity and narrowly drawn, do you concede
that such a statute would be constitutional?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Perhaps, Justice Kennedy, but
the real challenge is to actually do that narrowing.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You say "perhaps." Yes or
no? Can Congress by an appropriately, an appropriately
drawn narrow statute, prohibit attorneys from advising,
A, criminal conduct in reference to a bankruptcy; or, B,
civil conduct -- conduct that is improper under the
civil code because it's a fraud on creditors?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Kennedy, if it
were narrowly drawn to apply to criminal activity or
fraudulent activity, yes. Those terms have
well-established meanings. We know how to apply them.
This statute, of course, does not do that.
Now, the government does not defend the
statute as written. The government seeks to rewrite it,
but the manner in which the government seeks to rewrite
the statute really doesn't work under the statutory
terms. We do not have that guidance.
The government in its brief proposes three
different formulations of how it might be narrowed.
None of those work, even if we -- we were to accept any
of those formulations. We don't know what "abusive
conduct" means. The government simply would trade a
First Amendment problem for a vagueness problem. We do
not have --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there's already in
the statute an -- a required attestation from the lawyer
who signs a bankruptcy petition that the petition does
not constitute an abuse. This is 707(b).
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the words are
something like "does not constitute an abuse." So
apparently it has meaning there. Why doesn't -- why
don't we say, well, whatever it means in 707(b), it also
means in 5, whatever it is.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Two reasons, Justice
Ginsburg. First, the 707(b) abuse standard is a
completely different context. It involves gatekeeping
to the access to bankruptcy relief.
The second reason is that Congress -- there
is no indication whatsoever, in the legislative history
or elsewhere, that Congress intended to import the abuse
standard under Section 707 into the 526(a)(4) context.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, again in the
hypothetical context, could Congress enforce by a
statute what it requires in the attestation clause?
MR. BRUNSTAD: No, Justice Kennedy, because
the abuse standard is too nebulous to satisfy, I think,
scrutiny under the First Amendment.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You think the attestation
clause cannot be the basis for sanctioning an attorney.
MR. BRUNSTAD: It can be the basis for
sanctioning an attorney --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, how can that be if
it's too vague.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, I think, Your Honor,
that the gateway to the bankruptcy procedures or
basically provisions, like section 707 or in the Chapter
context, basically are equitable inquiry that looks
into the totality of the circumstances, whether what the
lawyer has done or what the debtor has done -- and
really it looks to what the debtor has done -- would be
such that it would deny access to bankruptcy relief.
Has the debtor engaged in inequitable conduct, engaged
in inequitable conduct in some way that would basically
shut the door to bankruptcy relief?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The attestation clause is
designed to ensure that the attorney has performed in an
ethical and proper way, I take it.
MR. BRUNSTAD: In a sense.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Isn't that one of its
purposes?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think it goes more towards
the attorney checking the information that the debtor
has basically provided in the petition and elsewhere to
make sure that the information that's provided is
accurate and that the bankruptcy petition is not being
proposed in essence for an abusive purpose.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I won't take up too much
more of your argument, but it just seems to me odd that
you can enforce an attestation clause, but not a statute
that does the same thing. I don't understand the
principle for that. You say it's a gateway and it's
designed to facilitate the bankruptcy process. Well,
the government could say the same thing about its
statute.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Except, I think, Your Honor,
that whereas for the purposes of getting into bankruptcy
or staying in bankruptcy is one standard that courts
apply basically on an equitable basis, that analysis --
what Congress did there, it didn't have in mind First
Amendment concerns. It didn't have in mind trying to
narrowly tailor the statutory regime so that lawyers
basically can understand what they are doing in a way
and communicate it to their client.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, Congress often
forgets about the First Amendment, but lawyers don't.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That's true, Your Honor, and
that's the heart of the problem here. The problem here
is that when Congress basically -- first of all,
Congress didn't import the 707(b) standard into
6(a)(4).
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What are the words in
7(b)? I mean, they are both in the statute. What the
lawyer has to attest to is required by statute.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That is true, Justice
Ginsburg. But there is no evidence that Congress, in
the legislative history or otherwise, that Congress
intended the 707{b} standard to be the standard that
governs what the lawyer can tell the client under
section 526 (a)(4).
JUSTICE STEVENS: But isn't there another
problem? Even if Congress didn't think of the problem,
don't we have the duty to construe the statute to avoid
constitutional problems if there is any reasonable basis
for doing so?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Stevens, but
this statute is not reasonable susceptible to the
government's interpretation.
JUSTICE STEVENS: That is an entirely
different argument from the fact that Congress didn't
think of this problem.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That's correct, Justice
Stevens. But the problem here is that what the
government has tried to do is tease out a standard from
the "in contemplation of" language in 526(a)(4), and the
problem is that -- two problems: One, the "in
contemplation of" language only modifies half the
statute, so the "or pay the attorney" prong is not even
addressed by the government's construction. They kind
of ignore that.
The second problem is that the "in
contemplation of" language cannot bear the weight the
government would have it bear.
JUSTICE ALITO: What do you think that
means? What do you think "in contemplation of
bankruptcy" means?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think it means what the
Court said it meant in the Pender case interpreting
section 60(d) of the former Bankruptcy Act of 1898.
That is, whether bankruptcy is likely or imminent; in
contemplation of bankruptcy, taking some action where a
bankruptcy case is imminent or likely.
Now, it appears --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let's say someone goes
to the lawyer and they discuss the person's debt
situation and the decision is made that a bankruptcy
petition is going to be filed at some future date. Do
you think that everything that that person does after
that point is done in contemplation of bankruptcy?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Not necessarily, Justice
Alito?
JUSTICE ALITO: Well then, why not? The
person drives home in contemplation of bankruptcy, the
person has lunch in contemplation of bankruptcy.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, I think that would --
JUSTICE ALITO: Doesn't it mean -- "in
contemplation of bankruptcy" means because of the
expectation of filing a bankruptcy petition later?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think that that would
assume that the filing of the bankruptcy petition looms
entirely in the consciousness of the debtor when the
debtor does everything. But I do -- I do think that the
"in contemplation of" clause, which is also used in
section 529, is a neutral phrase. "In contemplation of"
means nothing more than is the bankruptcy filing likely?
It doesn't have any nefarious, it doesn't have any
abusive context to it at all.
For example, section 329 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. It doesn't mean is
it likely. "In contemplation of" means that the reason
you are doing this is the contemplated bankruptcy. You
don't see any causal connection in that phrase?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I do see a causal connection,
but there is no element of doing something improper in
the language "in contemplation of."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's true. That
may be true enough. But -- but the act must be taken
because you are about to file a bankruptcy petition.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Scalia. But the
government relies and hinges its argument on the abusive
connotation to the "in contemplation of."
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a different
question.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That doesn't exist. So what
the government is trying to do is rewrite the statute by
importing meaning into a phrase that has never been
there and doesn't exist there.
Every time we see the "in contemplation of"
phrase appearing either under the current law or under a
prior law, if there was some element of abuse coupled
with it that was separately stated, and of course there
is no separate statement here.
Now, again I go back to the fact that this
-- the practical effect of section 526(a)(4) is to make
an impossible situation for attorneys. We have two
regimes: One under applicable normal ethical State bar
rules which say you have to give unfettered candid
advice to your client; and this provision which gives
you must give truncated advice; there are thing you
cannot say. But whether you are in one regime or
another depends upon whether the debtor is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is there a -- is there a
difference between unethical and illegal advice?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As an attorney can you
under -- give unethical advice?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, I think so, Justice
Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Under the State rules
you can give unethical advice as a lawyer?
MR. BRUNSTAD: You cannot, no. That is
proscribed by the State rules.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So if you are not
permitted to do so, what in the First Amendment would
otherwise give you that right? I mean, this is a
commercial transaction of sorts. It's a fiduciary duty,
but it's a commercial transaction. They are coming to
you and they are paying you for certain advice, so why
would the person then protect your right to give
unethical advice.
MR. BRUNSTAD: It wouldn't protect your
right to give unethical advice. The problem is that the
statute sweeps within it's scope perfectly truthful
advice about lawful activity.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We are assuming that
it's not read with a limitation with respect to abusive
conduct.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Correct. But just as --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Assuming that is read
into the statute or is viewed as part of "in
contemplation of bankruptcy," what in the First
Amendment would make that be?
MR. BRUNSTAD: The First Amendment would not
protect unethical advice. The problem, though, is that
the term "abusive" which the government wants to
interlineate into the statute is itself inherently
vague, unlike "fraudulent conduct --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Which doesn't explain
why.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because "abusive," it's like
"seditious utterances." It's not something which a
normal person who just looks at it would be able to
understand what it means.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You don't understand
what it means as a lawyer?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I have some ideas about what
means. But because of the onerous sanctions that
section 526(c) imposes, if I'm wrong I can be basically
subject to a whole panoply of remedies, some very
serious remedies and very serious punishments for making
a mistake. And that's one of the problems under the
First Amendment --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if you leave "abusive"
out. Let's accept your point that "abusive" is not
there and the government is reading in out of nowhere.
What's -- what's the matter with the statute then?
MR. BRUNSTAD: I'll give you -- -
JUSTICE SCALIA: It just prohibits giving
advice in contemplation of bankruptcy that somebody
incur more debt. What's unlawful about that?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, I'll give you -- I'll
give you a perfect example. Suppose the debtor's
problem is that he lives in a house that is too
expensive for him. He comes to the lawyer: I'm in
financial distress. The lawyer suggests -- the lawyer
would logically suggest: Why don't you sell your house
and rent an apartment? But the signing of the lease is
incurring debt, the lease obligation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's not in
contemplation of bankruptcy.
MR. BRUNSTAD: It would be, Justice Scalia,
if the debtor comes to you in financial distress, is
thinking about filing for bankruptcy, and wants the
advice in that context.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If the only reason the
lawyer gives the advice is because he knows that this --
that this debtor is planning to file bankruptcy, he
says, if you are going to file bankruptcy, you better
sell the house and move to an apartment, then it's no
good. Now, it may be a stupid law, but I don't see why
it's -- why it's unconstitutional.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because it's perfectly
legitimate advice about perfectly lawful activity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So it's a stupid law.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, what happens is that
basically it interferes with the lawyer's ability
through speech to communicate full and candid advice to
the client.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly. And that's why
it's a stupid law.
MR. BRUNSTAD: And ultimately under --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now, where is the
prohibition of stupid laws in the Constitution?
(Laughter.)
MR. BRUNSTAD: Justice Scalia, I think the
problem here is that this stupid law does not pass
either strict scrutiny and it is substantially
overbroad.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How much of your
case depends upon the difficulty of defining what -- if
you accept the idea that "in contemplation of" means
abusive or fraudulent, how much of your case depends
upon the proposition that it's just hard to tell, that
it's -- it's a multifactored inquiry and that the lawyer
sort of has to stop and think at every turn: Well,
could this be construed as recommending abuse, or is
this just construed as telling clients what they can and
can't do? And in some areas it's a gray area, and what
should you do when it's a gray area?
Is that -- does your case depend upon that,
which is, I guess, just an issue with the limiting
construction proposed by the Solicitor General?
MR. BRUNSTAD: It doesn't turn on that, but
that demonstrates the chilling effect. The effect of
the statute has been to drive conscientious bankruptcy
counsel from the practice. Why? Because it's not just
difficult to apply; it's often impossible to apply. The
whole statute turns on whether the debtor, the client or
prospective client, is an assisted person, which depends
on the relative wealth of the client, which is something
very, very difficult to determine at any particular
given point in time.
So the lawyer doesn't know: Am I restricted
in my speech under 526(a)(4) because that applies or
does 526(a)(4) not apply at all because I am not dealing
with an assisted person, such that I am under normal
State bar rules which requires me to give unfettered
advice?
And since that is impossible to know without
detailed, careful analysis of the relative wealth of the
client, the statute is basically impossible to apply.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, if we assume a
proper limited construction -- I know you disagree with
that, but if we assume that we can limit the statute
properly so that it applies just to unethical conduct,
then you can't give that advice to anybody, and the fact
that assisted persons is a subclass of that is
irrelevant.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That would be true, Justice
Kennedy, if in fact we could tease out from the abusive
conduct, if people could actually understand what
"abusive" meant. Does that proscribe -- what does it
proscribe? It's too vague.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, but that doesn't go
to your other point that there's a problem in
determining the class of persons. If it's unethical,
you can't give it to anybody. And the fact that the
class of persons is difficult to understand
is irrelevant.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Kennedy, but
that assumes that we can do the narrowing construction,
I think as Your Honor points out. And that, again, is a
fundamental problem because the standard the government
would like to impose or interlineate in the statute is
entirely vague.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You want to -- I mean,
your first point is -- and we never get to that question
because lawyers shouldn't be under this act at all.
They shouldn't be labelled debt relief agencies.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Ginsburg. Our
point on the statutory construction piece is that the
statute is ambiguous and that to avoid the
constitutional questions -- actually, avoid two
constitutional questions here, the constitutional
question under 526(a)(4) and then a separate
constitutional question under 528(a)(4) and (b)(2)(B) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's only lawyers who are
protected against vague criminal statutes?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Certainly not, Justice
Scalia, which is why --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So then -- so then there is
no reason in particular to take lawyers out of it just
to make it constitutional.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, our argument there,
Justice Scalia, is that the statute does not
unambiguously embrace attorneys. "Attorney" is not
mentioned in the definition of "debt relief agency" in
1(12)(a) where you think it would be, because wherever
Congress has otherwise intended to regulate attorneys in
connection with bankruptcy practice, it has used the
word "attorney" specifically.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's fine. If you -- if
you are letting that argument stand on its own, that's a
fine argument. But don't -- don't bring in the fact
that, well then, moreover, if it's applied to attorneys,
it's unconstitutional, because if it's applied to
anybody it's unconstitutional according to your
argument.
MR. BRUNSTAD: That is also true, Justice
Scalia, because we do make a substantial overbreadth
argument. The statute is substantially overbroad.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, but when you say it
isn't referred to, it seems to me to be referred to. It
says "The term 'debt relief agency' means 'any person
who provides any bankruptcy assistance to an assisted
person." And the term "bankruptcy assistance" is
defined to include "appearing in a case or proceeding on
behalf of another or providing legal representation with
respect to a case or proceeding."
Doesn't a lawyer provide legal
representation?
MR. BRUNSTAD: A lawyer does, Justice
Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So doesn't the
term "provide legal representation" include a lawyer?
MR. BRUNSTAD: The problem, Justice Breyer,
is that I think when Your Honor was quoting from section
1(4A), Your Honor took out a whole lot of information
that goes between the word "bankruptcy assistance" and
"legal representation."
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes; they include other
people besides lawyers.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Not only that, but I think
that that language is inherently ambiguous. What is
Congress getting at there?
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know. What is it
getting at with "providing legal representation with
respect to a case"?
MR. BRUNSTAD: That would seem to be with
respect to lawyers.
JUSTICE BREYER: It would seem to be a
lawyer.
MR. BRUNSTAD: But it's precluded -- it's
preceded by language, "any goods or services sold or
otherwise provided to an assisted person with the
express or implied purpose of providing information, et
cetera, about legal representation."
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah. Those are other
people who are covered.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, not just other people,
but what it looks like, is it looks like what Congress
was getting at was people who provide things like what
attorneys provide.
Now, there are a whole host of problems with
including attorneys within the definition of "debt
relief agency." I mean, it's counter -- it's contrary
to the purpose of what Congress seemed to be getting at.
It leads to anomalous results. It does various things.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How is it any different
from including lawyers within the category "debt
collectors," which lawyers objected to in this Court
unsuccessfully?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Ginsburg. But
there it was interesting. There, there -- in the Heintz
case, that was a situation where lawyers had been
expressly excluded from the statutory regime, then
Congress repealed the exclusion, so a clear signal to
include attorneys.
Here, we have the opposite. We have a very
ambiguous legislative history, where in the initial
version of this legislation the House report
accompanying it said lawyers were included and the
language was "debt relief counseling agency." Then
Congress amended the statute -- Congress amended the
proposed legislation in 1999, and thereafter in the
01, 2003, and 2005 House reports deleted all reference
to attorneys -- a very, very strange tale, which seems
to signal exactly the opposite of the Heintz case.
So we have a very ambiguous legislative
history that seems to give us a contrary signal. That
in part is part of the ambiguity behind this statute,
which I think is one of the reasons why it's perfectly
-- the statute is readily susceptible to an
interpretation --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that in the
legislative history there were examples of lawyers
overreaching, that the conduct that Congress was aiming
at was engaged in by lawyers, as well as others.
MR. BRUNSTAD: There are some references in
the legislative history to that, Justice Ginsburg.
There are a few scattered references in the legislative
history.
But again, the legislative history is very
ambiguous. It seems to go in lots of different
directions. Now, recall, Justice Ginsburg --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have heard of referring
to legislative history when the statute is ambiguous. I
haven't heard of referring to legislative history to
make the statute ambiguous.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Kennedy. I
think the statute is ambiguous for a whole host of
reasons, and the legislative history does not clear up
the ambiguity; it actually deepens it. So the
legislative history reinforces the other indicators, the
textual indicators, of in fact ambiguity here.
But I think -- I think it is also important
to underscore not only would the constitutional
avoidance, application of that canon here, by excluding
attorneys from debt relief agencies solve the problem
under section 526(a)(4), but also under section
8(a)(4) and (b)(2)(B). 528 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Before you go on on 528,
could you clarify for me: What is your challenge to
8? Is it a normal --
MR. BRUNSTAD: 528, Justice Sotomayor?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: 528.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is it a normal facial
invalidity? Is it an overbreadth invalidity? Is it an
as-applied challenge? What exactly are you claiming
with respect to that --
MR. BRUNSTAD: Does Your Honor mean 526 or
8?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: 528.
MR. BRUNSTAD: 528. 528, the disclosures in
the advertising provision?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes.
MR. BRUNSTAD: We are challenging that on
as-applied it violates the Constitution --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can you tell me how you
have an as-applied challenge when I don't even know what
ad is at issue?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Your Honor. I think
it's the same as the Cincinnati case, where in fact
there was no obligation that the handbills that were
being distributed were any way deceptive or misleading.
That's the same situation here. The district court --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I have scoured the
record for a handbill, meaning -- an advertisement --
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- by you that I could
look at and say, you know, I'm looking at it and it's
not misleading. So where is it in the record?
MR. BRUNSTAD: The ads are not in the
record. But, as the district court found, there is no
evidence suggesting that bankruptcy assistance
advertisements that -- that Petitioners' bankruptcy
advertisements are deceptive in any regard. The
government never alleged that Petitioners engaged in any
deceptive advertising. That's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I truly have never
heard of an as-applied challenge when we don't know what
it is being applied to. But putting that aside, so you
have an as-applied challenge; do you have a facial
challenge or an overbreadth challenge?
MR. BRUNSTAD: With respect to the
advertisements with the commercial speech?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR. Yes, the 528.
MR. BRUNSTAD: No, it's not a -- it's not a
facial challenge; it's an as-applied challenge. But
here -- here's the point on the evidentiary point. The
government never sought to introduce that evidence
because it's not at issue. There is no dispute that
Petitioners' advertisement is not -- is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Did the government bring
this lawsuit below?
MR. BRUNSTAD: We brought this lawsuit as a
declaratory judgment action.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what, were they
supposed to scour your advertisements to find the
violation? Was that it?
MR. BRUNSTAD: No, unless there was an
allegation that in some way Petitioners' advertisements
were misleading. It's not. It's not a disputed
question. It's not a disputed factual question.
There is no dispute, and the district court
basically found that there is no allegation that
Petitioners' advertising is deceptive or untruthful in
any way. So Petitioners' advertising is not of the kind
that Congress was trying to target.
Now, the problem and the burden that 528
imposes is that it requires counterfactual, misleading
statements that interfere with legitimate advertising
messages. That's the problem. The statute is not
narrowly tailored under Central Hudson to address the
"make debts disappear" problem the government identifies
as animating this particular statute.
Let me give a simple illustration to sort of
illustrate my point. Suppose I sell bread and the
government required me to say -- disclose: I am a bread
supply agency; I sell products that contain wheat.
Well, what if the bread I sell does not contain wheat,
it's wheat-free? Forcing me to make that statement is
counterfactual and misleading. That's what this statute
does. If I also sell milk, it requires me to make the
statement: I am the bread relief -- the bread supply
agency --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I ask you
something? When you are an attorney advertising as an
attorney who gives advice on bankruptcy, why aren't you
a debt release -- relief advisor?
MR. BRUNSTAD: The problem, Justice
Sotomayor, is that that statement inherently is
misleading. When lawyers -- when clients look for
lawyers, bankruptcy lawyers or just lawyers in general,
they don't want to see someone called a debt relief
agency. It conveys no meaningful information. In fact,
it's misleading. What does that mean?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: They don't want to be --
lawyers don't want to be called debt collectors either,
and in this, the Fair Debt Collection Act, it says
that -- that communication must say the communication is
from a debt collector, except that formal pleadings are
not -- you don't have to identify. It seems to me that
that -- that would be a harder thing for a lawyer to do,
to identify herself in an advertisement as, I am a debt
collector, than I am a debt relief agency.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, but the debt collection
statute doesn't require that in advertising. It
requires that in letters and things like that that go to
other parties where you are actually trying to help
collect the debt. So it's a communication that the
lawyer is making, for example, and a disclosure that's
required.
Here putting in your advertising "I'm a debt
relief agency" conveys no meaningful information to the
public. In fact, it is misleading.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, A, I suppose you
don't have to advertise; or B, if you do, you can say in
your bread hypo: Under the Federal law we have bread,
but our bread is -- I don't know -- gluten-free or
whatever. You can use --
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You can always add -- add
in order to make it non-misleading.
MR. BRUNSTAD: But that would require a
statement in our advertising that is actually -- to make
it fundamentally dissimilar to the statement that's
being actually imposed on us, we have to say -- we have
to put in the advertising something like "This product
contains wheat." Then we also have to say, but my
product doesn't.
So, for the consumer who is looking at the
information, it's inherently misleading because the two
conflict.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is a proposal for a
commercial transaction, right? You are trying to get a
consumer to hire you. And the First Amendment standards
for proposals for commercial transactions have always
been more -- more lenient than other First Amendment
contexts.
We -- we -- we regulate the content of
advertising all the time.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Yes, Justice Scalia, but this
statute is odd because it requires counterfactual
information, it's not narrowly drawn to address the
problem the government identifies.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know --
JUSTICE ALITO: If a law firm -- if a law
firm provides representation for debtors in bankruptcy,
what is misleading about requiring them to say: We help
people file for bankruptcy relief under the Bankruptcy
Code?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because the scope of
8(b)(2)(B) is so broad. If I am advertising mortgage
foreclosure services having nothing to do with
bankruptcy, I still must make this counterfactual
statement. 528 -- for example, in my bread
hypothetical, if I am also selling milk, and the
government says when I am selling milk through my milk
advertisement I have to say I am a bread supply agency,
I sell products that contain wheat, that is misleading
and irrelevant to the milk advertisement.
But this statute does the same thing. If I
am advertising eviction protection services having
nothing to do with bankruptcy or mortgage foreclosure
services representation having nothing to do with the
bankruptcy, I have to make these counterfactual
statements that are inherently misleading.
If there are no questions at the moment, I
would like to reserve my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Brunstad.
Mr. Jay.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM M. JAY
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES
MR. JAY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I would like to begin with the threshold
statutory question if I may. I have only a few points
on that.
A debt relief agency is any person who
provides specified services to specified clients for
pay. An attorney is a person, a defined term under the
Bankruptcy Code, and the Petitioners have affirmatively
alleged in their complaint that they provide bankruptcy
assistance to assisted persons. We think that is all
that is required to determine that they are debt relief
agencies under the statute.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the provision
that says the directors, employees, are not included?
MR. JAY: As I understand Petitioners'
argument about that provision, it is that Congress would
surely have made an exception for partners as well had
it intended to include attorneys. We think that that is
a multi-step chain of reasoning that breaks down at each
step.
Congress made an exception from the
definition of "debt relief agencies" for officers and
employees of the business that is itself a debt relief
agency. Partnerships, of course, have employees as
well, and a run-of-the-mill employee of a partnership
who doesn't provided the bankruptcy assistance services
himself is not himself a debt relief agency.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about an associate?
MR. JAY: I think, Justice Ginsburg, an
associate is an employee, so if the associate in a law
firm provides -- doesn't provide the bankruptcy
assistance herself, then she is not a debt relief
agency. It's the -- because any person is defined under
the Bankruptcy Code to include individual partnership or
corporation. That is Section 101(41). It's the law
firm that provides the services, is a person who
provides the services and therefore a debt relief
agency. I suppose an individual who provides the
services himself or herself might be an agency, a debt
relief agency, as well.
But we don't think that the absence of a
specific exception for partners of a partnership tells
us anything that would derogate from the plain meaning
of the defined terms in the statute. The fact that
partners are liable for actions of the partnership is a
commonplace of partnership law. And it's also not the
case that all attorneys practice in partnerships. The
Petitioner law firm is a professional corporation and
one of the individual Petitioners is a director of
that -- of that professional corporation.
JUSTICE BREYER: What he -- what I think his
argument is, as I understand it, is if you look at the
definition of "bankruptcy assistance," you will see
there are seven different things that a person could do
and fall within that definition. And all of those seven
things are probably provided by the kinds of agencies
you see advertised on television, which say: We will
help you with your debts. And they probably aren't
lawyers.
And, so, if you look at the six of the seven
things, it's clear that all of those are provided by
those television companies. And the seventh is simply
added in, namely the providing legal representation, to
be a catch-all to be sure that if one of those companies
actually does something that is legal representation,
even though they are not lawyers, they are caught, too.
So he is saying, read the whole paragraph
and then you will see they are after the companies that
appear on television and they're not after lawyers. And
then he says that's the history of the bill, and so
forth and so on. Okay.
Now, that's the argument, and so it isn't --
can't quite be brushed off as quickly, I think, as you
did.
MR. JAY: Well, I -- I am happy to respond
to it in further detail. I think that the -- first, the
reference to appearing in a case or proceeding on behalf
of another, that can only refer to lawyers. Even if as
you --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? I mean, there could
not only be lawyers. I mean, there are numerous
proceedings where your brother, your mother, your
cousin, your friend appears for you. They say: Bring a
friend, bring one of us.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: We will charge you very
little, we will save you money. I am a lawyer, by the
way.
(Laughter.)
MR. JAY: That's right, Justice Breyer, and
I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: I have relatives who
aren't, and you can bring one of them.
MR. JAY: But appearing -- appearing in a
case or proceeding under this title, Your Honor, means
entering an appearance in court. I think that's --
that's the natural reading of that phrase. And
Petitioners have suggested that this is an attempt to
catch the unauthorized practice of law. But certainly
neither the plain meaning nor the legislative record
suggests that people who are not lawyers were actually
engaging in conduct so brazen as to show up in Federal
Bankruptcy Court, enter -- file a notice of appearance
and purport to be a lawyer. That is not what this
statute is intended to catch.
At any rate, the legislative history I think
amply supports our view. Page 21 of our brief collects
a number of citations to the legislative record
specifically referring to attorneys.
As for the point Mr. Brunstad made about the
change in the drafting history of this bill from "debt
relief counseling agency" to "debt relief agency," that
change was made in 1999. And in the House report
accompanying the 1999 version of the bill, which had
changed from "debt relief counseling agency" to "debt
relief agency," the House report said, "It applies to
attorneys, as well as to non-attorneys, such as petition
preparers. That is page 120 of House Report 106-123.
So I think that amply refutes the point
about the drafting history.
But in any event, if the Court were to look
at legislative history, we think that the provisions of
the 2005 House report accompanying the bill that
actually was enacted are the most probative, and we've
cited two references on page 21 of our brief that we
think amply demonstrate that attorneys are included.
If the Court has no further questions about
the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, if -- if -- if
lawyers are debt relief agencies, I am curious how your
limiting construction works. If a client comes into a
lawyer and says, look, I know we are thinking of filing
bankruptcy, but I want to go to Tahiti and charge it;
can I do it? And the lawyer says: Oh, the law says I
can't give you advice in contemplation of bankruptcy;
the Solicitor General says that means I can't give you
advice in aid of fraud that would deprive debtors of
assets they might otherwise get, so I can't tell you.
MR. JAY: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Has that
person violated -- has that lawyer violated the statute?
MR. JAY: I don't think so, Your Honor. The
statute prohibits only advice to incur more debt in
contemplation of bankruptcy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the person has
asked, can I charge the trip to Tahiti? And the lawyer,
although giving perfectly truthful advice, has
effectively conveyed to his client that if he does he
would be depriving debtors of assets they might
otherwise get.
MR. JAY: But the lawyer in your
hypothetical, Mr. Chief Justice, has not advised the
client to take the trip; it has not advised the client
to do that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He has communicated
to the client that if he takes the trip, one, he will
have a good time in Tahiti; and two, he will be using
assets that would otherwise end up in the hands of the
debtors.
MR. JAY: I suppose that, you know, there
might be a fact question about whether a particular wink
and nod communication between an attorney and client
were in fact advice to engage in the transaction, that's
prohibited under the Bankruptcy Code, the fraudulent or
abusive transaction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if -- what if
the lawyer said: I can't give you advice in
contemplation of bankruptcy, but here's the Solicitor
General's brief, read that.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And a reasonable --
my point is a reasonable person reading the brief would
say, well, the reason he can't give me advice is because
that might cause me to do something that would defraud
the debtors, so I'm going to buy the ticket.
MR. JAY: Well, if -- if that debtor reads
our brief, that debtor will also see that there are
serious consequences for the debtor himself, which is
precisely why Congress passed this statute providing for
relief for the debtor against the attorney who provides
this unethical or abusive advice.
An attorney -- sorry. A client who incurs
additional debt intending to defraud the creditor may
not be able to obtain a discharge of that debt and
indeed may not be able to obtain a discharge in
bankruptcy at all.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's one of
the things I'm concerned about your limiting
construction, "intending to defraud the debtor." What
if the person takes a trip to Tahiti every November?
They've always done it. They are not intending to
defraud the debtor. They are just doing what they have
always done. So an attorney that gives that advice,
would be -- that would be okay?
MR. JAY: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, I think
the Culver case, a -- a disciplinary case that we
referred to in our brief, is a good illustration of
this. Fraud turns on the defrauder's intent as a -- as
a general matter. And when someone --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if -- so if the
lawyer said that, I can't give you advice in
contemplation of bankruptcy, but I can tell you that
fraud turns on the debtor's intent?
MR. JAY: Well, again, Mr. Chief Justice, I
-- I don't think that that would be advice to incur the
additional debt. And I don't think that the -- that a
debtor who read our brief or who informed himself with
these hints that you're positing the attorney giving, I
don't think that the debtor would take the step of -- of
incurring the additional debt, precisely because there
are consequences for the debtor, and it's -- it's a
grave risk. That's precisely why Congress prohibited --
prohibited this form of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, but the whole
point is that the attorney could be providing advice
that would steer the debtor away from doing anything
wrong. And yet the other -- the government would say,
oh, no, no, no, no; you are trying to tell him it's okay
to take the trip to Tahiti. If he says you can take the
trip to Tahiti so long as your intent is not to defraud
the debtor -- correct advice that could be read as
telling the debtor not to do anything wrong or could be
read as giving the debtor a little, as you say, a wink
and a nod and saying, you know, what do you intend to
do? And he says, oh, I just intend to go on vacation,
not to defraud the debtors.
MR. JAY: I think, Your Honor, subject to
some kind of situations of willful blindness, that the
attorney in that situation would not be read by any
factfinder to have advised a -- to have advised her
client to incur additional debt in contemplation of
bankruptcy.
And it is -- it is that that is the
statutory touchstone.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, let's take some of
the examples that were in the amicus brief. One of them
was the debtor is just told by her doctor that she has a
serious cancer that needs operation and radiation, and
she is at the end of the line on resources. She has her
trade tools, which she could sell to get some money, but
then she won't be able to carry on her business. And
she could also borrow money, but incurring that debt --
since she's on the brink of the bankruptcy, she's
incurring the debt knowing that she's on the brink of
bankruptcy.
Could the lawyer say, you don't have to sell
your -- the lawyer could say: Sell your equipment.
That wouldn't be a problem. But could the lawyer say,
incur the debt?
MR. JAY: I think the lawyer under a number
of circumstances could say incur the debt. Precisely --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, take this
circumstance. There is no other -- the person is on a
brink of bankruptcy, has no resources, can get money by
selling assets or by borrowing.
MR. JAY: Well, if I may, Justice Ginsburg,
the hypothetical doesn't state how she's going to borrow
the money. So for example, if she has an open home
equity line of credit and she borrows against that home
equity line of credit, it's a secured loan that is not
going to be discharged in a Chapter 7 proceeding, I
think that that's unobjectionable under our reading of
the statute. It's not -- it's not abusive, because it's
not an abuse of the bankruptcy system.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose she doesn't have
a home equity loan.  Suppose she's a renter?
MR. JAY: Well, the two -- the two scenarios
that our view -- that in our view are covered by the
statute are taking on debt in an attempt to abuse the
bankruptcy system or to defraud the creditor. And even
-- even someone without -- without a home equity loan, a
home equity line of credit, can take on additional debt
without intending to defraud the creditor simply by --
by intending to repay it.
And that is illustrated in the Culver case,
in which the attorney had advised the client to take on
additional debt, to -- indeed, he gave her a credit card
application and said, get some more cash advances. And
she said: I don't want to take on this additional debt.
And he said: Don't worry, I will represent you in
bankruptcy; you won't have to repay a penny of it. And
the Court of Appeals of Maryland explained that that was
unethical advice under the Rule 1.2(d), the model rule
that applies in just about every jurisdiction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You can come up with
your own hypotheticals that are a lot easier from your
point of view, and Justice Ginsburg has been suggesting
some that are much more difficult because they depend on
particular facts. And under your construction it seems
to me that a lawyer trying to give correct, legal,
ethical advice has got to pause before every sentence
and think, oh, is this going to be construed in
violation of subsection (a)(4)?
MR. JAY: I don't think so, Mr. Chief
Justice, and I'm certainly not attempting to fight
Justice Ginsburg's hypothetical. I'm attempting to
illustrate that -- that the aspect of the statute that
prohibits advice to defraud creditors, you know, will
turn on, among other things, whether there is any intent
to repay the debt.
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't something in
contemplation of bankruptcy done only -- isn't something
done in contemplation of bankruptcy only if it is done
because of the anticipation of filing a bankruptcy
petition? So that if -- if a person takes on additional
debt in order to obtain life-saving treatment, that is
not done in contemplation of bankruptcy; it's not done
because of the bankruptcy. It's done because there is
an emergency that requires immediate expenditures.
MR. JAY: I think that that's right, Justice
Alito, that in that hypothetical there is no -- the mere
-- the mere fact that the bankruptcy may be looming,
even in the hypothetical, is not the animating cause.
And the Court has --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If indeed "in contemplation
of bankruptcy" means, as -- as you argue, that it has to
be for the purpose of abusing the Bankruptcy Code --
right? If that's true, then aren't all these vagueness
arguments irrelevant, because it would be illegal
anyway, wouldn't it?
MR. JAY: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So even without this
statute, the lawyer would have to worry about -- about
whether he's doing something that is unlawful.
MR. JAY: The two prongs of -- of our
reading of the statute, that's right, Justice Scalia,
are to abuse the Bankruptcy Code or to -- or to defraud
creditors. The fraud of course is illegal --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the point is you
don't know. Of course you can't give advice to do
something illegal. But I -- I would think that some of
the questions have been suggesting that it's hard to
know whether it's illegal. You yourself say it depends
on the debtor's intent. So if a client came in to me
and said, can I do this, and it depends on his intent,
as a lawyer I would want to say: It depends on why you
are doing it. But if -- but that I think could be
construed as being -- giving advice in contemplation of
bankruptcy.
MR. JAY: But precisely because, Mr. Chief
Justice, the definition of fraud turns on the defendant
or the fraudulent actor's intent, that's true under
present law, under Rule 1.2(d) which prohibits all
attorneys from counseling their clients to commit
fraudulent acts.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The lawyer runs that risk
anyway, whether this statute applies or not. He has --
he has to decide whether what he is doing is a fraud on
creditors.
MR. JAY: Or an abuse of the Bankruptcy
Code. And as Justice Ginsburg pointed out in
Mr. Brunstad's argument, that is something that the
attorney already must be familiar with under Section
7(b) and must certify in filing any Chapter 7
bankruptcy that in -- after the attorney's professional
investigation, that the granting of relief would not be
an abuse of the provisions of the Bankruptcy Code.
Attorneys are -- are making that
certification every day when they are filing for Chapter
bankruptcies.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: This is a regulation
of the attorney-client relationship to pursue an
unrelated substantive objective. You want to ensure
that debtors don't do something and you think, well, the
way -- it's not enough to tell debtors, don't do this.
You're going to say: We are going to regulate what
lawyers tell them as a way of pursuing an unrelated
objective.
MR. JAY: I don't think it's unrelated,
Mr. Chief Justice. The objective is in many -- in some
instances criminal and in other instances it is
prohibited by the Bankruptcy Code. And the reason
that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the objective
is criminal; that doesn't mean it is not being
indirectly enforced by interfering with the
attorney-client relationship.
MR. JAY: Well, it is certainly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- or affecting the
attorney-client relationship.
MR. JAY: It is certainly true,
Mr. Chief Justice, that the attorney is the
sophisticated player here. It is the attorney who is
the repeat player, and it is the attorney who, by being
made subject to this statute, is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, it's a good way
to enforce it, to tell people you can't get legal advice
about it.
What if a State thinks that there are too
many punitive damage awards, that they are out of
control, and so it passes a law saying lawyers may not
tell their clients that they can get -- they can seek
punitive damages?
MR. JAY: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, seeking
punitive damages is not illegal --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, if it's done
with the purpose of fraud, it is. If you think, well,
I'm really -- I really wasn't -- it really wasn't
malicious conduct, I know that, or whatever the standard
is for punitive damages, then it's illegal, just like
here if you incur debt to defraud your debtors it's
illegal, but if you don't it's not.
MR. JAY: Well, I think that the restriction
that you're positing is that advice ever to seek
punitive damages is -- is going to be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, no, no, no, no.
Only if it's -- you know, it says you can't give that
advice in contemplation of filing a lawsuit.
MR. JAY: Well, no. That would, of course,
would be outside the bankruptcy context, and we are
relying in part here on -- both on the avoidance
doctrine and on the meaning that "in contemplation of
bankruptcy" has had for a long time.
But -- but to answer your question, I think
that, if there is actually a tie between -- so that
sounds exactly to me like a prohibition saying to the
lawyer, don't file complaints for punitive damages that
aren't supported just under the normal Rule 11 evidence
standard. And I don't think that that is an
impermissible attempt to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, no. It's a
difference between filing, because there the lawyer
signs the -- signs the complaint. It's giving advice to
the client.
And the -- I guess what I would see as the
parallel is that it's an objective outside the
attorney-client relationship. It's not like saying, you
can't charge more than 50 percent contingent fee or --
or whatever -- you know, designed to regulate the
client -- protect the client.
It's -- it's a totally extraneous objective.
MR. JAY: Well, here, I don't think -- I
don't think it's an extraneous objective. Perhaps I am
misunderstanding how you -- how the Court is meaning
extraneous.
The -- here, the advice is the motivating
cause in some of these instances of the -- of the debtor
taking the step that's going to lead to actual harm to
the debtor.
That's why Congress provided that the remedy
for a violation of this is either an injunctive action
by a government official, the U.S. trustee or by the
Court or State attorney general, or actual damages paid
to the debtor who has suffered harm from the unethical
or abuse of advice given to him or her by the attorney.
So I think that saying that -- that it's
extraneous to the attorney-client relationship, I think
that's not the statute that -- that Congress enacted
here.
It enacted a statute that protects the
client from improper, unethical, abusive, or even
criminal -- criminally fraudulent advice by the
attorney.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: One thing that lawyers
who render services for money want -- is to be sure that
they will get paid, and one part of this provision, this
6(a)(4), talks about incurring debt to pay an attorney
for representing the debtor.
So what can a lawyer say safely about the
lawyer's getting paid?
MR. JAY: Well, I would like to note, if I
may, Justice Ginsburg, that we don't think that that is
properly part of this challenge. I will be happy -- I
will be happy to answer the question, but the court of
appeals struck down this statute, and it said, nine
times, that it was talking about the portion of the
statute referring to in contemplation of bankruptcy.
And the to pay an attorney provision was not
addressed in the Petitioner's brief in the court of
appeals or in their brief in opposition to our cert
position, so we don't -- we don't think it's properly
here -- it hasn't been addressed.
But to -- to answer your question, the
statute says not -- and this part of the statute is on
page 5a of the appendix to our brief -- "to advise an
assisted person to incur more debt to pay an attorney or
bankruptcy petition preparer."
So advising the client -- you know, that the
client ought to pay the fee -- you know, here's my bill,
my fee is due on day X, that simply doesn't come within
the terms of the statute. It's only to incur more debt
to pay the attorney.
And the situation that we think Congress is
getting at is the circumstance where the attorney wants
to be paid up-front, again, like in the Culver case, the
attorney wants his client to take out a cash advance
from the credit card company, knowing -- and to give
that money to the attorney to pay his fee, precisely
because the debt's going to be -- the unsecured debt to
the credit card company is going to be discharged in
bankruptcy.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's -- that's the
clear case. How about the person comes in, shows the
attorney his or her financial state. There is no money
to pay the fee. The attorney simply gives a bill and
says, "I need it by Friday."
No self-respecting person would believe that
the individual is going to pay that bill without
borrowing money from somewhere, if you have looked at
their financial statement and there is no money to be
had. Would the attorney have violated the statute
there?
MR. JAY: I don't think so, Justice
Sotomayor, precisely because the attorney -- the
attorney still hasn't issued the advice to incur more
debt. I mean, the client, of course, also has the
opportunity -- or the option of not paying the fee and
carrying it -- carrying it forward into bankruptcy.
So, in any event, we don't think that that
provision can -- can be the basis for a holding that the
other provision about in contemplation of bankruptcy is
substantially overbroad, which is what the court of
appeals held here.
If I may, unless the Court has further
questions on --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Just one. So,
basically, your bottom line is any advice to incur debt
to pay an attorney is illegal?
MR. JAY: To incur more debt to pay an
attorney, I think -- I think that is the import of the
statute, and that's because Congress recognized that
there is an incentive for attorneys to put pressure on
their clients to -- to favor the attorney as creditor,
to, essentially, treat the attorney as a creditor in a
better position than other creditors.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Perhaps I am being --
not quite understanding you. You are underscoring the
more debt, that is going to always be additional, if the
advice is to incur it. So what meaning are you giving
to more that I am missing?
MR. JAY: Well, in some of the examples that
have come up in the briefing in this case -- you know, a
refinancing transaction, for example -- you know, or a
sale -- sale of the house and replacing it with a
rental. We don't think that that is more debt.
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't how this works
exactly. I'm not an expert. I thought that, when
someone goes bankrupt, that one of the things you ask
the bankruptcy judge for is permission to pay for
ongoing expenses, and that would include an attorney's
fee. Otherwise, people could never be represented.
MR. JAY: It's true that the court can
authorize --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, so why is there some
incentive here? All the attorney has to do is follow
ordinary procedure.
MR. JAY: Precisely because, Justice Breyer,
different standards apply to the -- to payments made to
the attorney before the bankruptcy commences and
payments made to the attorney after the bankruptcy
commences.
It's a -- the standard of scrutiny after the
bankruptcy commences is a -- is a bit more searching
under Section 330.
If the Court has no further questions on
Section 526, I do want to address Section 528, the --
the advertising disclosure requirements. And, there, we
think that, as Justice Sotomayor brought out in her
exchange with Mr. Brunstad, there is no evidence in this
case pertaining to the particular advertisements that
petitioners want to run.
They simply say, on pages 38 and 39 of the
joint appendix, that they have advertised, and they wish
to continue to advertise. There is no allegation about
their content. And they sought and were granted summary
judgment in the district court on the theory that this
statute is unconstitutional.
And so to the extent that it's anything
other than a facial challenge, it's an as-applied
challenge, as applied, essentially, to any attorney or,
indeed, anyone who wants to run these advertisements.
We think that, as I understand the gravamen
of Petitioners' argument, is that the two-sentence
suggested text is incorrect, that it's -- that it's
misleading because it's wrong.
And the basis for that is saying that some
people who are debt relief agencies don't help people
file for bankruptcy relief under the Bankruptcy Code.
That is not correct.
JUSTICE ALITO: But isn't it misleading for
an attorney to say, I'm a -- I'm a debt relief agency?
Nobody is going to know what a debt relief agency is,
unless they are familiar with this statute.
MR. JAY: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: A perspective client looks
at that, and they say, well, I don't want a debt relief
agency, I want a lawyer.
MR. JAY: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: That's misleading.
MR. JAY: Four points on that, Justice
Alito.
First, the advertisement can and indeed, I'm
sure always will, say that the advertiser is a lawyer.
Nothing forbids the advertisement from saying that.
There is no restriction on what content goes in the ad,
only that it include this is disclaimer.
Second, the term "debt relief agency" is a
new one. It was coined by Congress in 2005 precisely
because it includes -- it includes attorneys; it
includes bankruptcy petition preparers. They had to --
you know, they had to come up with an amalgamated term
that includes them both. The fact that it's a new term
-- it came freighted with no -- no preceding -- no
baggage from its preceding history, and indeed, if the
statute were on the books and allowed to take affect
once this challenge is disposed of, I am confident that
the meaning would become much more well-accepted.
And the Petitioners have invited the Court,
and this is on page 87 of their opening brief, to look
at their website. And of course that's outside the
record, but to the extent that the Court looks at it,
the Court will see that Petitioners refer to their
bankruptcy practice as providing debt relief. We think
that's a natural way of -- of pitching what the services
made available by a bankruptcy attorney are: Relief
from one's debts. So we don't think there is anything
wrong with that term.
But I do want to turn back to why it's not
correct to say that a debt relief agency would ever not
-- not help people file for bankruptcy relief under the
Bankruptcy Code. That is because, as I understand
Petitioners' argument, it's that an assisted person
might be a creditor. That is not correct.
The definition of "assisted person" turns on
having nonexempt property in excess of a certain amount.
Under section 522(l) of the Bankruptcy Code, and indeed
under this Court's decision in Owen v. Owen, there is no
exempt property until there is a filing for bankruptcy
and an assembly of the bankruptcy estate and a filing by
the debtor, or someone on the debtor's behalf, filing
schedules that specify what property the debtor has and
which exemptions the debtor chooses to claim. That is
only done when there is a debtor. Creditors don't do
that. Creditors don't have nonexempt property. We
don't think a creditor could be an assisted person.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How about a law firm
that represents the biggest companies in the world? And
so they are never going to consciously, intentionally
seek out or represent a person defined with the
financial limitations of this category. But it so
happens that one of their very rich clients comes in and
says, I have a small -- my brother-in-law is running a
small business; help him or her.
Is that firm in violation now because their
advertisements did not include what 528(a) required?
MR. JAY: Well, first, Justice Sotomayor,
if, for example, they do it pro bono, then it wouldn't
-- then it wouldn't trigger the definition at all. But
assuming that the brother-in-law pays for the services,
then yes. I mean, yes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So they have to -- for
this one brother-in-law, they have to amend -- they're
now violated the statute ex post facto somehow?
MR. JAY: Not ex post facto, Justice
Sotomayor. They would become a debt relief agency, and
thereafter, advertisements directed to the public that
advertise those specific services, and if they don't
have a bankruptcy practice at all, or don't advertise
the services that are listed in section 528, then the
disclaimer requirement doesn't apply at all. But if
they then chose --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If they're -- if they're,
as the hypothetical suggests, representing only big
companies, they're probably not advertising to the
general public anyway.
MR. JAY: That -- that may well be. Well,
they may have a website, Justice Scalia, but big firms
have to deal already with multifarious disclaimer
requirements in every State where they practice, and
firm websites often have a lengthy set of disclaimers;
you know, one required by Texas, and one required by New
York, and so on. This is something that -- that
multijurisdictional firms are already familiar with, and
they provide these disclaimers without problem. And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You said that one of the
aspects of this that makes it horrible is that they are
not limited to saying, "We are debt relief agencies; we
help people file for bankruptcy." They can say anything
else. But there's no screening -- there is no
administrator that a law firm can go to and say, "This
is what I think is substantially similar. Is it okay?"
MR. JAY: That is true, Justice Ginsburg,
and there is of course the safe harbor. By using this
two-sentence statement, the advertiser is certain that
there will be no problem.
But I think that -- that a substantially --
a substantially similar statement is a permissive
standard, and if there would be any constitutional
doubt, it would be to resolve it in flexibility in that
regard.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Brunstad, you have three minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF G. ERIC BRUNSTAD, JR.
ON BEHALF OF MILAVETZ, GALLOP &
MILAVETZ, P.A., ET AL.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Thank you.
Justice Ginsburg, your example about the
woman who is in need of medical attention falls squarely
within the statute. The lawyer would be prohibited from
advising her to incur debt to get needed medical
attention, and the government, in trying to articulate a
way around that during the course of the argument,
articulated no less than five different standards.
The conduct would have to be fraudulent or
unethical or abusive or criminal or improper. None of
those are in the statute, and it's impossible to know
which one. Chief Justice Roberts, you are absolutely
right: What this statute does is it's basically trying
to interfere with the attorney-client relationship, and
even moreso on the side of "or pay an attorney. "
And Justice Breyer, here's how it works.
The client comes to -- the prospective client comes to
the lawyer and is in trouble. And may not know whether
the client has to file for bankruptcy or not. So there
is a conversation that happens. And in that
conversation, it may be decided that the best thing for
the client to do is to file for bankruptcy, and of
course, the client will have to know: How am I going to
pay for this?
Well, there are two ways. One, the client
can pay the attorney in full, up front, or the attorney
can take payment over time. However, this all happens
before bankruptcy, so there is no involvement of the
Court at this point. If the attorney accepts payment
over time, which many do, because it's very expensive to
file for bankruptcy now and most debtors don't have the
wherewithal, the attorney, by saying, I take payment
over time, and the debtor accepting that, the debtor
would be incurring debt in contemplation of bankruptcy.
Incurring debt to the attorney. The attorney would be
proscribed, under the statute, from actually giving that
particular advice.
JUSTICE BREYER: What the attorney says is,
Here's what we will do; when we file for bankruptcy, I
will ask the Court to approve my own fees as something
that is continuing after bankruptcy.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Exactly.
JUSTICE BREYER: And he says, This is what
they will be.
So what is the harm --
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because you can't --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- since that's what he has
to do, of making him tell his client that that's what he
has to do?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because you can't advise the
client in advance to incur that debt.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, you -- you can't? This
prevents you had from saying, What I'm going to do is
ask the bankruptcy judge to approve what I just said?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, that has to happen
anyway under section --
JUSTICE BREYER: Of course. And so what's
wrong with the law that tells the lawyer that's what he
has to tell the client?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because there, in that
situation, you would be advising the client to incur the
debt. In other words, be advising the client to incur
the debt, not the actual incurrence of the debt.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't read the
hypothetical that you have given as coming within the
statute. I think what -- what it means: Incurred debt
to pay an attorney, I don't think it means debt to the
attorney. You are not worried about the attorney
cheating himself.
MR. BRUNSTAD: Well, except debt --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Making himself an
additional creditor. That's ridiculous.
MR. BRUNSTAD: But debt is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What it talks about is
inducing the client to -- to borrow money from somebody
else to pay the attorney. You know, and that seems to
be perfectly reasonable.
MR. BRUNSTAD: I think it includes both,
Justice Scalia. For example, you couldn't advises your
client to borrow $1,000 from your mother.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's right.
MR. BRUNSTAD: And you couldn't -- and you
also, I think, advise a client to basically borrow money
from you, the attorney. You're extending services on
credit; that's incurring a debt.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why would you worry
about the attorney, you know, hurting himself?
MR. BRUNSTAD: Because the statute --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It makes no sense.
MR. BRUNSTAD: It's at least unclear,
Justice Scalia, and that is the heart of the problem.
It's very unclear.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
