OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPT
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE
UNITED STATES
CAPTION: MICHAEL J. ASTRUE, COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL
SECURITY, Petitioner, v. CATHERINE G. RATLIFF.
CASE NO: No. 08-1322
PLACE: Washington, D.C.
DATE: Monday, February 22, 2010
PAGES: 1-54
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
55 CONNECTICUT AVE., NW
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036
(202) 289-2260
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MICHAEL J. ASTRUE, COMMISSIONER :
OF SOCIAL SECURITY, :
Petitioner : No. 08-1322
v. :
CATHERINE G. RATLIFF. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, February 22, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ANTHONY YANG, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Petitioner.
JAMES D. LEACH, ESQ., Rapid City, South Dakota; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ANTHONY YANG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
JAMES D. LEACH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 25
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ANTHONY YANG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-1322, Astrue v.
Ratliff.
Mr. Yang.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANTHONY YANG
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. YANG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
EAJA provides that in an appropriate case a
court shall award to a prevailing party fees and other
expenses incurred by that party. Every court of appeals
to have addressed the question, including the court
below, recognized that the plain meaning of EAJA's text
directs payment of EAJA fees and other expenses to the
prevailing party, and not her attorneys.
Moreover, EAJA's relationship to the fees
approved under section 406(b) of the Social Security Act
and this Court's decisions in Jeff D. and Venegas in the
section 1988 fee context make clear that Congress
designed EAJA, like other fee-shifting statutes,
to work within traditional attorney-client fee
relationships, under which the attorney looks to the
client for payment.
Congress has also provided that, subject to
exceptions not relevant here, all funds payable to the
-- by the United States to an individual who owes a
valid delinquent debt, Federal debt, shall be reduced by
administrative offset.
There is no dispute in this case
that the prevailing party in this case, Ms. Kills Ree,
owed a valid delinquent debt to the United States,
received notice of that debt, had the opportunity to
repay that debt or enter into a repayment agreement that
would have avoided offset, failed to do so. Congress
directed in the Debt Collection Improvement Act of 1996
that agencies and the Department of Treasury here shall
offset such payments for delinquent debts.
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't it true that the
Commissioner of Social Security in the past paid EAJA
awards directly to attorneys and that this is still
done in cases in which the client has assigned the
payment to an attorney?
MR. YANG: That is true in part. Prior to
05, the Treasury Department did not yet implement,
fully implement, the Debt Collection Improvement Act
with respect to certain payments. Here, these are
miscellaneous payments. Treasury undertook the very
large undertaking of computerizing the system to provide
for offsets by tackling things like tax refunds, Federal
benefits, most contractor payments, large payment
systems that the government deals with on a day-to-day
basis, and only in 2005 was able to implement
miscellaneous offsets.
Since 2005, the government has been
offsetting EAJA payments. Now, in some circumstances
where a debt is owed -- where an EAJA payment is made
and a court, for instance, orders the government to pay
the attorney, the government's policy is to check
whether or not there is a delinquent debt a prevailing
party owes, and if not, then the government may accept
the assignment or comply with the --
JUSTICE ALITO: What gives the Federal
Government the right to override State law on that
issue? Suppose the situation was that another creditor
would have priority over the attorney if the money had
been paid directly to the claimant.
What gives the government the right, in
effect, to override that by paying the money directly to
the attorney, unless the government believes that this
is payable to the attorney under -- under EAJA?
MR. YANG: I don't believe so. There's two
circumstances where -- that we might be talking about.
The first circumstance might be where a court has
ordered the government to pay the attorney. That
happens in a number of cases.
When the government does not have a debt
which is receivable from the prevailing party, it
complies with the district court's order. It simply
does not have a dog in that fight. When we have an
assignment that the government recognizes, that's true
in any kind of context where you might have an
assignment. The government recognizes the assignment.
If there are third-party creditors who are able to come
in, they may come in and contest that. They likely
wouldn't have notice of it. But it's no different than
any other assignment that the government might accept,
from a party, of the debt, and that is not an infrequent
event.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What authority does a court
have to direct that the money be paid to the attorney?
MR. YANG: Well, it certainly doesn't lie in
EAJA. Courts have recognized that they retain equitable
authority to recognize a constructive trust or an
equitable lien to enforce an agreement between the
attorney and client that the client will pay over to an
attorney funds received pursuant to an award such as
EAJA. And in that context, although courts haven't been
particularly clear in their reasoning -- they have cited
to equity -- the courts have provided that when, for
instance, an attorney represents a client pro bono or
represents a prisoner pro bono, that the court will see
to it that the payment actually received doesn't
ultimately land in the hands of the client and enforces
the understanding, either expressed or implicit, between
the attorney and client that the funds that the client
receives will go to the attorney.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would happen in the
case -- in case it is a prisoner who is this
prevailing party? Would the -- would the attorney fee
be paid to the prisoner? And if not, to whom would it
be paid?
MR. YANG: The attorney fee under EAJA is
payable to the prevailing party, which would be the
prisoner. Now, attorneys would likely come in, the
attorneys for the prisoner, and ask the court to
exercise its equitable authority to recognize a
constructive trust over the fees that are actually paid
to the party and prevent the party from keeping that
money. But a prisoner is ultimately no different than
any other prevailing party under EAJA. It is the
prevailing party to whom Congress has directed the court
shall award fees and other expenses.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So how can the
court's broad equitable authority trump what you say is
what the statute says?
MR. YANG: They are not trumping it, Your
Honor. The -- there's two things going on when a court
recognizes an equitable trust. First, it has to
necessarily recognize the right of the prevailing party
to the payment. The prevailing party obtains the payment,
and only once the prevailing party actually has title to
the thing does equitable trust or a constructive trust
attach. So it's recognizing in the EAJA context that
the prevailing party is the one who is entitled to the
fee, but then --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you actually have
to transfer it or --
MR. YANG: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I mean, the statute
says pay the prevailing party.
MR. YANG: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And you’re saying
the court can say: No, pay the lawyer.
MR. YANG: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In certain --
MR. YANG: In order to recognize the
agreement between the party and the attorney.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where is the agreement
between the party and the attorney? The Equal Access to
Justice Act provides that fees will be paid to the
prevailing party. Where does the prevailing party have
a contract with the attorney to turn the fees over?
MR. YANG: I'm sorry. I didn’t --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You said that pursuant --
maybe I misunderstood you, but I thought you said that
there is a contract between the prevailing party and the
attorney. And where is -- how does that contract come
about if it's simply a case that the lawyer is
representing pro bono a plaintiff?
MR. YANG: Well, as this Court recognized in
Venegas in the section 1988 context, it's commonplace
either for there to be an expressed or an implied
agreement to pay over any statutory award that the
prevailing party may receive to the attorney. And I
think, in the absence of any indication otherwise, courts
are well positioned to simply say, you know, if they
haven't agreed otherwise, the normal practice would be
for a prevailing party, if they were to receive
something under a statutory fee-shifting provision like
section 1988 or like EAJA, to agree to pay it to the
attorney.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Doesn't -- doesn't the
government setoff depend upon who owns the money under
State law? I mean, it's -- it's commonplace for the
Federal law to look to State law on issues of ownership.
And, in fact, if there is this doctrine of equitable
ownership on the part of the attorney, what right does
the government have to do the setoff?
MR. YANG: Well, that might be true if we
were relying on a common law offset. But in this
context, Congress has directed that all Federal
payments, unless there is an exception -- and there is
no exception in this case -- are to be offset before
payment, any payment, to the debtor. So in this case,
Congress has effectively established a priority scheme
whereby when a debtor owes a delinquent valid debt to
the United States and the United States owes an
offsetting obligation to that individual, Congress has
provided that no Federal funds shall be paid to the
individual and instead that the debt -- the government's
debt shall be offset against the debt that the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if the client
is bankrupt? What happens then?
MR. YANG: The same rule would apply. No
Federal payment would -- well -- I believe that the same
rule would apply. I've not carefully studied the
bankruptcy provisions, and I hate to venture into a very
complicated area to give you something definitive. But
my belief is that, based on the very clear text of
section 3716 of Title 31, which was amended by the Debt
Collection Improvement Act, that no payment shall be --
even in bankruptcy, the payment goes to the -- has
to go to the debtor first, and then it goes to the estate
-- that no payment shall be made from the Treasury and
instead an administrative offset shall be undertaken to
collect the government's debt.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there a way for the
lawyer -- a lawyer sees that his client has a good case
against the government, and thinks he can get an EAGA
fee, so he says to the client: I'd like to represent
you and I can get paid for this. But the client says:
There are a lot of debts I owe the government.
Now, is there any way they can work it out
so he can get the representation?
MR. YANG: Well, sure. There’s --
JUSTICE BREYER: What?
MR. YANG: As we indicated in our brief,
there's several things that can be done. First, the
attorney can determine whether there is in fact a debt
which is eligible for offset, and that can be done by
asking the Treasury with a valid Privacy Act waiver from
the client. If that is the case, the client retains the
right, which Congress expressly codified in section
16, the right to enter into a repayment agreement. If
that is done, there will be no offset, and the repayment
agreement is largely governed by the Federal claims
collections standards, which are codified at 31 C.F.R. 900
to 904, and those -- those provisions provide in section
1.8, for instance, that installments shall -- should
bear a reasonable relation to the size of the debt and
the debtor's ability to pay. And in some instances, the
government agency is able to compromise that debt if the
debtor is unable to repay it within a reasonable amount of
time. The agency should consider the age, health,
present and potential income, as well as assets of the
debtor, in order to determine the --
JUSTICE BREYER: In other words, the lawyer
and the agency and the client sit down, and the lawyer
says: Here, I can get some money for this client and
that will help everybody, but I want to be paid. So I
want you, Agency, to agree that on the repayment
schedule if I get an EAGA fee, then I get to keep it and
I don't have to give it to my client, who will have to
give it to the government. And then they can sign a
piece of paper and then that's done and the lawyer gets
to keep the money.
MR. YANG: That -- that's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: And has that ever happened?
MR. YANG: I don't know that that's happened
in this offset context.
JUSTICE BREYER: But it could now. Now
people would know about, and they could do it.
MR. YANG: It could well happen, and in
fact --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, what’s -- what’s the
authority for the government to enter into the agreement?
MR. YANG: The authority --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, if the statute
says there has to be an offset, that's it.
MR. YANG: Well, the statute also provides,
under section 3711, for the Department of Justice and the
Department of Treasury to establish guidelines for
agencies. They have done so in Parts 901 to -- or 900
to 904 of Title 31 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But do the guidelines
reflect Justice Breyer's hypothetical?
MR. YANG: Well, the statute actually
reflects Justice Breyer's hypothetical, because at
section 3716 -- this is at page 9a of the government's
brief’s appendix -- the head of the agency, prior to
implementing an administrative offset must advise --
this is on a4 -- the debtor of the opportunity to make a
written agreement with the head of the agency to repay
the amount of the claim. That reflects the practice in
the Federal claims collections standards of agreeing to
repayment of such claims.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me what
would motivate the government to agree to give to a
lawyer a piece of a recovery that it, the government,
thinks it's entitled to? I mean, it's one thing to work
a repayment plan. That starts on the proposition that
the individual can only each week or month or whatever
give a certain amount of money over. But what --
MR. YANG: Well, I think the hypothetical was
premised at the beginning of the lawsuit rather than at
the end. If -- if the case were at the end and the
government were ordered to pay EAJA fees, the offset
would be automatic. We would not agree at that point to
split the -- the offset with -- with the attorney. But
in the beginning of the lawsuit, when the attorney is
undertaking representation of the client, the attorney
is able to do precisely what Congress intended, which
was to have debtors come to the United States and
take -- to avail themselves of the opportunity to repay
their debts to avoid an offset.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that's a
fanciful answer, because EAJA requires that the
government's position, to get fees, is substantially
unjustified. And so the government lawyer is going to
sit down and say, well, you know, if I take a position
that is substantially unjustified, I will at that point
pay the fees to you, not to the client.
MR. YANG: Well, not at all. The
government's interest in an installment plan is not
motivated by EAJA. The government’s interest is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, but the
attorney's interest -- I thought in the hypothetical we
were talking about, the attorney's interest is. He
thinks the government is going to take a substantially
unjustified position, and he wants to make sure in that
case that he gets paid.
MR. YANG: This is a separate question,
which is whether there is really any deterrent or how
large the deterrent effect would be having the specter
of a fee offset. And as we explained in our brief, this
Court in Underwood explained that, because EAJA awards
are not given to every prevailing party and are only
given to parties where the government's position is not
substantially justified, it is -- one cannot reliably
determine in advance whether the government's position
is going to be so unreasonable that you’re going to get
an award of fees.
And that -- that suggests that any deterrent
effect of having the possibility of an offsetting -- an
offset for the client's debt is small. And that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's going
to look awful bad to a court that comes in and he's --
and the court is asked to award EAJA fees, and there is
an agreement already in effect. The government says,
well, if we’re -- you know, if we’re liable for EAJA
fees, this is how we are going to handle it.
MR. YANG: I may have misspoken --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That would be the
first piece of -- that would be the first piece of
evidence that I would want to put in saying I should get
EAJA fees. The government thought they might even take
a position that qualified.
MR. YANG: Let me back up. I may have
misspoken. What I intended to convey is that at the
beginning of the case when an attorney is deciding
whether to represent a client, the case has not been
litigated, we don't know whether the government's
position is going to be found to be substantially
unjustified or not, the attorney -- if the attorney
checks and wants to determine whether the client has
a -- a debt owed to the government that would be subject
to offset, the attorney can go to the government and say:
Let's enter into a repayment plan so that my debtor gets
on the government's good graces and no longer is subject to
have a tax -- a tax return, for instance, offset or any
other payment that the government may owe to that
debtor in the future, including EAJA. But it's not
because of the EAJA payment that you would enter into
the agreement. The government --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, but say he goes
in to the government and says, look, I’m about to sue
you, and I’d like to sit down and negotiate a nice
agreement about the repayment.
MR. YANG: Well, I guess the attorney may
say, I'm about to sue you, but the government certainly
is not motivated because of the lawsuit. The
government -- whether an attorney is going to sue the
government or not, the question is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Government lawyers
are always sympathetic to people who come in and say:
I'm going to sue you.
(Laughter.)
MR. YANG: Well, I guess that certainly gets
our attention. But the reason that the government would
enter into a repayment agreement is because that is an
opportunity for the government to collect a debt that is
delinquent, valid, and outstanding.
And what Congress intended to do in the Debt
Collection Improvement Act was not to have additional
Federal funds be paid to debtors who have been given
multiple warnings of the debt and are essentially, you
know --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The problem with your
argument is this pot of money is actually not going
to -- it's going to the debtor, according to your
argument, because in theory the debtor is the prevailing
party and is entitled to get the award. But the money
is not being paid to the debtor. It's for the benefit
of the lawyer who has done the work that Congress wanted
done.
MR. YANG: Well, actually, either --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't know what the --
I don't know what the motivation would be for a lawyer
to undertake to represent the meritorious claim when
they have to not only do the work in the case, but now
have to do the work for the government in getting their
client to negotiate an agreement with the government on
something that's completely unrelated to the claim.
MR. YANG: I guess a --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's -- it's sort of --
MR. YANG: There’s a few answers --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- illogical.
MR. YANG: There’s a few answers to that.
EAJA applies not only in the Social Security context; it
applies in all civil actions in which -- not sounding in
tort, in which there’s not another specific fee
provision, brought -- brought by or against the United
States.
Congress intended -- and this is in the
statutory findings which precede EAJA in section -- I
believe it's 202 of the Act; it is -- to diminish the
financial deterrent on individuals, businesses, and
organizations caused by the expense of providing -- of
litigating a case. This is --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That sounds like
you're -- you have -- the client has an agreement to pay
the lawyer or the client has paid the lawyer. It would
make sense if the client has paid the lawyer and then
there is reimbursement under EAJA that what -- what
you're describing would make sense in that situation.
But in most of these situations, the client doesn't have
the wherewithal to pay the attorney upfront, of course.
MR. YANG: That may be true in the Social
Security context, but there are many instances in
which -- this is the -- this is the normal way that,
you know, clients and -- and -- and their -- their
attorneys work out fee arrangements. Sometimes clients
will pay their attorney in advance; sometimes they will
pay as the litigation goes forward. And by the time you
have the EAJA award the client will have paid all or
part -- sometimes none -- but all or part of the -- of
the fee award.
JUSTICE GINSBURGH: Is it --
MR. YANG: Congress directed -- the language
is very clear: Courts shall award to the prevailing party
fees and expenses --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And does that mean --
MR. YANG: -- incurred by the party.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The award goes to the
prevailing party. So, therefore, the attorney's fee is
income to the client --
MR. YANG: I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- is taxable income
to the client?
MR. YANG: This is -- the answer to that is
complicated and, generally, yes. The IRS is of the view
that attorney fee awards to prevailing parties, whether
it's EAJA or otherwise, are deemed to be taxable income
to the client.
Now, the clients, of course, will have an
offsetting deduction for expenses incurred by -- in --
in the course of producing or collecting income, and
that was recognized by this Court's opinion in Banks.
That deduction is, of course, subject to certain limits.
It has to be in excess of 2 percent of the adjusted
gross income and subject to the alternative minimum tax,
which wouldn't apply to Social Security claims.
But the general answer is yes, it is income
when the prevailing party receives a fee. There is an
offsetting deduction. However, there's a -- some
uncertainty with whether some fee awards when the
underlying benefit obtained is not taxable, whether
that -- the IRS will treat such payments to -- the fee
awards, as --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Like pain and suffering,
but that's not --
MR. YANG: Yes, so, but also certain
Federal benefits, including Social Security benefits,
have a very complicated tax relationship. Social
Security benefits are taxable in part. It depends on
the size and the amount of other income.
So, the answer is actually quite complicated
whether fees are taxable under EAJA in the Social
Security context. But the general rule is, yes, fee
awards to a prevailing party are income and subject
to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then, in turn, income
to the attorney when -- if the client --
MR. YANG: Correct. Just as, you know, when
I'm -- you know, I am paid my salary and taxed on it,
and then when I pay for services, the person to whom I
pay also has income, and they are taxed as well. This is
not an unusual situation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It seems to me the
underlying assumption -- and some of the question would
have been put to you by the court -- is that the
government has somehow benefited because the money is
created to offset the debt. It really isn't. It
would -- this would be true if an attorney were suing
a third party and creating a fund, and the government
said, ah, there's the money. In this case, it's just
being paid from one account to the other. The
government would be better off if there were no suit
at all.
MR. YANG: That's correct. If the
government never had an EAJA award, it at least would
be less of a debt that it could collect.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's just paying itself
from one account to the other.
MR. YANG: That's correct. The government
is -- ultimately zeroes out here. The person that gets
the benefit is the prevailing party, because the
prevailing party has eliminated a debt to the United
States by having that offset by the EAJA award. So the
prevailing party obtains the benefit, which is precisely
what Congress intended here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The government
zeroes out, but in the course of it, it has taken a
legal position in court against a small business that
was substantially unjustified.
MR. YANG: And it has paid its EAJA award by
offsetting that award against the debt that the business
owed to the United States. The government is -- at the
end of the day, the balance sheets of the government
have not changed. And with -- from the perspective of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I think the
idea -- well --
MR. YANG: From the perspective of the
prevailing party as well. The prevailing party has an
obligation to the attorney. Those are the attorney's
fees incurred which have not yet been paid. The
prevailing party also has an obligation to the
government in the -- in the amount of a debt. It has
income that comes in through the -- through the fee
award, and whether that goes to offset the debt to the
government or offset the -- for use to pay the attorney,
the prevailing party ultimately gets the benefit of that
fee award. And the government has paid the EAJA award
as required by statute.
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you happen to know how
much the -- the Treasury typically collects in a year
under these EAJA offsets? Does it put a dent in the
Federal deficit?
MR. YANG: We don't, and the reason we don't
is because each agency that -- which is the subject of
an EAJA order submits to Treasury a payment request
based on that order, and they check “miscellaneous
payment.” That agency doesn't know whether that payment
is offset. Treasury receives that -- that request of
payment and sees that it's a miscellaneous payment,
checks it against a debt, and may offset. But Treasury
doesn't know that the miscellaneous payment was an EAJA
award.
So we don't have any statistics that we can
point to, to say how often this -- this occurs. I can
say that the financial management service executes one
-- over one billion payments per year, and that offsets
of those payments account for $4.8 billion. So about
two-tenths of 1 percent of payments from the Federal
Government result in offsets.
I’d like to reserve the balance of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Leach.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES D. LEACH
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. LEACH: Mr. Chief Justice, may it
please the Court:
I’d like to discuss with you this
morning four reasons why Catherine Ratliff, and not the
government, is entitled to receive the fee for the legal
services she performed, that Congress invited her to
perform, to show that the government's position was
legally erroneous and was not even substantially
justified.
And my first point arises from your
question, Justice Scalia. You asked whether State law
determines who has the priorities here in terms of
offset, if I understood. And the answer is that
actually Federal law determines that, specifically the
Debt Collection Improvement Act and regulations. The
Act requires mutuality of a debt between the debtor and
the government before the government can offset. And the
regulations, which I’ll quote in just an instant,
require that before offset can occur, the government must
look to who has the beneficial interest in the payment.
In other words, who is entitled to benefit from it.
Specifically, 31 C.F.R. 285.5(b), which is
quoted at page 45 of the red brief, defines, quote,
"offset," close quote, as withholding funds to satisfy
a debt owed by a payee. And "payee" -- and this is
critical -- is defined as the same -- in the same
regulation, also quoted at page 45 of our reply brief,
as "the person entitled" -- as the person entitled to
the benefit of all or part of a payment. In other
words, not the legal title holder if there is a
difference, but the person with the beneficial interest.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The prevailing party
gets the benefit in the sense that she is relieved of
the debt she owed to the government. That's a real
benefit.
MR. LEACH: Well, Your Honor, I think that's
a benefit -- true, that's a benefit, I agree; but that's
not a benefit, I don't think, in the sense of who --
because the question is who has the beneficial interest
in the fee payment? And when we look to that question,
because that's what's at issue here, is the fee payment.
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't this argument
circular? The -- the issue is who is -- to whom is this
payment to be made. And if it's to be made to the --
the claimant, then it's not for the beneficial interest
of the -- of the attorney.
MR. LEACH: Two responses, if I could,
Justice Alito: First, the word "payment" gets thrown
around a lot in the briefs. It can mean two separate
things. It can mean who receives the payment first; in
other words, who is the check mailed to; or it can mean
who the check is ultimately entitled to -- who is
entitled to benefit from it.
And the government's -- my second point is
the government's reply brief at page 10 to 12 concedes
that, but for the government's alleged right to offset,
the attorney does indeed have the beneficial interest in
the attorney's fee. And the government gives three
reasons, and only three reasons, why its alleged right
to offset trumps the attorney's beneficial interest.
The first reason the government gives is the
government says that the -- the constructive trust, which
the government acknowledges exists in the -- in -- in
favor of the attorney with respect to the fee payment,
does not arise until the instant the fee reaches the
client. And that's true, but that's not the point.
The point is the attorney had the
beneficial interest in the fee, which had to precede the
moment the fee reached the client, if it's payable to
the client in the sense of "sent to." The beneficial
interest had to precede that in order for a constructive
trust to arise.
The government's second argument --
JUSTICE BREYER: On the first one, imagine
that the -- a trust owes some money to the government.
Now, suppose a lawyer representing the trust recovers.
Now, they recover on a separate debt, okay? Separate
debt? One. That money goes to the trust. Right?
MR. LEACH: If -- I'm not --
JUSTICE BREYER: The trust first owes -- the
trust owes $1,000 to the government. The trust then
independently recovers $500 from the government on a
different matter.
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: The government couldn't
offset that?
MR. LEACH: Of course it could.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Of course it could.
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: But the trust is not a
person entitled to the benefit of the payment.
MR. LEACH: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: The beneficiaries of the
trust are entitled to the benefit of the payment.
MR. LEACH: If I understood your
hypothetical, if the trust is entitled to $500, then the
trust I think would be entitled to the benefit of the
payment.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's not entitled to the
benefit of the $500. The trust holds money for the
benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust. So --
MR. LEACH: I --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it can’t -- you agree
that that couldn't be?
MR. LEACH: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, and once you agree
that that couldn't be, I think you are in trouble on
your first argument. I'm not sure.
MR. LEACH: Okay. I don't think so, because
if we are talking about payments to persons, you know,
if a person -- if a person owes a debt of $10,000,
receives $500 on the debt, the person receives the
benefit of that $500.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, similarly, the -- the
guy -- the client here receives the benefit of the money
that he has just gotten from the government, including
the attorney's fees. It happens that he can't keep
those attorney's fees, just as the trust can't keep the
$500. He has to give the attorney's fees to the lawyer,
just as the trust eventually has to give the $500 to the
beneficiary. So I'm simply saying -- drawing a
parallel, which -- go on to the next issue.
MR. LEACH: All right, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, let me -- can
trusts -- can trusts recover EAJA fees?
MR. LEACH: I don't know, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, I don't either.
I’m looking at the definition. It doesn't say "trust."
It says a lot of other things, like corporation,
association, unit of government. I just don't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I’m having trouble with
this aspect, and it may -- may be that it varies from
State to State. But as a general matter, under State
law, let's say that the employee makes a contingency fee
arrangement with a lawyer to sue the employer and wins
$50,000. It's a one-third contingent fee. The -- the
employee already owes the employer $40,000. It would
seem to me under the general principle of offset that
the employer has to only pay $10,000, and the attorney
is not going to get his full fee.
MR. LEACH: That’s --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that's just -- that's
just the law of offsets.
MR. LEACH: That's true.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because again, it's the
same party. If they created money by suing some third
person, then that's different.
MR. LEACH: I think that's true.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And -- and so I -- it
seems to me that what you're -- what you're asking for
is just contrary to the standard law of offsets.
MR. LEACH: Well, Your Honor, with what I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And it's even worse
because the Federal statute says that there shall be
this offset first as a matter of priority.
MR. LEACH: Actually, Your Honor, the
Federal statute provides for offset in accordance with
regulations to be issued by the Treasury Department.
And those Treasury Department regulations were what I
quoted right at the beginning of my argument. We have
to look at who is entitled to the benefit of the
payment, not the benefit in a generalized sense of the
lawsuit.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, in the generalized
sense of -- of common law of offsets, as I've described
to it, sure, the attorney has a beneficial interest, but
he's not going to be able to collect it vis-à-vis the
employer who is entitled to an offset.
MR. LEACH: Yes. And the difference, Your
Honor, is that in your hypothetical we’re talking about
one sum of money that’s recovered in the name of the
claimant. In this situation, we’re talking about a
statutory fee award, which is created only based on the
work of the attorney and which is labeled an attorney's
fee and separate from the benefit --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, how is it different?
Look. This, what I was talking about, has nothing to do
With EAJA.
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: It has to do with when the
government's allowed to offset some money.
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it's allowed to offset
some money when the money is money that it would otherwise
give to a payee. All right?
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And then you've defined
"payee" as a person who has some beneficial interest in
that money.
MR. LEACH: Yes. Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And I think that the client
here has no more and no less beneficial interest whether
he's a person or whether he's a trust. That was my
point.
MR. LEACH: I understand, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. LEACH: And my point about the statute
is simply that the statute is subject to the regulation
which looks to who's entitled to benefit.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay, let's take the
regulation: "A person who is entitled to the benefit of
all or part of the payment." Ultimately, isn't it the
plaintiff who has recovered that is entitled to the
benefit, because this money is given to him in order
that he can meet a financial obligation that he owes to
the lawyer?
I mean, if this didn't exist, he'd owe the
lawyer and have to pony it up out of his own pocket, no?
MR. LEACH: Not so, Your Honor, in Social
Security cases, which this is, and in Veterans cases,
which together account for more than 90 percent of all
EAJA awards. In Social Security cases, 42 U.S.C.
6(b)(2), set out in our appendix, makes it a Federal
crime for any lawyer to charge, receive, demand, or
collect a fee payment directly from a client, other than
under past -- the 46 U.S.C. 406 past-due benefits, 25
percent, or EAJA.
And this is a critical difference. In the
non-EAJA, in the non-Social Security, non-Veterans
contexts, you know, about 10 percent of cases, you've got
-- conceivably, you've got, often, clients paying lawyers
on a traditional pay-as-you-go basis. But in a Social
Security case or a Veterans case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And in those cases, you
agree the offset can be made?
MR. LEACH: Absolutely. Absolutely.
The difference here in all these Social
Security and Veterans cases is that the attorney is
barred by law from receiving money on a
pay-as-you-go basis. So the attorney has never been
paid.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In exchange for getting
percent of the recovery?
MR. LEACH: No. Actually, Your Honor, in
exchange for showing in Federal court, if I understand
your question. I hope I do.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: My understanding is that
the ordinary payment to the lawyer for Social Security
benefits gained for the client is 25 percent of the
recovery to the client paid directly to the lawyer.
MR. LEACH: That's true.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So that, just as a
background in this case, did Ms. Ratliff get that
percent?
MR. LEACH: No, Your Honor. There was no
percent fee here.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that was because it
was too small to be bothered with? What was the reason?
MR. LEACH: She did not apply for a
percent fee. It would have been quite small, had she
received it. It would have been much smaller than the
EAJA fee.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And she could keep only
one from the --
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: She could keep only the
larger of the two.
MR. LEACH: Had she received the EAJA fee,
she could have kept it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: One of the difficulties
with your position is that Congress did exempt a number
of Federal payments from the offset, but it didn't
exempt Equal Access to Justice fees.
MR. LEACH: Yes. And the -- there are two
points there, Your Honor. I mean, EAJA fees -- I'm not
claiming all EAJA fees are exempt. As I just said --
spoke with you, Justice Scalia, if the -- in a non-Social
Security, non-Veterans case where the client has paid
the attorney and then an EAJA fee comes down, that’s
clearly subject to offset. You have to look to that
regulation and who is entitled to the benefit of the fee
payment.
And the reason that the Debt Collection
Improvement Act doesn't address this in 1996 is that in
96, the government had never taken the position that
attorney fees were subject to offset in Social Security
or Veterans cases. And in fact, in 1996, there were
three court of appeals decisions on the question of
whether a creditor could offset a statutory fee award:
Plant -- these are all of our briefs -- Plant, Fourth
Circuit, 1979; Duncan -- I'm sorry, Plant is Fifth
Circuit, 1979; Duncan, Fourth Circuit, 1989; Curtis,
Eighth Circuit, 1993.
All those cases said that the creditor may
not offset a statutory fee award against the creditor's
debt because the fee is for the attorney. That’s why
Congress couldn't have conceivably thought to address it
in 1996.
And some of the questions take me toward the
point that you asked about before, Justice Roberts --
Chief Justice Roberts. And you suggested, or you said,
that EAJA says: Pay to the prevailing party. If I heard
you correctly. In fact, Your Honor, the language of the
statute is, quote, "award to the prevailing party...
fees and other expenses...incurred by that party."
And the two parts that we haven't really
addressed yet are that what is awarded is attorney's
fees. And this "incurred by" language -- with respect to
that attorney's fee language, "attorney's fees" has a
traditional meaning. It's a meaning this Court has
recognized in all those cases bullet-pointed at pages 19
to 21 of our briefs. It's a fee earned by and paid to
an attorney. And in Gisbrecht v. Barnhart in 2002, this
Court specifically described the real parties in
interest in attorney's fees litigation as the attorneys,
recognizing the reality that attorney fees go to
attorneys.
In addition, the language "incurred by that
party" -- what does it mean here? Well, outside of EAJA,
it could mean -- it does mean, I think -- money the
client takes out and pays to the attorney. We know in
Social Security cases and Veterans cases it can't mean
that, because that's illegal. That's a Federal crime if
the attorney does it.
So what does it mean? Well, the government
concedes at page 8 of its reply brief that that language
"incurred by" a prevailing party is supported by the
client's implied or express obligation to pay the
attorney the fee received. So this is where the
government's argument is circular, I think,
Justice Alito, in the sense that that "incurred by"
language only is satisfied and an EAJA award only may be
made where the client has the express or implied
obligation to pay the attorney.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you say that in
Social Security the attorney is forbidden to accept
pay-as-you-go? Is --
MR. LEACH: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that doesn't mean that
there is not either an express or an implied contract
between the attorney and the Social Security recipient.
MR. LEACH: I agree. That's what I was
trying to say.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but if there is that
implied contract, then it is an obligation of the
recipient.
MR. LEACH: Yes, that's what I was trying to
say, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I don't see how that
leads you where you want to go. Then the payment given
to the recipient does indeed benefit the recipient by --
by paying off an obligation that the Social Security
recipient has.
MR. LEACH: Yes, but that obligation exists
only to the extent of the EAJA fee. It's not a separate
obligation. The attorney can't turn around and go
against the client. I mean, 406(b)(2) prohibits the
attorney going against the client for any fee other than
the 406(b) fee, which is separate, if there is a 406(b)
fee, or the EAJA fee. And when --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is it --
MR. LEACH: We have been talking
-- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Just so I'm clarifying,
is it your position -- and this is something I want to
ask the government as well -- that once the EAJA fee is
awarded, the attorney couldn't sue the client later even
in an offset situation for repayment, because by statute
you view them as blocked from --
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- from seeking anything
other than the EAJA fee or the 406 fee?
MR. LEACH: Yes, that's what 406(b)(2) says,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that once the offset
happens, the attorney, under -- even if the client had
other money, the attorney would be blocked from going
after it?
MR. LEACH: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Because by the terms of
the statute they can only seek the EAJA fee?
MR. LEACH: They can only seek what?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Either the EAJA fee or
the 406 fee.
MR. LEACH: Yes, and we have been talking as
if EAJA fees and 406(b) fees are sort of contemporaneous
in every case. In fact, the data cited at page 14 of the
red brief is that 46 percent of Federal court Social
Security cases result in a remand. Only 5 percent result
in an award of benefits. So there are going to be far more
EAJA fees in Federal court than there ever are 406(b) fees.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you calculate the fee
under either the Social Security Act or EAJA, depending
on the case? Do you ever calculate it under both so that
you get some under each?
MR. LEACH: Yes, Your Honor. And that's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The -- the -- you calculate
it under both so you get some under each?
MR. LEACH: No, section 3 says how this
works, of the -- of EAJA 1985. It says if there are two
fees, the attorney keeps the larger fee --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Right.
MR. LEACH: -- and sends the smaller
to the client and vice versa.
And that’s the situation, for example,
where you could have an offset of an EAJA fee in a
Social Security case. Let's say there is a 406(b) fee
that's $6,000. Let's say there is an EAJA fee that is
$4,000. Under section 3, that -- the attorney doesn't
keep that $4,000. That $4,000 winds up in the client's
pocket. The government can offset that. That's --
that's what integrates all this discussion we’ve been
having about EAJA fees not being exempt. We have to
look to the beneficial interest.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In what percent of the
Social Security cases where the claimant prevails is
there an EAJA fee?
MR. LEACH: Forty-six percent. No, that's not
right. It's about 42 percent. And I get that from
combining two numbers. There are 5,481 EAJA awards per
year. That's red brief page 4. And there are about
,000 Social Security civil cases per year. That's
green brief page 22. Fifty-four -- 13,000 divided by
,481 is 42 percent.
And this bring me to the point the
government was making in suggesting that an attorney at
the beginning of a case could never know whether or
not there -- there is going to be an EAJA fee, because,
you know, you can't know at the beginning, they argue,
what position the government will take, whether or not
the government's position is substantially justified or
not.
Well -- and the government cites
Pierce/Underwood from 1988 from this Court, in which
this Court said exactly that -- Pierce v. Underwood.
Pierce v. Underwood is outside the Social
Security context, outside the Veterans context, so
Pierce v. Underwood is in this less than 10 percent
category of cases under EAJA which are not Social
Security or Veterans.
In a Social Security case or a Veterans
case, the attorney has the record before proceeding into
court, before deciding whether to proceed into court.
And the attorney can look at that record, read it, and
have a pretty good idea of whether or not the government
position might be substantially justified or not.
I don't ask you to take my word for any of
this. Let me tell you what the data shows.
The data, Justice Ginsburg -- this is where
the 42 percent of Federal Social Security cases result
in an EAJA award. If it's 42 percent, that's quite a
high number of cases in which the government's position
is found substantially -- not substantially justified as
well as legally erroneous.
In Veterans cases, it's even worse. The
Court of Veterans Appeal Web site -- this the number of
cases -- all together -- number of dispositions per year
and the number of EAJA awards. And for 2008 and 2009, if
you add up the numbers, out of all the Veterans
disability cases filed, 70 percent, 7-0, result in an
EAJA award. So there’s quite a large number of cases
in which -- in -- in a Veterans context or Social
Security context where the government's position is
found not to be --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't understand your
earlier point.
MR. LEACH: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: Imagine that if Joe Smith
is in a lot of financial trouble.
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: His house is being
foreclosed on --
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- all his bank accounts
are attached. Then he gets some money from the
government and -- including an EAJA fee.
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it's $5,000 of money and
,000 for the fee. They put it in his bank account. It
was attached, good-bye, nobody sees the money, because
it's whoever attached it got the money. Is that
possible?
MR. LEACH: Are we talking about the
government?
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm making this up. I'm
not talking about the government. I'm saying the
government paid him 5,000 plus 1,000 in an EAJA fee, and
the bank got all the money because it had attached his
bank account. Is that possible?
MR. LEACH: Is this in a Social Security --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm making it up. No. It
has nothing to do with -- I'm just making up --
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- a hypothetical.
MR. LEACH: Yes, it is. Sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right?
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: You follow that. Those are
the facts.
MR. LEACH: I think so.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So a year later, Joe
Smith is doing much better. Couldn't the attorney now
sue him for the $1,000, say I’d like it? It went to
the bank because they had attached the bank account.
MR. LEACH: Outside the Social Security
context, yes, I think so.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now, suppose it
happened to be that that 6,000, 5 for the one and 1 for
the other, came from Social Security. Then how does
that make a difference?
MR. LEACH: The bank could not take it
because of the anti-assignment provision --
JUSTICE BREYER: It couldn't take 1,000?
MR. LEACH: Couldn't take any of it under --
JUSTICE BREYER: Couldn't take any of it.
Because of?
MR. LEACH: -- 42 U.S.C. 407.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that in here?
MR. LEACH: Yes, 42 U.S.C. 407 -- it's cited,
if it’s not quoted -- prohibits assignment of Social
Security benefits. But, Justice Breyer, if I --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the EAJA fee counts as a
Social Security benefit?
MR. LEACH: Oh, I'm sorry. I thought we were
outside the Social Security context.
JUSTICE BREYER: I changed it and said, now,
how does it matter if it’s Social Security?
(Laughter.)
MR. LEACH: If it's an EAJA fee in a Social
Security context, the bank cannot take that because of
the Federal -- well, because the attorney -- the
government admits the constructive trust exists in favor
of the attorney with respect to those funds.
JUSTICE BREYER: If you win this case?
MR. LEACH: No. The government says -- has
said that in its reply brief.
JUSTICE BREYER: In other words -- in other
words, no one can attach? No one can -- no one get the
EAJA fee by attaching the bank account of the client?
MR. LEACH: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. LEACH: And I wanted to get back to the
point you asked, Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, skip my points.
They’re too complicated.
(Laughter.)
MR. LEACH: Well -- but during -- during
Mr. Yang's argument, you asked about this -- this
repayment agreement. The concept of a repayment
agreement being any use to a lawyer who is thinking
about taking one of these cases is fanciful for two
reasons: Number one, SSI benefits by statute are
limited to, quote, "aged, blind, and disabled people who
have little or no money."
So, I don't know where the disabled or blind
or aged person is going to get the money to enter into
any repayment agreement.
But the second reason it's fanciful is that
the attorney only has 60 days from final agency action
to file the case in Federal court. And, so, there is
days to, you know, meet with the client and try to
get an answer out of the government. I've never tried
to do this -- I don't know anyone who has -- but I don't
think you’re going to get much of an answer at 60 days
asking the government to do this so the attorney can
then recover a fee.
Finally, there’s -- there’s a critical
point here that I need to get to, which is that I think
Congress has told us exactly what this language means.
Here's why.
In 1985, Congress enacts EAJA and uses this
section 3 language which talks about who gets the fee,
large or smaller fee. Okay. In 1992, Congress extends
EAJA to Veterans claims. And when it does that, in 38
U.S.C. 5904, Congress uses the same language, down to
the exact commas in the same place, that it has done in
85.
During this entire period -- and here's why
that's important -- during that entire period from 1985
to 1992, and indeed continuing many years after that,
but for purposes here, 1992, the administration is every
time paying the attorney’s fee to the attorney under
EAJA. And so when Congress in 1992 uses the same
language for Veterans EAJA claims that it used for
Social Security EAJA claims 7 years earlier,
Congress, as a matter of law, is incorporating the
settled administrative construction --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought the -- I
thought the government said they only did that when --
when the court directed that it be paid to the attorney.
MR. LEACH: Mr. Yang was talking about from
06 on. From 1990 -- from 1985 to 2006, every EAJA fee
went to the attorney.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because there was no
offset in the picture because the government wasn't
offsetting.
MR. LEACH: Two responses, Your Honor: The
offset came into the picture in 1996, but the government
says it wasn't practical to 2005. Even if you grant them
that point, the agency had to make -- totally apart from
offset, the agency had to decide who these fees should
be paid to under section 3 -- I mean under EAJA.
The government had to say, who does this
statute say fees should be paid to? Now, had the
government said, well, fees go to the client, says, you
know, award to the prevailing party, fees and other
expenses, we are going to pay attorney's fees to
clients, which had never happened. But had the
government said that -- that's not what they said.
They look at the statute. They look at the
fact that the attorney earned the fees, and they say we
are going to pay these fees to the attorney. So that's
what’s going on at the time Congress in 1992 copies its
85 language --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But Congress has provided
in some statutes, the Social Security Act itself, 406,
that you quoted, for the fee to be paid directly to the
attorney. Here it used different language; it said pay
the prevailing party.
MR. LEACH: Just two points,
Justice Ginsburg: Number one, we get back to this
question about does payment mean who receives the check
or who is entitled to benefit from it? Number two, EAJA
doesn't say pay to the party. EAJA doesn't use the
phrase “payment”; 406 says payment to the attorney. EAJA
doesn't say that, "payment," at all. The only place you
find "pay" in EAJA is where it says the government
cannot be required to pay a filing fee.
There is this, shall award to a prevailing
party fees and other expenses, and (d)(2)(A) defines
“fees” to include quote, "attorney fees," close quote.
I'm finishing my sentence, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
MR. LEACH: Thank you. And -- and so
“payment” isn't even in EAJA.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. LEACH: Thank you very much, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Yang, you have
minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ANTHONY YANG
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. YANG: I believe I heard counsel concede
that EAJA fees outside of the Social Security context
are payable to the prevailing party and therefore
subject to offset. That's true. EAJA does not draw a
distinction between Social Security fees and other types
of fees. Section 2412 uses the same language, court
shall award to the prevailing party fees and other
expenses. I believe that disposes of this case.
Second, counsel relies on a definition of
“representative payee” in the offset regulations. That's
addressed at reply -- our reply, page 2, footnote 1. A
representative payee -- as the Federal Register provisions
that relate to this make clear, it refers to things like
attorneys, it refers to things like parents, where the
beneficial interest is not that of the attorney or the
parent but the client and the child.
It would be entirely unworkable if any time
that a payee owes some debt that a third party might
claim an interest to, that the government would have to
find out the payee's finances and obligations in order
to execute an offset. It's simply not the way the
offset program was designed, and it's not reflected in
the regulation.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, is your
adversary correct that under 406(b) --
MR. YANG: (2).
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- (b)(2), that if these
attorneys -- if any attorney attempts to collect from
a Social Security or Veterans client any fees outside
of those granted --
MR. YANG: No. Section 206(b) of the EAJA,
which is reproduced on 4a of our appendix, states that
section 206(b)(2), the provision you were talking about,
shall not apply with respect to any such award, meaning
any award under EAJA, so long as where the attorney
receives fees, the smaller fee is returned. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, do you -- do
you dispute your friend's statement that 42 percent of
the time in Social Security cases the government's
position is unjustified, and 70 percent of the time in
Veterans cases?
MR. YANG: Well, I think that reflects the
stakes often, Your Honor. Oftentimes the government
does not contest, for instance, a $2,000 EAJA award
and because it's the government, it has to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So whenever it
really makes a difference --
MR. YANG: No --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- 70 percent of the time
the government's position is substantially unjustified?
MR. YANG: In cases -- in the VA context, the
number is not quite that large, but there’s a substantial
number of cases at the court of appeals --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What number would
you accept?
MR. YANG: It was, I believe, in the order of
either 50 or maybe slightly more than 50 percent. It
might be 60. But the number is substantial that you get
a reversal, and in almost all of those cases, EAJA --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's really
startling, isn't it? In litigating with veterans, the
government more often than not takes a position that is
substantially unjustified?
MR. YANG: It is an unfortunate number, Your
Honor. And it is -- it's accurate.
With respect to the question of in the
Social Security context, EAJA awards occur not only --
excuse me, 406(b) awards under the Social Security
Administration do not apply in only the 5 percent of the
cases that get judgment entered. 406(b) provides that
any time a judgment that leads to an award of benefits
is made, then 406(b) fees are awarded.
So even if in cases that were remanded to
the Social Security Administration, as in this case, you
could get 406(b) fees. It’s just a question of the
timing. You have to do so after a remand determines the
amount of the fee. So in all cases in which a claimant
ends up recovering back benefits -- prevailing and
recovering back benefits as a result of a successful court
case, that attorney is entitled to payment under 406(b)
pursuant to the fee agreement with the client.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would that be in
this case? What was the -- the amount?
MR. YANG: That is not in the record, but
what is in the record -- actually, no, this is not in
the record, either. But the court's -- I can tell you that
the district court's opinion at the underlying case,
pursuant to the government's concession, awarded --
determined that 2 additional months of benefits would
be paid.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
