IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
KAWASAKI KISEN KAISHA LTD., :
ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 08-1553
v. :
REGAL-BELOIT CORPORATION, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD COMPANY, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1554
REGAL-BELOIT CORPORATION, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 24, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
J. SCOTT BALLENGER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Petitioners.
ANTHONY YANG, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Petitioners.
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
J. SCOTT BALLENGER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ANTHONY YANG, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioners 20
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
J. SCOTT BALLENGER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-1553, Kawasaki
Kisen Kaisha, Ltd. v. Regal-Beloit Corporation, and the
consolidated case.
Mr. Ballenger.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF J. SCOTT BALLENGER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. BALLENGER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
From its enactment in 1906 until very
recently, it has been settled law for a century that the
Carmack Amendment does not apply to the inland leg of an
import through shipment. This Court had a factually
identical --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you taking -- are
you taking a position different than the U.S., that it
applies to exports but not imports? I think the -- the
Solicitor General's position is that it doesn't apply to
any import or export.
Is it yours that it doesn't apply to
imports?
MR. BALLENGER: I don't believe so, Your
Honor. I think both of our position is that the current
scope of Carmack is consistent with its historic scope,
which had a very limited, special application to exports
to Canada and Mexico. Other than that, it doesn't apply
to foreign trade at all.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me
something? Is there -- do you know if there’s a
railroad line from the U.S. through to -- through
Mexico? I know there is one from New York to Canada, a
freight line.
MR. BALLENGER: There certainly are rail
connections between the United States and Mexico, yes,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There are?
MR. BALLENGER: Yes, absolutely.
This Court had a factually identical import
case just a few years ago in Kirby, and, although it did
not discuss the Carmack Amendment, this Court agreed
unanimously on both reasoning and a result that are
flatly inconsistent with Respondents’ arguments here.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the government
told us in this -- in that case that Carmack wasn't in
the case because it was either waived or something. But
the case was considered on the basis of, on the one hand,
COGSA and, on the other, the law of 50 States.
MR. BALLENGER: That's correct, Justice.
The United States represented to this Court that -- that
Carmack was not in the case, either because it was
waived or because the traffic was moving under 49 U.S.C.
section 10709, which of course is true here as well.
Our view has always been that this Court
wouldn't have granted certiorari purely on the basis of
a waiver. But in any event, this Court's reasoning in
Kirby was that it's very important to foreign trade and
to the uniformity of rules on a through shipment.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but uniformity is
one thing when you’re talking about 50 States and
another when it's just two Federal statutes.
MR. BALLENGER: That's absolutely true, Your
Honor. But the -- for more than a century, the relevant
Federal statutes have been construed harmoniously not to
overlap in this particular situation. Foreign ocean
commerce is governed by the Carriage of Goods at Sea
Act, and the Carmack Amendment has always governed
purely domestic traffic and exports to Canada and
Mexico.
Now, Respondents say that the settled
meaning of that statute changed dramatically in 1978,
but Congress said that it didn't. And it's not really
that hard to read the present language --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what if --
what if Congress was wrong? I mean, the language that
they adopted sure looks quite different to me than what
was applicable prior to 1978, and the boilerplate
provision that, oh, when we codify this, we don't mean to
change anything -- I mean, which prevails, the actual
language they used or that boilerplate?
MR. BALLENGER: Your Honor, I think that
this Court's task, as always, is to read the statute as
a whole, which includes that language that Your Honor
characterizes as boilerplate and also includes the
language that we are here to construe. And you would
want to read it all together if possible.
So let's look at the -- at the present
language. It appears at the back of Union Pacific's
reply brief at page 6a. Just like it always has,
Carmack distinguishes between receiving carriers,
delivering carriers, and connecting carriers.
The simplest way to resolve this case is
that I believe even Respondents would concede that for
Carmack to apply, you need a receiving carrier that
is a rail carrier. "K" Line is the receiving carrier
here, and they are not a rail carrier. Numerous decisions
of this Court and the Interstate Commerce Commission
confirm what the statute plainly says, which is that a
rail carrier is a party providing common carrier railroad
transportation, not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Those are -- those
are two different arguments, right; your rail carrier
argument and your pre-1978 argument?
MR. BALLENGER: They are, Your Honor. The
simplest way to resolve this case is that the present
language, even taken on its face, requires a receiving
carrier that is a rail carrier.
"K" Line is the receiving carrier here.
They are not a rail carrier. This Court and the ICC
have long held that merely subcontracting for common
carrier service does not make you a common carrier.
This Court held that in the American Railway Express
case. The ICC made this crystal clear in the
CSX/Sea-Land matter in 1987, where they held that the
ocean carrier Sea-Land was not a rail carrier simply
because it subcontracted for inland rail transportation
and provided carrier containers to the inland rail
carrier. So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So your -- I'm sorry.
I'm a little confused. Your position is that "K" Line
-- you’re representing whom here?
MR. BALLENGER: I -- my client is Union
Pacific, but I am here today speaking for both of the
Petitioners, "K" Line and Union Pacific.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You have a bit of a --
MR. BALLENGER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- conflict, don't you?
Because isn't "K" Line taking the position it's not a rail
line? And who are you speaking for when you say it's --
MR. BALLENGER: For both of us, Your Honor,
because that resolves -- actually resolves the case for
both "K" Line and Union Pacific.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If it's considered what?
If it's considered --
MR. BALLENGER: "K" Line -- the statute
requires -- to be triggered, it requires a receiving
carrier that is a rail carrier. "K" Line is the
receiving carrier here, and they are not a rail carrier.
So then the question becomes -- Union Pacific certainly
is a rail carrier. The question becomes: Can you treat
Union Pacific as the receiving carrier? You can't. The
receiving carrier language has been in the statute since
06. It has never changed. And for a century it has
always meant the carrier that receives the property from
the shipper at the point of origin. The current
language --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Where is that defined in
Carmack? Where in the pre-1978 provisions or in the
current statute is that to be read?
MR. BALLENGER: Well, there are -- there is
not an explicit definition of the term "receiving
carrier," Your Honor. It appears in the first sentence
of 11706, where it has always appeared in the first
sentence of Carmack, and then there are implications
in -- throughout the rest of Carmack, which I'm happy to
talk about.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I’m trying to
find it, statutorily.
MR. BALLENGER: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And what case says that?
MR. BALLENGER: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What case of ours defines
a -- a receiving carrier in that particular way?
MR. BALLENGER: Well, let's start with the
statutory language, if we may. The first sentence of
Carmack says that "A rail carrier providing
transportation or service subject to the jurisdiction of
the Board under this part shall issue a receipt or bill
of lading for property it receives for
transportation under this part.”
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The only one who’s in --
MR. BALLENGER: That's how --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The only one who has --
the board has jurisdiction over is the railroad. It
doesn't have jurisdiction over the ocean carrier
receiving.
MR. BALLENGER: That -- that's correct, Your
Honor. And then the question is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so you are the --
you have to be the person -- the railroad has to be the
person receiving the goods, correct?
MR. BALLENGER: No, Your Honor. The
receiving carrier has always been the party at the point
of origin of the shipment. And you can see if you look at
the venue provision in the current language --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you’re not reading
the language. Doesn't the language say the person who
receives under the jurisdiction of the board?
MR. BALLENGER: No, Your Honor. It's --
it's two separate requirements. It's always been
understood as two separate requirements. Carmack
requires that the receiving -- a receiving carrier is
subject to the jurisdiction of the board, and then it
also has to be the receiving carrier. The receiving
carrier is the originating carrier. If you look at the
venue provision --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I keep going back
to: What language tells me that particular point in the
statute?
MR. BALLENGER: Because otherwise the -- the
whole structure of the statute doesn't work. Carmack draws
a distinction between receiving carriers, delivering
carriers, and connecting carriers.
If receiving property directly from another
common carrier and merely moving it for a portion of the
journey and connecting that were enough to make you a
receiving carrier -- and, of course, it is in common
parlance; you are receiving goods in that circumstance.
But this receiving --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's my problem.
MR. BALLENGER: "Receiving carrier" has
always been a term of art in this statute. If that were
enough to make you a receiving carrier, then the
statutory structure would fall apart, because every
interim carrier in the line would be a receiving
carrier. Every single one of them receives property --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but not --
MR. BALLENGER: -- property for transportation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not every -- where you are
dealing with -- with intermodal transportation, not every
receiving -- not every rail carrier would be the receiving
rail carrier. I mean, this --
MR. BALLENGER: That --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Your client is the first
rail carrier to receive, right?
MR. BALLENGER: It's not how -- that's not
how the statute is worded, Justice Scalia. The
statute --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is this the language? It
says the -- see if it helps with Justice Scalia's question.
The language says "a rail carrier providing transportation
or service subject to the jurisdiction of” the STB “shall
issue a receipt or bill of lading for property it
receives."
MR. BALLENGER: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: And so that's what it has
to do, is a bill of lading for property it receives.
And you are saying "receives" means receives from the
shipper.
MR. BALLENGER: It has always meant --
JUSTICE BREYER: It does not mean receives
from another carrier.
MR. BALLENGER: It has always meant that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that right?
MR. BALLENGER: That's correct, Your Honor.
It has always meant that. It has to mean that, because
otherwise, if you read it to mean receives from another
carrier, then every single connecting carrier or delivering
carrier in the chain would be a receiving carrier as
well as a connecting or delivering carrier and required
to issue its own bill of lading, which would turn the
historic purposes of Carmack on its head.
The purpose of Carmack was to require the
first carrier in the chain to issue a single through
bill of lading to the destination that would govern the
whole voyage under uniform, consistent liability terms.
No one else in the chain is supposed to issue a bill of
lading, so there’s only one receiving carrier. It's
the first carrier who deals directly with the shipper.
If you look at the venue provision, you can see that the
statute uses the term "originating carrier"
interchangeably with "receiving carrier," and it
provides venue over that carrier only at the point of
origin of the shipment. That would make absolutely no
sense if someone downstream could be the receiving
carrier. In this circumstance you would say, I suppose,
that Union Pacific was the receiving carrier --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I always thought
that the purpose of Carmack was to ensure rail
responsibility, rail carrier responsibility, so that it
was one bill of lading with respect to all railroad
connections. If that was the purpose of Carmack --
MR. BALLENGER: That's not quite correct,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay.
MR. BALLENGER: Historically, this Court
explained in Atlantic Coast Line v. Riverside Mills and
in the Ward case, the purpose of Carmack was to require through
transportation, a through bill of lading, from the
originating point to the destination point, a single
bill of lading under consistent terms, so that the
shipper does not have to prove where damage occurred.
The point of Carmack --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But on the rail line.
MR. BALLENGER: On --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: On rail -- on the rail
transportation.
MR. BALLENGER: On any transportation,
actually, Your Honor. The way that the statute works,
it can --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Historically you say
that?
MR. BALLENGER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: In the pre-1978 Carmack,
there is a -- if you want to take a look at it.
MR. BALLENGER: Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It is in page 99a of
your petition. It reads: "If the loss, damage, or
injury occurs while the property is in the custody of
a carrier by water, that liability" -- "the
liability of such carrier shall be determined by the
bill of lading of the carrier by water and by and under
the laws applicable to transportation by water."
MR. BALLENGER: Yes, Your Honor. That --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So --
MR. BALLENGER: That provision was
introduced in the Transportation Act of 1920. It's
talking about domestic water carriers. And it's still
there in the statute. It's just in the -- the Carmack
provision -- when Congress split Carmack into three in
95, it moved that provision to 14706(c)(2). And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So explain to me what
happens in domestic water cases. It says that you can
have a different bill of lading for the water transport.
That bill of lading controls your damage on the water,
and it separates that out from damage on the rail side?
MR. BALLENGER: In domestic -- Congress drew
a distinction between foreign and domestic commerce for
a very long time, Your Honor. In domestic commerce, the
rule has been that a rail carrier could interconnect
with a domestic water carrier and the domestic water
carrier could carry it for a leg of the trip, and the
whole trip would still be governed by the Carmack
through bill of lading. But if there was damage during
the water portion, it would be governed by the water
law, which is the Harter Act.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And the railroad is
covered by any damage that occurs on land?
MR. BALLENGER: The railroad is liable on a
through transportation basis for the entire trip, but if
the damage occurred during the water leg, its liability
is limited and confined by the law that governs the
water leg.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there already is
domestically two different forms of liability
protection?
MR. BALLENGER: Congress made that
compromise, because Congress was forced to choose
between not having through bills of lading at all
domestically or making -- or essentially repealing the
Harter Act in circumstances where rail carriers interact
with them. Congress made the choice to compromise and
have kind of a hybrid arrangement.
But in foreign trade -- the geographics of
Carmack was always confined -- that Carmack did not apply
to imports at all, and it did not apply to exports except
for exports to adjacent foreign countries --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Prior -- prior to
78. If I think you lose on that question under the law
as happens to be currently codified, but would prevail
under the pre-1978 law, what -- what is your strongest
case for the proposition that what I referred to earlier
as the boilerplate language trumps the plain language of
the currently codified version?
MR. BALLENGER: Your Honor, we don't think
that this Court has ever interpreted language of that
nature. But in a different context with a much weaker
statutory language, the Fourco Glass line of cases, this
Court applies a strong thumb on the scale that Congress
didn't intend to change the law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's kind of a
difficult -- I mean, if you’re a shipper and you’re
trying to figure out, okay, let's ship some goods, and
you pick up the law and it says, well, this is what the
law says, who's going to tell you that, well, that you
may think that's what the law says, but you’re really
governed by the pre-1978 law.
MR. BALLENGER: Well, Your Honor, we don't
-- we don’t think that it’s -- it is necessary for this
Court to read the statute in a counter-textual way.
You just have to do what this Court has always done and
read the statute as a whole, including giving some weight
to that provision, which is in the text of the statute, and
reading the rest of the statute in light of it.
And I think if you do that, particularly in
this case, it's really not that hard to reconcile the
pre-1978 law with the current law. Union Pacific can’t
be a receiving carrier because it didn't receive the
goods at the point of origin. "K" Line isn't a rail
carrier. That's enough to resolve this case, and this
Court doesn't need to go any farther. Actually, that
would, as a practical matter, mostly resolve the
commercial problem that this Court granted certiorari to
resolve.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have one question. I
know that it’s -- your white light is on. Can I assume
that whether we rule for Petitioners or Respondents in
this case, the shipping world, the cargo world, will
immediately adjust to our decision? It's not going to
be a problem. There are insurers, there are freight
forwarders, there are form contracts. People will know
exactly what to do. They will adjust in 1 week to what we
do. Am I right about that? Or can you say that if we
adopt the Respondents’ position, it will be disruptive to
the shipping trade and so forth?
MR. BALLENGER: Not exactly, Your Honor,
because of course Respondents’ position is that Carmack
is a mandatory regime; there’s no way to contract
around it if it applies. So Respondents’ position is
that Carmack mandatorily must govern the inland leg of
any of these through shipments. The practical
consequence of that is that true through bills of
lading -- unity of responsibility in one shipper under
consistent terms for the entire voyage -- will become
impossible in foreign trade. So there won't be a way to
correct that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Ballenger.
Mr. Yang.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANTHONY YANG ON BEHALF
OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING PETITIONERS
MR. YANG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I’d like to address a few of the
questions that have come up already. Justice Sotomayor,
you asked what Supreme Court decision addresses the
receiving carrier. There’s a series of decisions which
address receiving carriers and the nature of the
receiving carrier as the initial carrier that receives
goods from the shipper. I would -- Mexican Light and
Power Company, 1947, is probably the best, but that
traces its way back all the way to the 1910s, Galveston
Wharf Company, Ward, Starbird, Blish Milling, Riverside
Mills. These cases are largely cited at our brief at
page 27 to 28, footnote 10.
Regarding the geographic scope of Carmack on
the current text, we believe that the current text,
which is reproduced in the petition appendix at 69a --
if you look at the combination of both the first and the
third sentences of Carmack, we believe that that
reproduces the historic scope as encompassing only
domestic transportation, purely domestic transportation,
and transportation to an adjacent foreign country when
it's an export.
The first sentence requires that the rail
carrier be providing transportation or service subject
to the jurisdiction of the board and issue a receipt or
bill of lading. The very purpose of Carmack from the
very beginning, its core purpose, was to allow a shipper
to sue the initial carrier. The initial carrier was
responsible for the entire shipment. All the connecting
carriers were deemed to be agents of the initial carrier,
and, therefore, there was an easy defendant for the
shipper, who dealt directly with that shipper -- that
carrier and received a bill of lading from that carrier
to sue. That --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I read -- I read
your brief, like your friend's, as relying almost
exclusively on the pre-1978 language.
MR. YANG: Our brief addressed the first
sentence briefly in, I believe, the prior page. Page 20
to 21 deals with the first sentence, and then 22 deals
with the third. But our point is that the first sentence
sets an anchor in the United States as the -- as the
origin of the shipment.
Part A jurisdiction -- this is reproduced at
page 62a of the petition appendix. It does cover
shipments that themselves transit United States and
foreign countries.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. What -- what are
you referring to now?
MR. YANG: 62a of the petition appendix.
This is section 10501, which defines Part A jurisdiction
of the STB. And then I'm looking --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The Union Pacific
petition appendix?
MR. YANG: They’re both -- both of them are
actually the same. Both the petition appendices are the
same.
So I'm looking down at -- (a)(2) provides
that the jurisdiction of the STB applies only to
transportation into the United States when that's
between -- you know, part of a larger transit between
the U.S. and a foreign country or even purely
domestically.
So, a shipper -- or a carrier that is
subject to STB jurisdiction has to be providing this
U.S. transportation when it issues the bill of lading.
So the -- again, the central purpose was to provide a
carrier by which -- against whom the shipper can bring
suit in a convenient forum, the person that the shipper
dealt with. And that's now reflected in section -- the
forum provision of Carmack, which is subsection (d)(2),
it provides that a suit under Carmack may only be
brought against the originating rail carrier in the
judicial district in which the point of origin is
located. Those -- and the prior provision says that
that's a U.S. district court or a State court.
Carmack itself anchors the transportation
as starting in the United States.
And then the third sentence explains the
remainder of the historic scope. The third sentence --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where -- we’re looking
where, now?
MR. YANG: This is back to 69(a). It’s
Carmack, third sentence in subsection (b). It defines
the liability under Carmack. It says the liability
under this section is for damage “caused by the receiving
carrier, the delivering carrier, or another rail carrier
over whose line or route the property is transited in
the United States or from a place in the United States
to a place in an adjacent foreign country.”
So, what that does is that provides the
center for the two bookends. The first bookend is the
originating carrier, the receiving carrier that receives
the goods in the United States, provides the bill of
lading to the shipper.
The second bookend is the delivering
carrier, and in between -- remember Carmack was intended
to cover the entire carriage as a unified whole. The
in-between is transportation in the United States or
export transportation from the United States to a point
in a foreign country.
We believe that that text, read as a whole,
reflects the historic scope of Carmack that's existed
since 1915 when it was extended beyond purely domestic
transportation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But why -- why doesn't the
(2), (a)(2), the delivering rail carrier -- if what you
say is true, that should be the delivering rail carrier
delivering in a -- in an adjacent foreign country.
MR. YANG: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That -- that limitation is
strangely missing from (2).
MR. YANG: Well, we believe the portion of
(a)(3), which now looks like it's in (a)(3), the “over
whose line or route the property is” transited --
“transported” actually applies to the receiving and
delivering rail carrier.
If you would turn to page 5a and 6a of the
reply brief of Union Pacific, there’s a side-by-side
comparison.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. Wait a minute now.
MR. YANG: I'm sorry to have the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The paragraphing you say is
wrong?
MR. YANG: The -- from 5a to 6a, you’ll see
a is the 1978 version of Carmack that was enacted in the
78 codification.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. YANG: The current version is reflected
on the facing page. There was no paragraph indentation
in 1978. And in 1995, when Congress changed the text, it
did include a paragraph indentation, but the committee
report -- the conference report is very clear that
Carmack was not changed. Also --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So all -- you’re saying
that -- I think what you’re saying is that all we have
to use the statutory statement that nothing was meant
to be changed or is to say, well, that paragraphing in
is just wrong, right?
MR. YANG: Well, I don't know -- you mean
the indentation?
JUSTICE SCALIA: The indentation.
MR. YANG: The indentation was inadvertent.
And I would actually direct the Court to page 73a, which
is the other part of Carmack that now exists for motor
transportation and freight forwarders. There is no
indentation. The current version of the other half of
Carmack does not provide the indentation. The
indentation is inadvertent. And in '95 -- the '95 Act,
which --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm losing you. 73a?
MR. YANG: 73a -- (a)(1) reproduces what we
were just looking for -- looking at in the rail carrier
context.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. YANG: It's a single paragraph. That's
the way it's existed since, you know, 1915, basically,
or 1927 when they added receiving carriers.
So, what the Court can do -- it's true,
Carmack is less clear than it used to be. It was made
somewhat less clear in '78 and in '95. But we believe
that when you take the text as a whole, particularly
when read in light of the context of this Court's
decision and the long-standing practice in the United States
reflected in the STB -- the STB's decisions, that is the
ICC's decisions, the predecessor, that at least the
provision is ambiguous.
And if the provision is ambiguous, section
(a), the mandate that the statute should not be construed
to make a substantive change in the law, should control.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: This may not have
anything to do with anything. Is there a reason the STB
doesn't appear on your brief?
MR. YANG: The STB does not appear on our
brief --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It did in the Kirby
case just a few years ago.
MR. YANG: It did. It did. The STB has not
taken a position about the current scope of Carmack and,
therefore, decided not to join our brief.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is -- is there a way to --
are you finished?
MR. YANG: No. I would say, though, that
the ICC's decisions remain binding. This is 1995. The
statute, ICCTA section 204(a), which is a note now to
section 701 of Title 49, specifically provided that the
ICC's orders and determinations would remain binding
unless changed by the STB. The STB just did not, at
this point, come on record and take a position about the
scope of Carmack.
JUSTICE BREYER: We don't even get into this
problem if -- unless the ship line is a rail carrier?
MR. YANG: In part. There's -- if you --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, it says, “A rail
carrier providing transportation or service subject to”
the STB “shall issue a receipt or a bill of lading.”
That's what leads us into the problem.
MR. YANG: That would take care of the
initial carrier, what we believe is the initial
receiving carrier in the case, "K" Line. However, I
believe the argument is being made that Carmack could
suddenly apply mid-carriage at the border.
JUSTICE BREYER: But mid-carriage -- it only
talks about -- they use that word "received." That's
why I thought possibly it didn't because it says --
MR. YANG: I believe the argument is that
the first carrier who receives property in the United
States would be deemed the receiving carrier.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's a separate argument?
MR. YANG: That's a separate argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: Did the Ninth Circuit pass
on that argument?
MR. YANG: You would have -- excuse me.
JUSTICE BREYER: Did the Ninth Circuit pass
on that argument?
MR. YANG: It did not.
JUSTICE BREYER: It did not.
MR. YANG: It did not.
JUSTICE BREYER: So that's not right in
front of us?
MR. YANG: That is correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's quite different.
MR. YANG: It is a different -- but we think
it's clearly wrong in light of Carmack's historic
purpose. This would be to divide the -- the -- if that
were correct, it would divide the transportation in two.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. YANG: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Frederick.
Mr. Frederick.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID C. FREDERICK
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. FREDERICK: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
It does not take great mental gymnastics to
read the plain language of this statute and resolve it
the way the Ninth Circuit did in favor of Respondents.
The case is controlled by the plain language
of several Federal statutes, and they have been adverted
to, to some extent. But I would like to point out to
the Court that in 2-1/2 pages of our merits brief,
starting at page 26 and going over to page 28, we not
only cite the full language in full of the Carmack
Amendment and the jurisdictional provision of the STB,
but explain how Union Pacific is a delivering carrier
within the meaning of the Carmack Amendment; under the
plain terms of the statute, they are liable for the
loss; the Carmack Amendment applies to their receipt of
the property; and the train derailment which was caused
by their negligence comes within the plain terms of the
Carmack Amendment.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then under that view, I
guess that -- that any intermodal transport, China, all
the goods coming from China, which tend to move under a
single bill of lading, as soon as they get to the United
States and go on a train for 50 miles, a new bill of
lading must issue?
MR. FREDERICK: No. In fact, this Carmack
Amendment --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why?
MR. FREDERICK: -- explicitly says, quote:
"Failure to issue a receipt or bill of lading does not
affect the liability of a rail carrier." Carmack --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right, so you're saying
they don't have to issue --
MR. FREDERICK: They do not have to issue a
separate --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. If they don't have
to issue a separate receipt, what we’re talking about
is the bill of lading that was issued by the ship.
MR. FREDERICK: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now, if that's
correct and if the ship -- the only one that has to do
that, it says, is a rail carrier, and a rail carrier is
a person providing common carrier rail transport. And
then that's defined to include intermodal equipment used
by or in connection with a railroad. And my
understanding -- which I'm asking you for correction
if I don’t -- is that the argument here is the ship is
providing intermodal equipment used by or in connection
with a railroad.
MR. FREDERICK: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: And it's the words "used by
or in connection with" that I am focusing on, because to
apply those words here seems to me to bring every
international shipment in the world, no matter how small
the American portion by rail and no matter how big the
foreign part of this transport -- it brings it all within
Carmack. And it means that the bill of ladings issued
by people throughout the world are all going to have to
apply to meet the terms of the Carmack Amendment, which
had the purposes of railroads in the United States, and
that's going to be a nightmare.
MR. FREDERICK: No, it won't,
Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, first, is it true what
I said? And, second, if it is true why isn't it way
contrary to the purpose and a nightmare?
MR. FREDERICK: It is not -- it is true and
not true, but for different reasons. And if I could
take a moment to explain, because I think it is
important.
In 1978, the plain language of the statute
defined what the STB's jurisdiction is. They do not
dispute that the last part of the jurisdictional
provision is the STB jurisdiction when a -- a shipment
is in, quote, "between the United States and a place in
a foreign country," but the STB only has jurisdiction to
the extent the transportation occurs in the United
States.
So it is true that imports into the United
States are covered by the Carmack Amendment, but only to
the extent of the transportation being within the United
States.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, but why don't they have to
issue a bill of lading? That's what they say. So every
company, the Finnish company, Chinese, every company,
every shipowner, even if he’s never been to the
United States -- sad for him, but nonetheless -- every
one of those is going to have to issue a bill of
lading, whatever meeting whatever requirements are
there, and we know at least one requirement you think
applies.
MR. FREDERICK: Let me go back -- let me go
back to the international point, Justice Breyer, because
the railroads argued against an international uniform
rule that would apply both to ocean carriage and inland
carriage in the Rotterdam rules. And they made the
representation to the international community: You don't
need to have a uniform rule that applies to both ocean
carriage and inland carriage, because we have this thing
called the Carmack Amendment.
And they made the representation that the
Carmack Amendment would apply to imports, as this Court,
in the Woodbury case written by Justice Brandeis, decided
in 1920, and a month earlier --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What are you arguing,
estoppel?
MR. FREDERICK: No, I'm arguing that their
position is inconsistent with their representations, and,
therefore, the plain language of the statute --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which one is right? That's
what we are concerned about.
MR. FREDERICK: What I'm --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which one is right? Their
earlier position or their current position?
MR. FREDERICK: Their earlier -- their
earlier position was correct under the plain
language of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why don't you speak to that
rather than the fact that they had an earlier position?
MR. FREDERICK: The plain language,
Justice Scalia, as it is currently enforced, I think
disposes of the case without any real argument.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me. Can I go back
to Justice Breyer's question?
MR. FREDERICK: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And perhaps -- as I
understand this, I think we are all forgetting that none
of these liability provisions come into play until there
is proof that an incident has occurred somewhere, either
on a railroad or on the ocean, correct?
MR. FREDERICK: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so the issue becomes
which set of rules governs that particular incident --
MR. FREDERICK: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- where it happened.
MR. FREDERICK: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I think Justice Breyer
asked you why it made sense that there would be two
rules in effect for what happens on the ocean and what
happens on land; and if we had it, wouldn't it create
great difficulty? I think -- you may correct me.
JUSTICE BREYER: Your point was --
MR. FREDERICK: That's how the whole world --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- if it creates such
difficulty, why were the railroads in favor of it
before?
MR. FREDERICK: Correct. And that's how --
that's how Europe operates. Europe has separate
conventions for rail and road that apply to damage that
occur on land, and the European nations have acceded to
the various versions of Hague rules --
JUSTICE BREYER: Anything here that says on
land? Anything in Carmack that says on land?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, it's transport --
JUSTICE BREYER: In other words, if it's in
a ferry boat -- remember, we have a very broad definition
of "rail" where "rail" includes all things that have
nothing to do with rail.
MR. FREDERICK: But as --
JUSTICE BREYER: And so now we’ve got that
broad definition, and I would have thought we traced
through what has to be in the receipt, and then we get to
the -- that section and where it's exempt, because they got
-- want to get rid of it; then you have to put in -- you
have to put in a certain kind of waiver, which is very hard
to achieve. And that -- that's my understanding of it.
MR. FREDERICK: It's the Surface
Transportation Board, Justice Breyer, that has the
jurisdiction here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but they can't get rid
of the thing you like.
MR. FREDERICK: No, they can.
JUSTICE BREYER: They can?
MR. FREDERICK: They can.
JUSTICE BREYER: How do they do it?
MR. FREDERICK: And I want to get to
Justice Kennedy's question. They can. These are
background rules that we’re talking about, and they will
be contracted around. After the Sompo decision was
decided in the Second Circuit, Union Pacific went right
out and changed the contracts that they have with ocean
carriers to ensure that the ocean carriers would
indemnify them if they were liable and did not get the
full benefits of contractual extensions. What we're
talking about here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, you don’t --
MR. FREDERICK: -- is whether there's an
American forum for American cargo interests for an
American train that is derailed in the United States.
That's what we are talking about.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But part of your
argument -- you don't rely heavily on your plain
language argument when it comes to deciding that these
huge ocean vessels are rail carriers.
MR. FREDERICK: Let me go to that point now,
Mr. Chief Justice. The Port of Long Beach is situated
more than 20 miles from Los Angeles, and the port has
miles of train track with intermodal, multimodal
facilities that get the cargo containers which "K" Line
owns on chassis that "K" Line owns, and they have to get
from the Port of Long Beach 20 miles away to the Los
Angeles train depot where Union Pacific picks them up.
Now, under "K" Line's theory of the case,
they get to have a donut hole in the Carmack Amendment
liability provision for that 20-mile transport. We
would submit as a factual matter, which of course would
need to be done on remand, that there are facts that can
be adduced to establish the functionality test which the
ICC has long administered to look at the functions being
performed as well as --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So that's a little
bit different from your argument that they are a rail
carrier because their bill of lading would cover the
train ride to Chicago.
MR. FREDERICK: We didn't make that
argument. Our argument was that, based on the functions
and them holding themselves out to be a rail carrier,
which they have done, they qualify under the normal ICC
method of determining rail carrier.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If it weren't -- if
it weren't for the -- for the track from Long Beach to
Los Angeles, you would say then they’re not a rail
carrier?
MR. FREDERICK: The argument, as the ICC has
defined it, also looks at things like the multimodal
facilities, like the containers, and -- and the holding
themselves out as a rail carrier in their advertising.
Those are important parts of the functionality test.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, how -- how does
the Chief Justice's hypothetical work with the language
of the statute? They -- it just goes to Los Angeles and
it -- there’s a railroad track right by -- by the
wharf, and it's the Union Pacific Railroad.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, there are -- there are
two ways to read the text and resolve the case. One is
to say "K" Line is the receiving rail carrier when it
transfers from the international ocean carriage
corporation to the American multimodal transportation
operation and gets the goods from the Port of Long Beach
up to Los Angeles, and then treat UP, Union Pacific, as
the delivering rail carrier. Under the statute, UP is
not required -- although the first part says you’re
supposed to issue a bill of lading, their liability for
the train derailment does not turn on whether they
issued a bill of lading or not.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is your case -- does
your case end if we hold that "K" Line is not a railroad
carrier?
MR. FREDERICK: No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right.
MR. FREDERICK: "K" Line gets out of the
case. We would have to go to Tokyo to pursue "K" Line
under the bill of lading. But we could continue our
suit against Union Pacific as a delivering rail carrier
under the Carmack Amendment.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As a delivering carrier.
MR. FREDERICK: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, unless we
hold, as your friends argue on the other side, that they
can opt out under 10709.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, you would need to
reach the question of whether or not exempt carriage
under 10502 takes away the option of a 10709 contract.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And that's a
different question with respect to liability and claims
and with respect to venue.
MR. FREDERICK: Correct. And let me address
that, if I might.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I just -- just
briefly before you answer the Judge --
MR. FREDERICK: Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The Justice -- the Chief.
In what capacity -- "K" Line is the contracting party with
Union Pacific. Under what contract could the shipper sue
Union Pacific?
MR. FREDERICK: Under the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If "K" Line is -- is the
shipper --
MR. FREDERICK: Directly under the Carmack
Amendment. And in fact, when Union Pacific removed this
case from State court to Federal court, the Federal
question was they said: There is a Carmack Amendment
claim being asserted against us. That's how we get from
State court to Federal court.
And when they -- when they sought to transfer
the case from California to New York, they did so on the
basis of the convenience of 28 of the 32 witnesses to their
train derailment being American citizens.
So it's not like there needs to be some
special -- there’s a special cause of action within the
Carmack Amendment, Justice Sotomayor, that provides a
means of redress for damaged cargo interests to go
directly against the railroad.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Perhaps --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Regardless of whether
the shipment was by them directly or not?
MR. FREDERICK: Correct, if they caused the
damage. That's the whole point of the Carmack
Amendment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe now you could
respond to my question about the distinction under 10502
between claims and liability and venue.
MR. FREDERICK: Yes. The STB, in an
authoritative determination that is entitled to our
deference, has said that when it issues an exemption for
certain categories of rail carriage, which it has done
with the multimodal shipments, those exemptions remove
the possibility of a 10709 contract carriage.
And the reason for that is that, in both
situations, the rail carrier has to provide an
opportunity for Carmack-compliant terms to be given to
the shipper. If it's exempt cargo carriage under 10502,
502(e) says that the carrier must provide
Carmack-compliant terms in order to take advantage of
the exemption and contract under the exemption. 10709
provides contract carriage, but only if the rail carrier
provides common carrier tariffs that a cargo interest
could ship under.
Here, because the transportation is exempt
under 105 -- 10205, there is no common carrier tariff
that is applicable. And that's why the STB has said if
there’s no common carrier tariff applicable under
101, then there cannot be an opportunity for contract
carriage. To do otherwise would be to make the statute
a complete deregulation statute.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but it's a
little -- I mean, the -- I’m looking at page 64a of the
petition appendix, where they’re saying you can't exempt
through contractual terms for liability and claims.
Venue is treated elsewhere, separately from liability and
claims. So, again, under -- you’re the plain language team,
and that seems fairly plain that venue is not covered.
MR. FREDERICK: No -- well, liability, Your
Honor, is where you can bring your suit and what your
suit --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, the liability is
not where you can bring your suit. Liability is
liability. Venue is where you can bring your suit.
MR. FREDERICK: The -- the way the board has
construed this in the letter brief that they filed in
the -- in the Second Circuit, which is entitled to our
deference, says the Ninth Circuit in Regal-Beloit got it
right with respect to the interplay between 10502,
709, and -- and contract carriage.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. Excuse me. You say
we have to defer to a letter --
MR. FREDERICK: No --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- brief in another case?
I think most of my colleagues would not defer to a
letter brief in this case. And you’re saying that we
owe deference to a letter brief in another case?
MR. FREDERICK: That is what this Court
held --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mead, which I didn't agree
with, it seems to me --
MR. FREDERICK: Mead did not overrule Auer,
and in Auer the Court -- this Court gave deference to a
brief by the Federal Government that was setting forth
the authoritative --
JUSTICE SCALIA: In another case?
MR. FREDERICK: In that case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: In that case.
MR. FREDERICK: But I don't know why --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do we have a brief here?
MR. FREDERICK: It's a distinction without
a difference, because here the Second Circuit invited
the views of the STB to tell us what do you think is
the interplay between these various provisions?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. FREDERICK: And the STB gave an
authoritative view to the Second Circuit so that it could
resolve a case in which the STB was not a party.
JUSTICE BREYER: There are two things here I
don't understand I'm just trying to get clear. In the
first part, 706(a), it talks about -- in the definition
of "rail carrier" -- 102(6), I guess. It says railroad
includes -- railroad transport will include intermodal
-- intermodal equipment transport used in connection
with a railroad.
What is intermodal equipment?
MR. FREDERICK: Those are the chassis. They
are the containers that are used to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So now, if we read
it literally, to go back to my -- I'm trying to produce
the worst example that frightens me the most. There is
miles of railroad transport in the United States,
but it carries the chassis, or it carries that big box,
which has come all over the world, from all over the
world. And if we read this with no limitation, this
definition makes the ships that carried it from other
places railroads, and once that's railroad
transportation, we’re into Carmack.
And now, if STB exempts it, what happens is
the provision comes into play that says you can't exempt
an exempt carrier, in effect, from the liability
provisions. And it means the ships that had to issue the
bill of lading now have to allow the kinds of suits --
now, here is the point I'm not certain about -- I would
think against them, not just against a railroad carrier,
and perhaps against them for anything that happens, even
on the ocean, and not just the railroad carrier for
something that happens within the United States.
MR. FREDERICK: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, explain to me: What
is it that gets us out of that?
MR. FREDERICK: There -- the -- COGSA
applies tackle to tackle. If the damage is occurring
on a ship --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. FREDERICK: -- the STB has no jurisdiction
over that. Carmack does not apply. It is only once the
ship --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, where does it say
that? Because I’d better read that one.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, COGSA itself, which is
set out in the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Yes. Where?
MR. FREDERICK: And under no condition --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you know -- do you know
offhand where it says that, just so I -- I’d better --
MR. FREDERICK: Yes. I can give -- the
provision of COGSA that you are looking for is the
definition of "carriage," which is set forth in --
JUSTICE BREYER: Good.
MR. FREDERICK: -- page 48a of the petition
appendix, and it is 1(e). “The term ‘carriage of goods’
covers the period from the time when the goods are
loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the
ship.” And as the Court in Kirby said --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's COGSA. That's not
Carmack.
MR. FREDERICK: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: So what gets us out of
Carmack?
MR. FREDERICK: Carmack only applies if it
is carriage and transportation within the STB's
jurisdiction. The STB has no jurisdiction over COGSA
carriers. That's the Federal Maritime Commission.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then why are we suing --
why are we suing -- why does the ship being sued here?
MR. FREDERICK: The ship is performing two
different functions, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: I see.
MR. FREDERICK: It is performing an ocean
carriage function, and then once it’s on land -- and
there are thousands of "K" Line containers all over the
United States right now where "K" Line is performing
services, motor carriage and rail carriage services, here
in the United States.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that because they
have contracted for them?
MR. FREDERICK: They own them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they don't own
Union Pacific's rail line.
MR. FREDERICK: No, they own the containers
that Union Pacific is pulling.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if I -- if I own
a container being pulled by somebody else's train, I'm
in the train business?
MR. FREDERICK: Under the definition of
functionality, where that is part of how the STB
regulates. And to say otherwise, Mr. Chief Justice,
would be to deny the Federal Government the regulatory
authority over containers that come into this country
representing approximately 80 percent of the trade.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, it wouldn't. It
would just -- it may just mean that they don't have
the regulatory authority because that container is a
rail carrier.
MR. FREDERICK: It’s carrying --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What’s carrying it
is the rail carrier. It's a container.
MR. FREDERICK: But they -- well, at one
level, Mr. Chief Justice, it's sort of academic, because
the STB exempted from Part A, which includes the Carmack
Amendment, those containers, and it did so in an
exemption order which we’ve cited in our -- in our brief.
So, at some level, there’s an academic quality to this
colloquy.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I am a little
bit confused now. Now, back to being confused.
You’re suggesting that from the landing --
it's an ocean carrier -- and the minute that the
containers are unloaded from the vessel and put on land,
it becomes a railroad carrier, even though its delivery
contract may have ended at that point?
MR. FREDERICK: If its delivery contract
ended at that point, it did not hold itself out --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No. Right. So what about --
MR. FREDERICK: -- as a rail carrier --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what about -- what is
it that you're arguing makes them a railroad carrier
once they put it there. Let's assume the reverse of the
hypothetical that you -- that you posited. They deliver
to the dock, and Union Pacific is the one that owns
those 3 to 6 miles of connection to its main railroad.
It's the one who’s going to provide the motor carriage.
It's the one who’s going to take it from the -- the dock
and bring it in.
MR. FREDERICK: And can I just add to the
hypothetical the fact, which is an important fact: Did
the ocean carrier hold itself out to the public as a rail
carrier in making the contract with the original
shipper? Because that is an important fact that does
not help us resolve your particular hypothetical,
Justice Sotomayor.
If UP is picking up the goods with its
equipment, the ocean carrier is not a rail carrier under
our theory of the case. There has to be functions being
performed that are multimodal functions, and the ocean
carrier has to hold --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it's not merely that
it has possession of the container that it has dropped
somewhere. It has to transport it in some way in
relationship to the railroad?
MR. FREDERICK: I think that's the best way
to understand the statute.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can we go back one more
second? Can you just give me the citation in Carmack --
not COGSA, but Carmack -- that would get our intermodal
shipment out of the board's jurisdiction?
Because what I'm thinking about is the
intermodal shipment and the boat sinks near Hawaii.
Okay? Now, on your reading of Carmack, not COGSA, what
gets that shipment sunk in Hawaii -- or Midway or Guam
or someplace -- what gets them out of Carmack?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Which words?
MR. FREDERICK: On 62a --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. FREDERICK: -- the petition appendix
defines the general jurisdiction.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, and it includes
transport, just as you defined it, between the United
States and another place -- United States and a place
in a foreign country.
MR. FREDERICK: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: So that's what this is.
This is a shipment between Shanghai and San Francisco
or Oakland.
MR. FREDERICK: And at (a)(2) -- will you
look at (a)(2), please?
JUSTICE BREYER: (a)(2).
MR. FREDERICK: (a)(2) says jurisdiction under
paragraph 1 applies only to transportation in the United
States.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, sorry. Between a place
in -- oh, transportation in the United States.
MR. FREDERICK: In the United States.
JUSTICE BREYER: Between a place in.
MR. FREDERICK: Exactly.
JUSTICE BREYER: Thank you.
MR. FREDERICK: Yes, thank you.
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK: Now, it is not true that the
law was settled prior to 1978. The Woodbury case
applied the Carmack Amendment to imports. Union
Pacific v. Burke applied it to imports. And in those
cases, this Court made the determination that the words
"from" and "to" were also meaning "between." And
Congress, when it cleaned up the statute in 1978 and
provided words that are very easy to understand now, was
not changing what had been a well-settled practice of
goods that were getting -- arriving at a port in the
United States and then being transported by land means.
And it's important to understand the context
in which this arose, because I think our fundamental
disagreement with the Solicitor General's presentation
is that it ignores the container revolution that was
occurring between the late 1950s and the '70s, when
this Act was codified and cleaned up. And in that
container revolution, prior to the time when containers
were used for multimodal transportation, it was common
for goods to be repackaged at ports in the United
States. They were taken off ships; they were
repackaged, put onto trains or trucks, and that required
a separate contractual arrangement.
Now, this Court, in Woodbury and Burke, had
said it is not so important whether or not there is a
separate contract, so long as the function and the intent
is clear that it is being moved by rail or road in the
United States.
The Carmack Amendment will apply, Justice
Sotomayor. You are completely correct that the purpose
of the Carmack Amendment was to hold railroads and motor
carriers responsible for the liabilities caused by their
loss. But when Congress then cleaned that up and put it in
section 3, it was not intending to obviate the clear and
unambiguous language of the statute. It was simply
providing, you know, some boilerplate that I think is
very difficult to cause the Court to override the
plain language of the statute today.
And in 1995, when Congress eliminated --
terminated the ICC and enacted the ICC Termination Act,
it reenacted that language. It did not encompass
section 3 at that time, so the statute as it presently
exists does not have a statutory pointer as to how you
are to interpret the language. And under the normal
canons that this Court has instructed for courts and the
bar, the easiest way to practice law in this area is to
look at the statute, see what it says, and not have to
go back, not just through the last iteration of the
statute, but the one before that, and not just to be
able to look at what was in the U.S. Code, but to have
to go back to the Statutes at Large to see what other
statutory provisions Congress had put into the statute.
That would make the practice of law extremely difficult.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I ask you a question
about -- about whether -- whether the shipper becomes a
rail carrier? Suppose it's not 3 to 5 miles.
Suppose the -- suppose the American rail carrier is
waiting right at the foot of the wharf, and all these
wharves have rails that go out to the ship, okay?
And let's assume that that's owned by the -- by the
shipping company. And a crane takes the -- the
goods off of the ship, puts it on a -- on a car that
rides along those rails for a couple of hundred yards.
Is that enough to make the shipper a railroad?
MR. FREDERICK: I would -- I would concede
the point of interchange at the port, Justice Scalia. I
don't think it's necessary for the Court to reach that.
I will concede that point, so long as, you know, we are
talking about an immediate nexus between the vessel and
the ship. And -- and that is not -- not a point that we
have to prevail on to win in this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you say here they own
rail lines that --
MR. FREDERICK: There are 60 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that go for --
MR. FREDERICK: Well, there was no discovery
because this was decided on the pleadings as a matter of
law. We believe that once discovery is permitted, if
you allow the case to go back for factual development,
that the facts would reveal that "K" Line was engaging
in significant rail operations that at least get us
beyond -- into the realm of legitimate advocacy.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: When you say "engaging
in," are you talking about vis-à-vis this shipment?
MR. FREDERICK: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or is it just in
general? Vis-à-vis you?
MR. FREDERICK: Yes. That's correct.
When my colleague here says that we take
the position that Carmack cannot be contracted around,
that is not true. Our point here is that when there is
exempt carriage, the STB has already defined this as
something that can be provided by contract, but we believe
that 10502(e) says that they have to provide
Carmack-compliant terms.
The industry will adapt to a decision by
this Court in setting the background rules. We would
submit that the simpler regime and the one that the
railroad had advocated in the international community
was there -- was for there to be a U.S. statute that
applies and not to allow complete deregulation through
contracts --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they -- they
can't contract around liability for an event such as the
one that happened here. Because they have to offer
Carmack-compliant terms, and if the owner of the goods
has the option of accepting those, they can't contract
around that.
MR. FREDERICK: That's correct. And -- and
the point here about the forum is an important one,
because Union Pacific has never thought that in these
ocean bills of lading that that entitled American cargo
interests to have to go to a foreign country under the
ocean carrier's bill of lading in order to vindicate the
interests in damage to their cargo. That was an
invention by "K" Line in this case after UP sought to
remove it under the Carmack Amendment and transfer it to
New York, and UP joined that motion and has argued
throughout that the Carmack Amendment applies.
It would be unusual, to say the least, to
allow UP now to take advantage of a contractual
extension of COGSA where section 12 of COGSA, by its
plain terms, in language that is completely ignored by
the other side, says COGSA stops basically at the
tackle-to-tackle period and does -- otherwise does not
affect otherwise applicable law. And there’s a
specific reference in section 12 to the Harter Act and
any other applicable law. And in 1936, when Congress
enacted COGSA to implement the United States -- of the
Hague rules, it was aware of the Carmack Amendment.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Ballenger, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF J. SCOTT BALLENGER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. BALLENGER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Even Respondents can't really bring
themselves to say that Union Pacific is the receiving
carrier here. It's obviously not. They say that
somehow, UP could be liable as the delivering carrier
under Carmack. But of course, if "K" Line is not a rail
carrier, there is no receiving carrier who is obligated
to issue a bill of lading under Carmack. No one is
liable to under Carmack.
That is how the statute always worked from 1906
to 1978. If the receiving carrier was not governed by Carmack,
as it was not in any import case and in any export case except
for Canada and Mexico, then Carmack did not apply to
anyone. You can't parachute in midstream into the
middle of a big movement and impose Carmack obligations at
the midpoint, because that would turn the historic purpose
of Carmack completely upside down. It would read Carmack
as mandating the commercial problem that Carmack was designed
to solve.
The point of Carmack and of through bills
under Carmack and COGSA is uniformity of responsibility
under consistent terms for the whole voyage in one
person.
And the reason is that in order to recover
from anyone, the shipper has to prove receipt of the
goods in good condition by that carrier, and if you
break the chain of the through bill, then you would have
to prove -- the shippers would have to prove that Union
Pacific, for instance, received the property in good
order, when as Respondents concede, all that Union
Pacific gets is a sealed container. It has no idea at
that point.
And -- and so the shipper would be left in a
position at the end of the day; it opens the container,
there's damage; no one knows where it occurs; and there’s
-- there’s no source of law, no source of fact to
figure out where the damage occurred.
Respondents raise a lot of questions about
some track that they say "K" Line owns from Long Beach
to Los Angeles. None of this is in the record, and it's
waived at this point, Your Honor. It's not actually
true. That's not "K" Line; it's an affiliate, and they
don't provide rail transportation. It's a Union Pacific
subsidiary that provides the rail transportation.
But the real point is that all of this is
far too late. This case was decided on a rule 12(b)(3)
motion to dismiss for improper venue, and the lower
courts have made clear, sensibly, that if you are
confronted with a forum selection motion to dismiss, you
are required to at least come forward with any factual
disputes that you think need to be resolved before the
district court can grant or deny that motion. It's far
too late to wait until the Supreme Court of the United
States, and say we have discovered some X number of
miles of track --
JUSTICE BREYER: How -- how do you get out
of the language that says that a rail carrier providing
transportation “shall issue a receipt” for property it
receives?
Now, the boat, oddly enough, is a rail
carrier under the definition.
MR. BALLENGER: The --
JUSTICE BREYER: And, therefore, it should
have issued -- since you agree it's a receiving
character, it should have -- or -- it should have issued
a bill of lading, that then, if it's within Carmack, as
I've just tried to put it, requires it to have certain
things in it that they say aren't there.
MR. BALLENGER: Under the definitions, a rail
carrier is a party providing railroad transportation.
And this --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, yes, right; and now we
see a rail carrier --
MR. BALLENGER: No --
JUSTICE BREYER: You can get the definition
there, and it includes somebody who provides intermodal
equipment. And you look at transportation, and transportation
includes services related to that equipment.
MR. BALLENGER: The definitions of “railroad”
and “transportation” have always been defined to include
all of the equipment used by a real railroad. But that
doesn't mean that anyone who happens to own that
equipment is also a railroad. For instance, the
purpose --
JUSTICE BREYER: Ah, now all right. Fine.
MR. BALLENGER: The purpose of those definitions
from 1906 on was to make sure that railroads couldn't evade
rate regulation by overcharging for the use of a bridge that
it owned.
JUSTICE BREYER: But --
MR. BALLENGER: But that doesn’t mean --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now just give me how -- what I
would write in the opinion that would in fact -- because
what they did here, the ship, is it took a container and
put it on the train. Okay? So that's inter-service
equipment. What's the language that does it your way?
MR. BALLENGER: A party providing rail
common carrier transportation, the scope of the -- of
that transportation is defined to include a container.
But that doesn't mean that everyone who owns a container
is -- meets the first part of the definition of
providing railroad transportation. Otherwise, for
instance, everyone who owned a bridge or a track or
provided rail cars would be providing railroad
transportation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon at 11:06 a.m., the case in the
