IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
THOMAS CARR, :
Petitioner : No. 08-1301
v. :
UNITED STATES :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, February 24, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:09 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CHARLES A. ROTHFELD, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Petitioner.
CURTIS E. GANNON, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CHARLES A. ROTHFELD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
CURTIS E. GANNON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CHARLES A. ROTHFELD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 51
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:09 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-1301, Carr v.
United States.
Mr. Rothfeld.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CHARLES A. ROTHFELD
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. ROTHFELD: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
When Congress uses ordinary words in the
statute, those words should get their ordinary meaning.
In SORNA, the Sex Offender Registration and Notification
Act, Congress did use ordinary words, and it used them
in an ordinary way. But the government proposes that
those words be given a most extraordinary reading. It
suggests that Congress wrote one of the elements of
SORNA's criminal offense in a sort of shorthand, and it
should be taken to mean something quite different than
what Congress actually said. It proposes --
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Rothfeld, I wondered if
I could ask you about three interrelated points
concerning your textual argument. And if I could just
lay those on the table and get your reaction to them, I
would appreciate it.
The first is that it appears that there is a
pretty universally accepted modern legislative drafting
convention that statutes should be phrased in the
present tense. The Senate drafting manual, for example,
says: Always use the present tense unless the
provision addresses only the past, the future, or a
sequence of events that requires use of a different
tense. And the House manual is to the same effect.
The second is that when the section that's
involved here, 2250, was drafted, the drafters didn't
know whether SORNA would apply to pre-SORNA sex offense
convictions. That was left up to the Attorney General.
And so when they were drafting this, they had -- it was
natural, perhaps, for them not to make a special
provision for the possibility that there might be some
pre-SORNA conduct involved. If the Attorney General had
determined that only post-SORNA convictions would qualify,
then only -- then the only travel that would qualify would
be -- would be post-SORNA travel. It was only when the
Attorney General decided that pre-SORNA convictions
could qualify that the question that's presented here
became a possibility.
And the third is that once the Attorney
General decided that SORNA would apply to pre-SORNA sex
offense convictions, that necessarily meant that conduct
constituting a -- a SORNA -- constituting a qualifying
sex offense could occur in the past. And yet there are
at least four provisions of SORNA that refer to the
conduct that constitutes a sex offense and uses only the
present tense, although in those instances it seems that
those provisions have to be read as also covering past
conduct, pre-SORNA conduct.
These are all in 42 U.S.C. 16911, which is
reproduced -- the relevant provisions are on 3a to 3-6
of the government's brief. I’ll just mention a couple of
them to provide a flavor for this. Under 42 U.S.C. section
911(3)(C), on 3a of the government's brief, an offense may
qualify as a tier II offense if, among other things, it,
quote, "occurs after the offender becomes a tier I sex
offender." But there "occurs" and "becomes" have to be
read as applying to past conduct.
U.S.C. 1691(4) on the same page says that
an offense may qualify as a tier III offense if, among
other things, it involves a kidnapping of a minor. But
"involves" there has to mean also “involved.”
And the other two are subsection (7) on 5a
and subsection (8) on 6a.
So I wondered if you could comment on that.
Maybe you have a reaction to it.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, I’ll try to keep
straight each of the parts of the question. A couple of
reactions.
First of all, I think that the ordinary
assumption is that when the present tense is used in a
statute that's creating a criminal offense, it refers to
conduct that takes place after the statute was enacted.
We are not aware of and the government has not cited any
decision of this Court in which it has interpreted a
present tense verb used in a criminal statute as
attaching criminal consequences to conduct that took
place before the Act -- before the statute was enacted.
But before delving too deeply into the
present tense question, I think it's helpful to take a
look at how that fits into the other elements of the SORNA
criminal offense, because there are a number of things
about the statutory language that we think compel the
conclusion that Congress had in mind only the attachment
of criminal consequences to travel that took place after
SORNA was enacted.
For example, and to begin with, the first
element of the offense, which provides that the
defendant is required to register under SORNA, the
government says, and we agree, that the elements of the
SORNA offense have to be read sequentially so that the
defendant is guilty only if he or she commits them in
order.
The first element, as I said, the
statutory text, is “is required to register” under SORNA.
And it seems undeniable that a defendant is not and
cannot possibly be required to register under SORNA
until SORNA is enacted and is on the books. And that is
enough to dispose of this case because, as the
government agrees, the elements are sequential. The
first element is that there is a requirement to register
under SORNA.
The second element, the travel in interstate
commerce, has to follow the first element. The travel,
therefore, must follow the enactment of SORNA. That we
think is sufficient to dispose of this case. The
government's answer to that point is to say -- really,
to candidly acknowledge that the statutory language has
to be rewritten if they're to prevail. They say when
Congress said "is required" --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Rothfeld, would you
clarify one thing? You’re not questioning the Attorney
General's determination that the underlying sex offense
can have occurred pre-SORNA?
MR. ROTHFELD: We are not questioning that.
Congress specifically authorized in SORNA that the
Attorney General had the authority to designate
pre-SORNA offenses as triggering the registration
requirement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that -- that's
pretty unusual, isn't it, to have Congress say it's up
to the Attorney General whether their laws apply
prospectively or retroactively or --
MR. ROTHFELD: It -- it certainly is unusual.
I think it's not for us to comment on whether that was a
sensible thing for them to do. But we don't dispute
here that -- that Congress did it and that the Attorney
General was authorized to do what he did. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's not as though he
was authorized to make something a crime which wasn't --
which wasn’t a crime.
MR. ROTHFELD: That's absolutely right,
Justice Scalia, and I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He was authorized to say
you have to register.
MR. ROTHFELD: It's -- it's actually quite
helpful to our argument in this case that Congress was
aware of how to confer retroactive authority on the
Attorney General for some things, which it did, the
designation of pre-SORNA sex offenses as triggering
the registration requirement.
JUSTICE ALITO: I thought that the sequence
argument that the government was making was that the
events have to occur in this sequence: the conviction,
the interstate travel, and the failure to register.
MR. ROTHFELD: That is their argument. But
the way that they reach that conclusion is to say that
the first element of the offense, which is “is required
to register” under SORNA, was really a shorthand by
which Congress meant “committed a sex offense” that
Congress --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, they might be wrong
on that. And I understood that you agreed that the
interstate travel has to take effect -- has to occur
after the sex offense conviction. It wouldn't --
you couldn't violate -- you wouldn't violate SORNA if
there’s interstate travel, then the conviction, and
then the failure to register.
MR. ROTHFELD: We -- we agree, but I
think -- we do not agree, obviously, with the
government's understanding of the first element of the
offense. It's not that the sex offense took place.
It's that the SORNA registration requirement attached.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you’re saying it has
to take place not just after the offense, but after the
obligation to register.
MR. ROTHFELD: That's absolutely right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which is what the statute
says.
MR. ROTHFELD: Which is what the statute
says. And, again, the government's only attempt to
answer that point is to say that Congress actual meant
something different when it wrote the first element of
the offense.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, but they might be
wrong that the sequence -- that the way these set out --
are set out in the statute dictates a temporal
sequence --
MR. ROTHFELD: They --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- that you can argue that
the temporal sequence that's necessary -- conviction,
travel, failure to register -- follows from the purpose
of this provision, which is to catch people who, after
having committing a sex offense and being convicted of a
sex offense in State A, move to State B. It would
follow from the purpose of the statute, not necessarily
from the sequence of subsections in this provision.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, we of course don't
agree with the government on everything, but we do agree
that they are right about the sequence, for a number of
reasons. One is that it follows -- I think it's the
most natural reading of the statutory language that one
is required to register, travels in commerce, and
knowingly fails to register. It explains why Congress
put the interstate travel element second, which is
somewhat a peculiar thing to do otherwise.
And if that were not the case, it creates
the problem of what we we've been calling the "Lincoln
Tunnel baby." If someone were an infant traveling and
went through the Lincoln Tunnel from New York to New
Jersey, lived in New Jersey for the rest of his life,
committed a sex offense at age 50 -- if sequential
fulfillment of the elements was not necessary, that
person would be subject to criminal prosecution under
SORNA. So --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, that makes -- that
makes a lot of sense. But you can get that from the
purpose of the statute, rather than from the sequence
in which these elements are listed. Is it -- is it
usually the case in a criminal statute that sets out
a number of element that they have to be satisfied in
some kind of temporal sequence? I'm not aware of that.
MR. ROTHFELD: I think sometimes it is and
sometimes it isn't. It's certainly not a universal rule
that it has to be. But, again, the language here makes
that a sensible rule.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, assuming it does
depend on the purpose of the statute, what would the
purpose -- it wouldn't cover his transportation as an
infant. What does he have to be, 20 years old?
MR. ROTHFELD: No. I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or 15 years old?
MR. ROTHFELD: Looking for --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or is it 20 years before
the offense or 25 years before the offense? I guess
we could make it up, couldn't we?
MR. ROTHFELD: You would have to make it up,
but if one were to depart from the text of the statute,
which says "is required to register under SORNA." So,
necessarily, the travel took place after SORNA was
enacted.
And I think the statutory language disposes
of the case. There’s no reason to look beyond that to
broader purposes. But if one does look to the purpose
of SORNA and what Congress had in mind, the interstate
travel requirement and attaching that the travel took
place after SORNA was enacted is what Congress wanted
to do. It accomplishes the purpose. Congress wrote
SORNA because it was concerned that there was divergent
approach to registrations that were taken by -- by States,
that they had inconsistent applications of registration
programs. This was creating loopholes that allowed sex
offenders who were unregistered not to register, and the
congressional response to that was to create a uniform
universal system of registration that it hoped all the
States would enact that would facilitate exchange of
information between the States and with the Federal
Government.
And the purpose of the SORNA criminal
provision in that context is that it was designed to
discourage people from traveling, unregistered sex
offenders from traveling, after SORNA was enacted to
evade the new SORNA registration requirements. For
that purpose, travel before SORNA is immaterial. It’s
travel after SORNA is enacted that -- that brings into
effect the congressional purpose that they were trying
to accomplish. Congress wanted to keep out of the
channels of interstate commerce unregistered sex
offenders who were trying to evade the SORNA
requirements. That’s necessarily prospective.
As to people who were unregistered sex
offenders who either had never traveled in interstate
commerce at all or who had traveled before SORNA was
enacted, they are identically situated for SORNA's
purposes. They are outside the system. They are not
registered. No one knows where they are. They are not
attempting to evade SORNA at that point. They are
subject to prosecution, not by the Federal Government,
but by the States under the new, more punitive regime
of criminal punishments that Congress tried to induce the
States to enact as part of the States’ --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But which the States didn't
enact.
MR. ROTHFELD: And States have
generally -- States have not complied with SORNA.
Almost universally, they have not complied with SORNA.
But one thing many States have done is, in fact, enact
these new, more punitive criminal provisions for people
who have failed to register, as did, for example, Indiana,
the State in which Petitioner here was not registered.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let's compare two cases.
We have this case, where you have conviction, interstate
travel, SORNA takes effect, failure to register. We
change that. That's case A. Case B is just like this
case except the sequence is different. You have
conviction, SORNA takes effect, interstate travel,
failure to register.
Now, why would Congress have treated those
two situations differently?
MR. ROTHFELD: I think Congress had in
mind -- as I say, it was addressing a particular
problem. It was concerned that people were evading
registration requirements because the States had
different diverging systems, and it was allowing some
people in some States simply not to register, not
because necessarily they were evading State registration
requirements, because the State didn't require them
to register. States had very different systems as to
what offenses triggered registration requirements.
And so the congressional reaction was to
say: We want the States to enact these new, much more
comprehensive and intrusive and elaborate registration
requirements. And they are so -- so elaborate and
intrusive that the States are refusing to do it. But --
but that was the congressional goal, that the States
would enact these -- these regulatory regimes; people
would then register under them. Everybody was now going
to have to be registered, or they would be in violation of
some State law, State registration requirement.
And if people after that were trying to get
off the grid, disappear by moving in interstate
commerce, the SORNA criminal provisions would come into
effect at that point. For people who stayed put, people
who had committed a sex offense before SORNA was enacted
and just stayed there, they are identically situated, as I
said, to someone who never traveled in interstate
commerce at all, and they are subject to prosecution by
the States.
Clearly, Congress did not intend that it was
going to federalize the entire regime of prosecuting
people.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what is the basic
purpose of this statute? I'm having a hard time with
it. Is it -- is the purpose of the statute to try to
get a lot of people to register who haven't registered
at all? Or is the purpose of the statute to get the
people who had registered in one State and then moved,
and make sure they register in another State?
MR. ROTHFELD: I think that the purpose was
generally to encourage registration of sex offenders.
Now, of course, when -- when Congress wrote the statute,
as -- as has been pointed out, it was not apparent to
them that it was going to apply to people who had
committed sex offenses before SORNA was enacted at all.
That turned upon the Attorney General's subsequent
determination.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I mean, if they are just
trying to get people to register in general, and they
are not particularly worried about travel, then they are
using this travel as a kind of jurisdictional hook. And
if they are using it as a jurisdictional hook, they’d
like to get everybody, as many as possible. That
argues against you.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, two points --
JUSTICE BREYER: I -- I have a hard
time seeing just what they’re aiming at.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, it -- it's -- to -- to
be honest, I think it's not entirely clear that Congress
had anything specific in mind beyond a reaction to the
prior regime in which there were inconsistent approaches
being taken by the States.
JUSTICE BREYER: Basically, at the time they
passed this --
MR. ROTHFELD: At the time they --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- most States didn't
require registration.
MR. ROTHFELD: All States did require
registration of some sort or another, but they had
different registration systems and different
requirements in their registration systems. There
were -- there were inconsistencies in them.
The one thing which appears from the
legislative background of SORNA is that Congress was
concerned about loopholes in various State registration
regimes, and it wanted to have a much more
comprehensive, universal, uniform system of
registration. So to address your point
specifically about the jurisdictional hook, I think
there are two reactions to that.
One is, even if it were a jurisdictional
hook, it is an element of the offense. No one denies
that. It has to be interpreted as written. It says
interstate travel, as we read it, after SORNA was
enacted. So I think that answers the -- the question.
But -- but it -- but it was, I would add,
more than a jurisdictional hook, because Congress had in
mind this particular problem of -- of people who,
post-SORNA, were going to be evading these new, more
comprehensive requirements by simply disappearing. Not
that they were complying with State regimes which --
which didn't require them to register, but they would
simply cross State lines to vanish.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That begs the question.
They were concerned with people who had disappeared, but
why is it logical for them to be worried about people
who disappear prospectively as opposed to the people who
have already disappeared and have failed to -- that's
basically the -- the government's argument, which is:
One of the main purposes of the statute is to capture
those people who have disappeared. And so why limit it?
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, that's -- that's right.
The government's argument is -- is an appeal to what it
sees as the gestalt of SORNA, rather than the statutory
language.
But I -- I -- but I think the answer to
your -- your question specifically, Justice Sotomayor,
is that they were -- they -- that when Congress passed
the statute, it -- it had in mind this division of
responsibility in -- in criminal enforcement. It --
it expected that the States, in order to comply
with SORNA, were going to enact these new and much
more -- more punitive criminal regimes to punish people
who did not register. And so far as SORNA was
concerned, people who never traveled in interstate
commerce and people who traveled in interstate commerce
before SORNA was enacted are identically situated.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The problem is that the
people who had traveled previously and failed to
register would no longer be subject to any -- either any
registration process or presumably any punishment
either, because they were no longer in the State in
which the conviction occurred, so any change in that
statute wouldn't affect them.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, that -- under the --
the new regime that Congress anticipated would -- would
be put in place, every State would enact, would have in
place a -- a criminal punishment. And these were --
these States don't punish people simply who committed a
sex offense in that State and failed to register. They
require registration of sex offenders who committed sex
offenses anywhere.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And do -- do they
generally require registration even if the offense was
committed before the registration act was passed in the
State?
MR. ROTHFELD: Yes, they do. So -- and in
that sense mirroring the current interpretation of SORNA
by the Attorney General.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So what you’re saying is
that, even under your interpretation, there is going to
be registration in at least one State?
MR. ROTHFELD: Absolutely.
JUSTICE BREYER: Would you say this at the
moment -- you may not know, but I think it would be
helpful. At the time this was passed, would you say
almost all States had some kind of registration act?
MR. ROTHFELD: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Okay.
MR. ROTHFELD: All States --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, thinking of that --
thinking of that set of registration acts in virtually
every State, did most of those or none of them or a few
of them or how many made it required that a person
register who had committed a crime, a sex crime, in a
different State and had moved to that State? Most, all
of them, none of them?
MR. ROTHFELD: I -- I believe that
universally --
JUSTICE BREYER: Universally.
MR. ROTHFELD: -- they did not distinguish
based on the location of where the sex offense took
place. So --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So -- so,
therefore, every person who has committed a sex offense,
or almost everyone, would have been subject to a
requirement to move when he committed the offense and
would have been subject to a requirement to register
when he moved under some law. Now, Congress's purpose
then must have been just to try to get uniformity here.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, the -- the various
registration -- State registration laws that existed
pre-SORNA, that -- all the States had registration
requirements, but -- but they differed in a number of
respects. Which sex offenses would trigger the
registration requirement, for example.
So -- so, there were people who -- who may
well have been sex offenders in -- in the broadest sense
under -- under the SORNA, a very broad definition, but
who were not required to register in the State in which
they -- they lived because that State's law did not
have -- list their offense as a triggering --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And would that be the case
after SORNA, that some States would have less extensive
coverage than others?
MR. ROTHFELD: It is possible after SORNA
that -- that States will enact criminal regimes that
don't -- that don't mirror the SORNA -- the SORNA
definition, but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, unless that could be
the case, then I don't see what is achieved by -- why
you worry about somebody moving to another State in
order to evade the registration.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, SORNA --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, if the new State
requires you to register just as much as the old one,
what are you worried about?
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, under the SORNA regime
if the States all implemented SORNA as Congress
anticipated that they would, if they all enacted these
statutes, I think that there wouldn't be -- the only
concern would be that people would simply fail to
register, they would then disappear --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Fail to register entirely?
MR. ROTHFELD: -- altogether. That's right.
And I think that is what SORNA is directed at. SORNA is
directed at people -- they are now all subject to
registration requirements. SORNA is directed at the
concern that people simply won't register. And -- and
it's designed after SORNA goes into effect, and there are
these new requirements on the books. The people --
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't the concern that the
State of conviction knows that an individual who has
been convicted of a sex offense has been released from
custody and, if that person is a resident of the State,
presumably knows that the person is likely to still be
in the State, but if the person moves to another State,
the State to which the person moves doesn't know that a
sex offender has moved into the State, and that's the
reason for the Federal law that imposes a penalty for
failing to register in the new State after having
traveled across interstate lines?
MR. ROTHFELD: That's -- that's -- that's
quite right. And SORNA addresses these problems by
saying, first of all, the States all have to -- have to
pool their information and exchange them.
Secondly, when the -- when the sex offender
moves from one State to another, he or she is required
to register in the new State, has to notify both -- both
the State and Federal authorities. So it is designed --
SORNA itself is designed to be a comprehensive response
to this problem, encouraging State cooperation. And
that is why if we are looking at the policy and -- and
just not paying attention to the language for the
moment, the focus was on post-SORNA activity, because
Congress has put in place this new regime which is
supposed to address the problem of missing sex
offenders. People who are taking steps after SORNA goes
into effect, you know, offenders, to evade their
registration requirements are now subject to these new,
more comprehensive Federal penalties as well as State
penalties.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I think that I
remain a little bit confused by the question one of my
colleagues answered, and I'm not sure if this last
answer by you is helping me understand it, which is if
SORNA now -- if every State is supposed to pass
legislation which requires sex offenders who have been
convicted elsewhere and moved to their State to
register, why do you -- I think that's what you -- that
you answered affirmatively for Justice Kennedy, correct?
SORNA requires every State to pass laws that obligate
people who have been convicted in other States to
register, correct?
MR. ROTHFELD: That -- that's right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So why do you
need SORNA? Why can't those States that the individual
has moved to simply prosecute the person for a failure to
register? Why do you need SORNA?
MR. ROTHFELD: Those States could do that.
And I -- as to why we need SORNA, why Congress thought
that SORNA was a good idea, I -- I think there are a
couple of reasons. One is that there are Federal
offenders and Congress, I think, believed that it was a
special Federal responsibility to -- to make sure that
Federal sex offenders were registered. And in addition,
Congress regarded the problem of -- of unregistered sex
offenders as a Federal problem, and it was one that,
after SORNA was enacted and this new systematic regime
was put in place, was more appropriate for Federal
prosecution. But I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Perhaps Congress --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you think part of it
is there was a -- SORNA requires a lot more information
than was required under the State statutes?
MR. ROTHFELD: Yes. SORNA is much more
expansive both in -- in the type of information that's
required and in the mechanism, in requiring in-person
registration by --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's conceivable also that
Congress was -- was not confident that the States would
be as active in prosecuting violations as the Federal
Government would be.
MR. ROTHFELD: That -- that is -- that's
possible, too, and again that is a prospective focus.
And, of course, I -- my final point is that discussion of
the purpose I think illuminates this to some extent, but
the language itself is absolutely clear. There is no
reason to go beyond the plain text of the statute.
And if I can reserve the remainder of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. ROTHFELD: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Gannon.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CURTIS E. GANNON
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. GANNON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Petitioner's offense under 18 U.S.C. 2250(a)
occurred when he failed to register as required by SORNA
well after SORNA was enacted. As Justice Ginsburg
elucidated, he does not dispute that the first paragraph
of SORNA can be triggered by a pre-SORNA conviction, and
adopting his construction of paragraph (2)(B) would
create a serious structural anomaly between the Federal
offenders, with whom there is no requirement that they
engage in any post-SORNA conduct other than the failure
to register, and the State sex offenders, who are the
majority of the missing sex offenders that Congress
intended to capture by enacting the new registration
regime and ensuring that there would be a serious
Federal penalty that would encourage offenders who had
used interstate travel to evade their registration
requirements to get back on the registration rolls.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. -- Mr. Carr, was
in violation of the law the instant it was passed,
right?
MR. GANNON: We don't think he was in
violation of the law the instant it was passed for
purposes of the Ex Post Facto Clause; under cases like
Tranbarger and Samuels, we think that he did have a
reasonable period of time to comply with the new
obligation. This is a problem that would occur with all
sorts of Federal criminal statutes based on a status
that somebody was in at the time something was made
criminal.
In the -- in the case prohibiting possession
of handguns by persons who had been convicted of
misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence, that this Court
upheld that statute last year, when that statute came
into effect, if somebody had the relevant conviction on
the books and possessed a handgun, they would have been
guilty at the instant the statute came into effect, but
they would have been allowed a reasonable period to come
into compliance. That's the reasoning that the Court
used in Tranbarger and in Samuels; somebody who acquired
alcohol legally before a statutory prohibition provision
came into effect would be given a reasonable period of time
to divest himself of possession.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What's -- an obvious
question. What’s the government's view on what a
reasonable time is?
MR. GANNON: Well, it's going to depend upon
the facts of the individual case, as the Tranbarger
Court recognized. In -- in the context of this
statute, where somebody is typically allowed only 3
business days to update their registration, we think it
would be a fairly short period. It's something that --
that -- that may depend on all sorts of circumstances.
If Petitioner -- or if a defendant, a sex offender, was
in the hospital for a long period of time and unable to
make it to the registry, that would provide him with an
-- an affirmative defense under the text of 2250(b).
And -- and so -- but we do think that this is a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- but the
reasonable time question doesn't come up in your --
in your hypothetical.
MR. GANNON: In -- in --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: First because
he's in the hospital and he has got a defense there,
so --
MR. GANNON: Well, that -- that's right,
and -- but I -- but we do think that it is a background
principle in -- in all of these cases that if somebody
is literally unable to avoid the criminal consequences
of their pre-enactment conduct, that that would raise the
concerns that the Ex Post Facto Clause is intended to
solve. And in cases like --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But no -- but as far
as a reasonable time goes, nobody's literally incapable
of doing it the same day the law passed.
MR. GANNON: Well, I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Unless they meet one
of the other exceptions.
MR. GANNON: Well, this -- I mean, this is
-- that's -- we -- we think that somebody does need a
reasonable time to come into compliance. It doesn't
need to be a long time. But this is an issue that --
that exists in the statute completely separate from the
travel requirement here. The Federal offenders who
are -- who are covered by paragraph (2)(A) -- there’s no
requirement, there’s no actus reus for them under 2250,
other than the fact that they have a previous
conviction, which can be pre-SORNA.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where -- where -- where?
(2)(A)? Which is where?
MR. GANNON: This is in 2250(a)(2)(A). It's
on page 1a of the government's appendix. And so
paragraph (2) is divided between (A) and (B) --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I see. “Or” --
MR. GANNON: (A) applies to sex offenders
who -- who are sex offenders by virtue of a conviction
under Federal or tribal law. Federal law --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they don't have to
travel in interstate commerce.
MR. GANNON: They don't have to travel in
interstate commerce because of the "or" between (A) and
(B). The only thing they have to do --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. GANNON: -- is then knowingly fail to
register or update a registration as required by SORNA
in paragraph (3).
And so the reasonable grace period question
for purposes of the Ex Post Facto Clause here is not
something that the Court can -- can sidestep by deciding
that interstate travel needs to occur after the statute
was enacted. And, indeed, if somebody were traveling on
the day the statute was enacted, there would still be a
question about whether they had a reasonable time to
comply.
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you happen to know what
Indiana law provided at the time? Within what period of
time after moving to Indiana was the Respondent required
to -- rather, the Petitioner required to register?
MR. GANNON: It -- it was a few days at the
time. He was also required under Alabama law -- when he
registered and signed a sex offender registration form
in Alabama in 2004, it said that he was required to
notify the law enforcement authorities in the
jurisdiction of his new residence within 10 days of his
arrival there. And the Indiana law was -- was I believe
a period of 7 or 10 days at -- at the time.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, should the reasonable
time -- should the period under SORNA, which isn't
specified by statute, be the same as the period under
the law of the State into which the person moves?
MR. GANNON: Well, the -- the period is
specified under -- under SORNA with -- when, once the
SORNA registration --
JUSTICE ALITO: Right.
MR. GANNON: -- regime comes into effect.
JUSTICE ALITO: Right.
MR. GANNON: And it does require in -- in
913(c), that somebody update the registration after a
change in residence within 3 business days of -- of
coming to the new residence. And so we -- we do think
that that would be relevant in evaluating what would be
a reasonable time period to come into compliance here.
This is the sort of thing that -- that after the statute
already comes into effect, that it would -- it would require
somebody to comply within 3 days. If they moved a
year later, then -- then that should be a reasonable time
period to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you clarify --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How long ago --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you clarify what you
mean by “the statute comes into effect”? Because if I
understand correctly, there’s only one State and one
Indian tribe that are in compliance.
MR. GANNON: Well, that's -- that’s partly
true, Justice Ginsburg. Since -- since the press
release that's cited in the briefs, another Indian tribe
has come into substantial compliance. But what's
important here is that that's just a question of whether
the State is in substantial compliance with SORNA's
requirements for purposes of receiving Federal funding
under -- under the Byrne program.
And here even if a State has not come into
substantial compliance -- and Indiana has not yet been
certified as having come into substantial compliance --
it still had a functioning sex offender registry that
would take most of the information that SORNA required
Petitioner to provide, things like his name, his
physical characteristics --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that would be what
their --
MR. GANNON: -- his -- his address --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- what their old law was.
It wouldn't be -- you have -- SORNA is in effect, but what
the State is implementing is the pre-SORNA State law, right?
MR. GANNON: It's true that, especially
before SORNA was enacted, that that's all the State was
doing, if the State has amended its law since then, and
Indiana did update its law in 2006.
But to the extent -- so the State may well
accept Congress's invitation to restructure its
registration system to match what SORNA requires, but
even when a State has not yet done that, there's no
doubt that someone like Petitioner can go in and
register. He was supposed to be registered, and, indeed,
after he was arrested in a -- in an incident in 2007, he
did register under Indiana law, and he provided the
information that Indiana was willing to take. And so --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What -- what do you
do with Mr. Rothfeld's hypothetical about someone who
travels in interstate commerce as a young child and,
years later, is covered by SORNA?
MR. GANNON: Well, we think that that's not
covered under the sequencing argument that we’ve made,
which -- which partakes of the purpose of the statute
that Justice Alito was talking about and -- and the
order in which the relevant acts occur.
As long as somebody is already a convicted
sex offender of the kind that SORNA requires to
register, and they are within the time period within
which SORNA would require them to register -- and
Petitioner here is a tier II sex offender, so he would
be required to register for 15 years after his 2004 sex
offense conviction. As long as he is within that period
when he engages in the travel, then we think that it’s
within the heartland of what Congress was concerned
about, which is a sex offender who is engaging in
interstate travel --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I'm not
-- I'm missing your answer to my question. The answer
to the child traveling and then 20 years later is --
MR. GANNON: Is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- is because it's
-- you have to require under SORNA before the travel?
MR. GANNON: It's -- no, it's -- you have to
have been convicted of a sex offense, because that --
that's what brings you within the category of persons --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know where you get
that from. I can understand how you can say, which is
what Mr. Rothfeld says, that it has to follow the
requirement to register. That's the way the statute
reads: Whoever, one, is required to register, not
whoever has committed an offense that -- that would
later justify registration. It seems to me you are just
making up the -- the prior act that -- that triggers the
interstate travel requirement.
MR. GANNON: Well, I don't think that we are
making it up, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, what text do you base
it on? (1) says "is required to register," and the
position of the Petitioner is: After you are required
to register, you must travel in interstate commerce.
And you say: No, it's after you commit the offense that
you must travel in interstate. Where do you get that
from?
MR. GANNON: Well, we get that from the
facts -- from the context here, from the anomaly that
would be created, the structural anomaly about the
differential treatment between Federal and State sex
offenders. The fact that the purpose of the statute is
to recapture missing sex offenders, which are persons
who engaged in interstate travel to elude the
registration requirements that already apply to them as
sex offenders. And so we think that when Congress
invoked the -- its powers to regulate travel and
interstate commerce, in order to give that element
meaning, we think that it makes sense to apply it to
persons who already have the type of sex offense
convictions that SORNA requires them to register for.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your answer to
Justice Scalia is that you don't get it from the
language? You get it from the anomaly; you get it from
the purpose.
MR. GANNON: We get it from the context.
That's right. And we know that the plain language of
the statute can't completely control this inquiry,
because the Congress changed the language that existed
earlier in the drafting process of the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what about going back
to the purpose? There's a section on page 26 of the House
report where they go in some length to saying that the
purpose is this is going to help with 100,000 missing
people. Don't worry; if you can't remember, it doesn't
matter. What they say is there are 100,000 missing.
What they do is they travel, let's say, from Alabama to
California and they don't register. Now, this statute
is going to help with that.
Well, how does it help with that? They are
already supposed to register in California. And I
thought, well, maybe the way it helps with that is that
it imposes some new information requirements, so that
Alabama, if it were complying, would now have a lot of
information about the sex offender, and it would have an
obligation -- it could more easily track him down, or at
least California could or somebody could more easily
track him down, because he has to give information to
Alabama, and Alabama has a registry up.
Is there something like that in this?
MR. GANNON: Well, there is something like that,
but that's not all that’s going on. On page 26 of the
House report --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. GANNON: -- that you’re talking about,
Justice Breyer, it specifically says that sex offenders
who fail to comply will face felony criminal
prosecution. And this -- this was a way --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but that’s -- that’s
true of everybody whether they have moved or not moved.
MR. GANNON: Well, it's --
JUSTICE BREYER: That is, what I’m --
the reason I brought up the other is because if this
is just a jurisdictional hook, I can see why Congress
might be trying to get as many people as they want
to register.
But this -- this also serves some purpose,
like we’re going to make Alabama get some information,
makes it easier to catch these people, that purpose
wouldn't be served when the travel takes place before
this takes effect because Alabama wouldn't have kept the
information then.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that Congress did
pass the statute for -- for multiple reasons in -- in
order to encourage there to be a more effective,
comprehensive nationwide registration scheme. And one
of the things that that required was -- anticipated, was
standardization among the States.
But it was also -- these -- Mr. Carr was
required to register both by the law of Alabama and
by the law of Indiana at the time when he committed his
sex offense and when he moved from one State to the
other. Congress considered that type of regime as
being inadequate. Congress obviously thought that
the State violations that were occurring with
0,000 sex offenders who had eluded registration,
gone underground, was a problem they wanted to solve.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So Congress passes
this statute. And how does it help specifically with
that?
MR. GANNON: Well, it -- it first of all
imposes a Federal registration requirement. So in --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So the person who
hasn't registered in California --
MR. GANNON: -- in 16913 --
JUSTICE BREYER: He’s afraid of the Feds.
He didn't -- he wasn't afraid of the California police,
but he’s afraid of the Feds. Okay. I've got it. I've
got that. Any other thing?
MR. GANNON: It's -- it's not just that he’s
afraid of the Feds when they can come with
prosecutorial powers under section 2250. It is also, as
you say, that there are several aspects of SORNA that
will encourage there to be much more cooperation among
jurisdictions in standardizing this information,
notifying different jurisdictions when somebody moves
from one to another --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. As far as I can read
that page, it seemed to me, insofar as what you’ve just said
is true, that would happen only after this statute is
passed. And, therefore, the fact that he had moved
before the statute is passed would not trigger the
cooperation. It might trigger the Fed prosecution part,
but it wouldn't trigger the cooperation part.
MR. GANNON: Well, that -- that's true, but
we already know that this is true without regard to
post-SORNA travel for persons who have Federal sex
offense convictions.
JUSTICE BREYER: The only reason I bring it
up is if this is a very close case. That tends to cut
somewhat against you; namely, that the thing applies
full-force in terms of its purposes to people who travel
after, but it only applies as sort of this weak thing to
people who travel before.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think, to the extent
that the committee report identified 100,000 missing sex
offenders as the most significant enforcement problem in
the sex offender context, 10 years after every single
State and the Federal government had passed a panoply of
sex offender registration requirements, shows that they
were concerned about persons who had fallen off the
sex offender registry rolls. And that this provision,
if it is -- if it is read to treat Federal and State sex
offenders more consistently, which is to require them
both -- to subject them both to potential Federal
prosecution if they knowingly fail to register after
SORNA comes into effect --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but -- but it doesn't,
because if you haven't been -- if you are convicted of a
Federal offense, you are automatically in, but if you
are convicted of a State offense, you’re in only if you
travel in interstate commerce after that offense. So
you don't resolve the inconsistency between (A) and (B).
There is still going to be some inconsistency between
the two.
MR. GANNON: There is going to be some
inconsistency --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly.
MR. GANNON: -- but we think that it's
dramatically lessened, and it's important in this
context to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That -- that’s a much less
powerful point. There is inconsistency between (A) and
(B), no matter what you do.
MR. GANNON: There is, but the vast majority
of the 100,000 sex offenders that were missing were people
who would have been convicted under State sex offenses.
And most of the -- most of the 705,000 registered sex
offenders in the country right now have been convicted
under -- under State provisions, rather than Federal --
JUSTICE BREYER: Have you been able to
find -- when in doubt about the purpose, let's turn to
the language. Is it the case that you found any other
statute, any other statute, where Congress phrased a
jurisdictional hook in the present tense?
MR. GANNON: I think that lots of
jurisdictional hooks referring to travel and interstate
commerce are phrased in present tense. There are --
there are a handful that -- that are -- are specifically
tailored and have extra language, like the one we cite
dealing with gambling devices that have been transported
in interstate commerce after the effective date of that
particular statute. But, for the most part, I think
that they are phrased in present tense and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you find anywhere where
they’re both phrased in present tense and it was
pretty clear that Congress intended to catch activity
that was -- at least where the jurisdictional part took
place before the statute took effect? You find that
good an analogy anywhere?
MR. GANNON: I -- I'm not aware of -- of a
provision that's -- that's phrased like that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I tried to --
MR. GANNON: -- where that -- where those
are the only things that are at issue.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I tried to find
one and -- and couldn't. I mean, looking up travels
in -- in the Code, and in each of those cases that I
found it's always -- it looks like it's -- it's linked
directly to the activity that's meant to be covered,
you know, traveling for the purpose of the -- the
activity that's against the law.
MR. GANNON: That's -- that's true. In
most instances in which Congress has an interstate
travel element, that's true. In some -- in
some cases like the -- the statute at issue in the
Trupin case about possession of -- of stolen goods
that have traveled in interstate commerce, that --
that's -- that's -- that's an invocation of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, where -- where it
means prior travel, it says so, use of a firearm that
has traveled in interstate commerce. They use the past
tense when they mean it.
MR. GANNON: In those cases in context,
I think it was easiest to say that when it has
traveled vis-à-vis the act that was in question there.
And -- and here -- neither side is contending that --
that the travel can happen after the failure to register
and somebody immediately then becomes guilty of the
offense.
We think that the sequencing requirement
makes sense on both ends, that somebody needs to have
the sex offense conviction before they travel, and then
they need to fail to register after they have -- they
have engaged in the travel, because that's the concern
that Congress was trying to get at, persons who were
able to use the fact of interstate travel to evade
registration.
And the reason, Mr. Chief Justice, why I
think that Congress didn't include a purpose requirement
there is because Congress didn't want sex offenders to
be able to take advantage of the fact that they had
another good reason to travel. If my employer transfers
me from one State to another, and then I take advantage
of that situation to go underground and not re-register,
that’s one of the 100,000 missing sex offenders that
Congress was concerned about, even though I would have
had a good defense to the charge that I had traveled with
the purpose or for the purpose of evading sex offender
registration requirements.
Justice Sotomayor, I think you were asking a
question about -- about why the -- what the purpose
would be served here if States would already have the
underlying offense that would be made criminal by SORNA.
I think that there are a couple different answers to
that.
Mr. Rothfeld acknowledged that Congress may
well have intended there to be extra force that would
come from the -- from the Federal prosecution itself.
But separately I think it's important to note that --
that States were given time to comply with SORNA, to
come into substantial compliance with SORNA. And -- and
even though no State at this point has said that they
don't intend to come into compliance with SORNA,
Congress couldn't necessarily have expected States to
adopt the particular offense that they -- that
they were concerned about. And I think that -- that --
that here Congress did want to -- to cover that
situation.
One other factual point that’s associated
with the -- the effectiveness there that was brought up
in the briefs and hasn't come up today is the question
of -- of when the prior Wetterling Act offenses were
repealed.
And I -- I -- in section 129 of SORNA, the
Wetterling Act offense was repealed effective 3
years after the date of SORNA's effective date, even
without regard to the 1-year extensions issued by the
Attorney General, notwithstanding a point in the
Petitioner's reply brief, simply because section 129
doesn't incorporate 124(B), which has the extension
provision for the Attorney General.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- understand some of
the delay Congress may have in passing a law with
specifics about how things are done. Are you worried at
all under Lambert whether or not there might be a due
process violation in all the indeterminate provisions of
this law? Where do you -- yes, you’re supposed to
register, but States don't have a place for you to
register, and now you are supposed to know that you are
supposed to register under the old systems, and you
don't know how much time to do it in.
MR. GANNON: Well, I -- I think here that
there -- the question of notice and knowledge has not
been an issue because it’s --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I --
MR. GANNON: And I think that's -- this --
one of the things you said is the States may not have a
place to register. And that's -- that's just not true.
Since -- since before 1996, every State has had a sex
offender registry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Absolutely --
MR. GANNON: And -- and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- but they don't have a
SORNA place to register.
MR. GANNON: Well, it's the same place.
What SORNA requires is that you provide the following
types of information to the relevant officials that run
the sex offender registry for the jurisdiction. And
“jurisdiction” is defined to include the State.
And, so, in -- in -- in these cases, even if
the State hasn't changed the name on the door to SORNA
registration facility -- it's just sex offender
registration facility under, you know, Zachary's Law,
which is the name of the Indiana sex offender registration
law, as opposed to Megan's Law -- there is -- they are
still required by SORNA to register, which requires them
to give information to the relevant officials in the
relevant jurisdiction.
And the jurisdiction is there; the officials
are there. They are taking the information. As long as
the officials will take the information, the failure to
do that is a violation of 2250.
And there’s one -- one other point that
Petitioner was making in the reply brief was that there
seemed to be some confusion about -- about whether there
was an offense under SORNA when States had not yet come
into compliance or whether that would have been an
offense only under the pre-SORNA Wetterling Act.
And -- and the reason that there isn't a
SORNA violation there, if -- if a State has not yet
decided to accept things like digital palm prints or
whatever the extra information is that SORNA would
require, the -- the defendant is still required to
provide that, what information the State will accept.
And the affirmative defense in 2250(b) would only be
applicable in circumstances where the State wouldn't
take that extra information.
So it's only those aspects of SORNA that are
above and beyond what the State will allow the offender
to do, that he's excused from complying with by the
affirmative defense, that it's uncontrollable circumstances
that he -- that he can't provide a DNA sample or a palm
print in a particular State that doesn't do that yet.
But as long as the State is taking the rest of the
information, he needs to give that.
And this is a case where Petitioner utterly
failed to give any of the information to Indiana once he
arrived there at the end of 2004 or beginning of 2005.
So, there's -- there's no dispute that the State would
have taken that information had he been in compliance
with that law. Once SORNA later came into effect, he
probably wouldn't have been in violation of SORNA at
that point.
But -- but that -- there's nothing unusual
about the fact that he could have engaged in pre-enactment
conduct that would have prevented him from being in
violation, just as the person convicted of a misdemeanor
possession -- misdemeanor crime of domestic violence, if
he doesn't possess a gun before the -- the new provision
in 922 comes into effect, then he hasn't committed the
offense. If somebody doesn't acquire the alcohol before
the statutory prohibition comes into effect that was at
issue in Samuels before that law came into effect, then
he hadn't committed the offense.
So, there’s nothing unusual about saying
that he could have complied with SORNA effectively in
anticipation of its being enacted, even though it
didn't yet exist.
The -- the -- the question here is whether
he knowingly failed to register as required by SORNA
after it came into effect. And -- and we think that --
that -- that he did, because he had already engaged in
the interstate travel after he had been convicted of a
sex offense.
If there are no further questions, we would
urge the Court to affirm the Seventh Circuit --
JUSTICE BREYER: One last one. It should
help with a minor point. But -- but I take it, under the
statute, you have to register if you are a sex offender.
And that's true whether you’ve moved or not moved?
MR. GANNON: That's -- that's true under
Section 42 U.S.C. 16913.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. GANNON: That's true. The registration
requirement applies without regard --
JUSTICE BREYER: But it's a crime -- it's a
crime under the section we’re talking about only if you
are both the person who had to register and you didn't
and you moved?
MR. GANNON: If you fall within (2)(B) --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Okay.
MR. GANNON: -- the person who -- who has to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Everybody in the State has
to register if they meet that definition?
MR. GANNON: In order to -- to meet the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Moved or not?
MR. GANNON: To meet the registration
requirement of 16913, that's true. That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. GANNON: And -- and -- and, obviously,
that -- that makes sense in terms of implementing the
scheme, that if somebody registers beforehand, it makes
it much easier to catch them once they move afterwards.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Rothfeld, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CHARLES A. ROTHFELD
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Rothfeld, I hate to eat
up any of your rebuttal time, but this is sort of by way
of unfinished business. Justice Alito asked three
questions at the beginning of this interesting exercise.
I think you only answered the first. I don't even
remember the third anymore.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: But I was interested in the
second, which mentioned other provisions in this -- in
this very statute that -- that use the present tense.
MR. ROTHFELD: The -- those all appear in
the civil registration provision, not in the criminal
provision. And my answer to Justice Alito's question is
that we are not aware of any case in which the Congress
has used a present-tense verb in a criminal statute to
attach criminal consequences to conduct that took place
before the statute was enacted. And --
JUSTICE ALITO: But all of those provisions
refer now -- as a result of the Attorney General's
determination that pre-SORNA convictions qualify, all of
those provisions use the present tense to refer to
activities that can have taken place in the past.
MR. ROTHFELD: But at the time that
Congress --
JUSTICE ALITO: This very -- this very
statute. Isn't that correct?
MR. ROTHFELD: That is correct. At the time
that Congress wrote those civil provisions, this
statute, on its face, applied prospectively only. The
Attorney General had not yet retroactively applied it.
Congress specifically gave the Attorney General the
authority to apply it retroactively in defining which
offenders had to register. It did not give him any
authority to retroactively change the scope of the --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, but your main argument
is that "travels" is in the present tense, and that
means present and future. But there are provisions of
this very statute that use the present tense to refer to
past conduct. So why doesn't that knock the legs out
from under your textual argument?
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, the -- that's --
I'm not sure that I would say that's our principal
argument. That's one of our arguments, and the
argument which I think is dispositive. Given the way
that the Attorney General -- the Solicitor General
has presented the case relates to the first element
of the offense, which is that the action -- the
offender is required to register under SORNA, which, as
we have said, has to take place after SORNA is enacted.
I think Mr. Gannon candidly acknowledged
that basically, that has to be read to mean something
different. It has to be read to mean "is a sex
offender," and that is simply not a plausible reading of
the statute. Not only because of the plain words "is
required to register," but the provision of the offense
which addresses Federal sex offenders sets out three
elements as to them. As to a Federal sex offender, it
must be someone who is required to register.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, Mr. Gannon may have
made an argument that’s not helpful to his position,
but you can accept that the first provision means
exactly what it says: "is required to register." And
that takes effect on day when SORNA is enacted.
There’s nothing in the statute that says
that those three events have to take place in -- in a
temporal sequence. It doesn't say "is required to
register and thereafter travels in interstate commerce."
It doesn't say that. In fact, an earlier version did
say that, and it was taken out, wasn't it?
MR. ROTHFELD: An earlier version said
"travels thereafter." I -- that was dropped, I would
suggest, as superfluous, because the present-tense
language encompasses that. But it -- it would not make
sense to say -- if one disregards the temporal sequence,
that brings back the Lincoln Tunnel baby. It would mean
that someone could have traveled as an infant, and that
satisfies the SORNA travel requirements.
JUSTICE ALITO: It doesn't if that results
from the aim of the statute, rather than the order in
which those elements are set out in the statute.
MR. ROTHFELD: But I'd suggest,
Justice Alito, that requires an extensive rewriting of
the language of the statute.
JUSTICE BREYER: It doesn't. He said, first
the crime has to take place, before the travel.
MR. ROTHFELD: And one has to -- one would
have to --
JUSTICE BREYER: And, moreover, there’s a
statutory limitation, because after a certain period of
years, you don't have to register anymore. So the
hypotheticals about the infant and 20 years ago are out,
because the longest it could last is 15 years.
MR. ROTHFELD: But one has to --
JUSTICE BREYER: And then you wouldn't have
committed the crime as an infant, so there we are.
But it's still a long time, 15 years, I grant you.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, and even so, one has to
read into that limitation as to where -- why it is that
there is that limit on -- on the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have to change the
language "is required to register" to "has committed
a" --
MR. ROTHFELD: "Has committed a sex
offense."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, you don't have
to -- you don't have to do that. I guess my problem
with your argument -- you say, "is required to register
under SORNA." But you can be required to register under
SORNA before SORNA is enacted to the extent that SORNA
is retroactive. You ask someone: Why are you
registering? Well, SORNA tells me I -- I have to.
MR. ROTHFELD: Well, I’d suggest that that’s
a peculiar reading of the term "is required to
register," that, as written, it seems to me as a present-
tense requirement. You are now currently required to
comply with the terms of the statute. It does not say:
You are required -- you are a sex offender within -- as
subsequently defined by SORNA. As Congress did expressly
say in the Federal offender provision in section (2)(A).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. ROTHFELD: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:07 a.m., the case in the
