IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MARY BERGHUIS, WARDEN, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1402
DIAPOLIS SMITH. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, January 20, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:14 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
B. ERIC RESTUCCIA, ESQ., Solicitor General, Lansing,
Mich.; on behalf of Petitioner.
JAMES STERLING LAWRENCE, ESQ., Royal Oak, Mich.; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
B. ERIC RESTUCCIA, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
JAMES STERLING LAWRENCE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 31
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
B. ERIC RESTUCCIA, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:14 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear argument
first this morning in Case 08-1402, Berghuis v. Smith.
Mr. Restuccia.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF B. ERIC RESTUCCIA
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. RESTUCCIA: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
This is really a case about the law of
habeas corpus for this murder conviction that was
obtained in the Michigan courts.
The issue was whether the Michigan Supreme
Court unreasonably applied clearly established Supreme
Court precedent in rejecting Mr. Smith's claim that
his jury was not drawn from a fair cross-section of
the community.
The Michigan Supreme Court did not act
unreasonably in concluding that there was no
unconstitutional underrepresentation and that there
was no systematic exclusion. This Court's decision in
Duren did not require a different result on either
point, and this Court should reverse the Sixth
Circuit.
I think it's important to note that there
are two prongs at issue: The fair and reasonable
representation prong and the systematic exclusion
prong. And it’s also significant to understand that
the disparities at issue here are relatively small,
that the time period at issue runs from -- from April
of 1993 to October of 1993, where there was
information -- for those 6 months for which the
processes at play were measured.
And the percentage of African-Americans that
appeared in the venires during that time period was --
they comprised 6 percent of the venires, where the
jury-eligible population was 7.28 percent. So your --
so there was a 1.28 percent absolute disparity during
this 6-month time period. That can also be measured
as an 18 percent comparative disparity.
Now, if you compare that to the disparities
that are issue -- at issue in Duren, they really are a
magnitude of difference, that the disparities in Duren
involve the exclusion of women in Missouri, where they
comprised -- women comprised 54 percent of the
population and only 14.5 percent of the venires over
an 8-month period of time.
JUSTICE BREYER: The -- I don't know if this
is relevant or how to use it, but years ago, I took a
course in this kind of thing at the Kennedy School. I
was teaching, and they said the only way you could
figure out what -- what's what here is you use
something called “binomial theorem,” and you have to
have, like, urns, and you imagine that there’s an urn
with 1,000 balls, and 60 of them are red, and 940 are
black, and then you select them at random, and -- and
at a time. You know, fill 12 -- fill a hundred
with 12 in each.
And when we tried to do that, just for the
interest of it, I -- I found that you would expect,
with these numbers, something like a third to a half
of juries would have at least one black person on it.
Now, that may be wrong, because I am not a
mathematician, but -- but putting that together, it
looks as if there is a pretty big disparity.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: On the other hand, that
isn't what they testified to, so I guess you’re going
to tell me just ignore it and forget it.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, if you’re looking at
the Michigan Supreme Court decision, I think it's
important to note that it's not just that it would
have to be incorrect; it would have to be objectively
unreasonable under the AEDPA standard, that what’s at
issue here is did the Michigan Supreme Court
unreasonably apply --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, you know, maybe it’s
the only way to do it, that the statistician stays
with these urns, which I guess they have computer
programs for.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: I -- I don't know, in other
words, and maybe I should just -- I hate to write
something, like, saying 2 and 2 is 6.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we don't have any urns
here.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: No. You can skip it, if
you want. If there's any comment, fine.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I think your point was
that Duren was quite different in the numbers --
MR. RESTUCCIA: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- starting out with
women 54 percent of the population, and then dwindled
to 14.5 percent of the -- of the jurors, available
jurors.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess the point
is, just following up, it's not that you’re going to
say 2 plus 2 is 6. I suppose, under AEDPA, all you
have to do is say 2 plus 2 is somewhere between 3 and
, right?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Right. That it’s not
unreasonable, and I think the best evidence of the
fact that this decision was not unreasonable is I --
in the blue brief, I put together a table of what the
other circuits have done with comparable statistical
disparities.
And it runs -- from the First Circuit
through the Tenth Circuit, I have seven circuits'
worth of opinions, and of course, there really are
additional cases, if you examine this. And if you
look at the kinds of disparities that have been
examined by other courts on --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I interrupt with this
question that goes both to what Justice Ginsburg asked
and the other? Should we treat all areas the same,
depending -- say it's -- the disparity between a
jurisdiction which has only 3 or 4 percent of a
minority should be treated similarly to a jurisdiction
where they have 30 or 40 percent?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, the -- in my view,
this Court really didn't provide guidance in Duren
about how this should be measured. In fact, Duren
doesn't specify what kind of measurement tools should
be used for examining disparity.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But isn't it perfectly
obvious that you’re going to have dramatic differences
where you only have a very small percentage, as in --
in Grand Rapids, for example, and where you have a
major percentage as you did in Duren.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, I think that's right.
And that's one of the reasons that on direct review
the courts are virtually unanimous in rejecting these
kinds of small disparities. So if you look at the
table on pages 32 and 33, the circuits, on direct
review, that were most comparable were the Second
Circuit decision in which the percentage of the
distinct group in the community was 7.08 percent and
in the jury pool it was 5.0 percent --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but I suppose the
thrust of Justice Stevens's question was that if you
have a very small population that we are concerned
with, then the disparity can be very substantial,
especially if you use the comparative disparity.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right. At the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I think -- at least, I
was interested in that aspect of his question.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, as kind of the first
matter, it seems like this Court doesn't have to
really reach that hard question, insofar as the
Michigan Supreme Court's decision is entitled to
deference under AEDPA, meaning --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, but we have a half-
hour. I’d kind of like to know how to --
MR. RESTUCCIA: Okay. No, I understand. I
understand. I just want to make that as kind of a
first point. Now, for the second point, it seems to
me that the absolute disparity test is the better
measure for examining -- examining these questions.
And the reason for that is that it objectively
captures the number of missing jurors that are part of
the venire, whereas the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you -- but your test
is 10 percent. And if you have a minority, what is it
here? 7 point -- whatever it is. 7 --
MR. RESTUCCIA: 7.28.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It's under 10 percent.
That would mean that a district is free to just
disregard all the people who are under 10 percent of
the population.
MR. RESTUCCIA: The 10 percent test is not
really necessarily tied to the absolute disparity. In
other words, this Court could conclude that the
absolute disparity test is the better test without
--
using that 10 percent threshold. The reason I suggest
the 10 percent threshold is that's really what's
happening on the ground in the Federal courts. It's
very hard to find a case in which there’s a --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You would suggest that
in a population that has 9 percent of any group,
protected group, that if they didn't have one person
serve on a jury per year of that group, that that
would not -- under an absolute disparity test using
the 10 percent figure, that would not give rise to any
kind of suspicion?
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right. Under -- if
this Court adopted it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It would not meet the
Duren's second prong.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right. If the Court
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Does that make any sense
to you?
MR. RESTUCCIA: It reflects the actual
practice of the courts because of the -- if you look
at the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, I don't think that
-- that any court has suggested that the complete
absence of the protected group in that kind of number
wouldn't give rise to a fair representation claim.
That's why this Court, the Michigan court, and many
others have said that the absolute disparity test just
can't be used in every circumstance.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, the -- it seems --
looking at what the Federal courts have done, they’ve
all -- they’ve generally used multiple tests. Now,
there are several circuits that have relied on this 10
percent threshold, but it's not necessary for the
State to prevail in order for this Court to adopt the
percent threshold.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't. The question I
have you for you is -- that's what you have been
advocating, or at least your brief suggested we
should. Wouldn't it be better for to us leave this in
the hands of the courts to sort of figure out what
test is better under what circumstances than us
announce a flat rule that would lead to a result like
the example that I just used?
MR. RESTUCCIA: I -- I understand that
point. The reason that I'm suggesting a threshold
also is it corresponds to a practical aspect of the
application of these rules. The -- if you have a
sufficiently small absolute disparity, as a matter of
probability, it’s not likely to affect the actual
composition of the petit jury.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, I agree that if a
protected group is 1 percent of the population, that
it’s not likely that their absence is going to give
rise to any flags.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But I think there is a
difference. I don’t -- I just don't know
statistically where. And we have to leave this in the
judgment of the lower courts as to where between 1 and
or 1 and 10 a difference makes sense. And that's
what the courts are saying, is: We can't use one test
to determine that.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well -- and one of the
concerns I have is I -- for example, I know in Kent
County that if you look at the other distinct groups -
- you look at the 1990 census for Kent County, it was
comprised of 2 point -- 2.9 percent Latino-Americans,
.1 percent Asian-Americans, and 0.6 percent Native
Americans.
Now, if you look at the one month that's
been placed at issue, in which Mr. Smith is indicating
that there was a 35 percent comparative disparity for
that one month, if that becomes the threshold, the
standard used, which the Sixth Circuit concluded was -
- established a violation of the second prong, then if
you think about the practical application that -- for
Michigan, for Kent County, if you take your 158 jurors
in that jury pool, you’d expect for that one month for
there to be four or five Latino-Americans, two Asian-
Americans, and one Native American.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What's wrong --
MR. RESTUCCIA: What’s missing -- I’m sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. What's wrong with a
rule?
MR. RESTUCCIA: What's wrong with what?
JUSTICE SCALIA: With a rule? With picking
a number, rather than leaving it up to the courts of
appeals or the district courts to use different
numbers, different times? I don't have to review all
of these cases all the time. Why don't we pick a
number? You want 10, right?
MR. RESTUCCIA: That what was I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes --
MR. RESTUCCIA: That has been the practice
of the courts below. That's why I'm -- I'm advocating
it. But it does correspond to this idea that below a
certain point, absolute disparity will have no
practical -- for example, in this case, the venire at
issue, according to the State trial court, included 60
prospective jurors, and there were three African-
Americans, which would then constitute 5 percent.
Now, in order for that percentage to
correspond exactly to the jury-eligible population,
there would had to have been one or two more African-
American jurors as part of that venire. Well, as a
matter of probability, if you have 12 being selected
from 60 -- this is kind of your point, Justice Breyer
-- that it's not -- it's more likely than not that
would have no effect on the actual selection of the
petit jury --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know. The one
thing I learned from the urn business is it never
turns out the way you think.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: For example, it had the
example of, like, the eight: There are eight out of a
hundred, and you run this thing a thousand times, and
you’ll discover that there is one black juror on about
half the juries, or a third, anyway. That's much more
than I would have thought intuitively. And I might
not have even read the example correctly. So you see
why I -- I’m at sea, as soon as you tell me to be a
statistician. I even got a book called Statistician
for Lawyers. That didn't help me very much.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's why Las Vegas makes
a profit, right?
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it does
depend, doesn't it, on the size of the -- the urn? In
other words, if it's a smaller --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If it's 10,000 of
these balls and you are going to go through it 10,000
times, it's more likely that you are going to get a
sample that reflects the overall percentage, correct?
MR. RESTUCCIA: I think that's right. One
of the -- one of the reasons, also -- talking about
this 10 percent as a rule -- is that if you look
through these cases, you’ll see a lot of -- a lot of
the courts, on direct review -- and I think -- I'm
going to come back to this point, that this, of
course, is an AEDPA case, so the question is whether
the Michigan Supreme Court acted unreasonably. And so
I think there’s a different standard, that it doesn't
have to have gotten it right; it had to have been
objectively unreasonable.
But setting that aside, you’ll find many
cases in which there are disparities of 5 percent and
percent which have been rejected. And the reason is
you have neutral processes, processes that everyone
would agree are reasonable on their face, which result
in disparities for distinct groups.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are you -- are you saying
that systematic exclusion -- and we are assuming good
faith, no intent to discriminate --
MR. RESTUCCIA: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that systematic
exclusion is always proven or disproven by statistics?
MR. RESTUCCIA: No. I'm making just the --
the opposite point, that under the third --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well --
MR. RESTUCCIA: I’m sorry.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I’ll -- I’ll allow you
to answer, of course, but --
MR. RESTUCCIA: Please.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If not, how do we show
systematic exclusion? Again, assuming good faith, no
intent to discriminate.
MR. RESTUCCIA: The Duren case involved a
categorical distinction, meaning women were exempted
in a different way than men. Women had an automatic
exemption. This Court didn't delineate in Duren that
if you had just a disparate impact based on a neutral
process, that that would be sufficient to give rise to
systematic exclusion. And that's really been the way
the Federal courts have applied it on direct review,
that there --
JUSTICE ALITO: The statistical issue is
very interesting, but I -- I wonder, if we were not
looking at this through AEDPA, why we -- why a court
should necessarily have to start with the question --
with the elements of the prima facie -- with the
question of whether there is unconstitutional
underrepresentation, when in the end, as I understand
Duren, the defendant has to identify some aspect of
the jury selection process that has a disproportionate
impact on the group involved and is unreasonable? And
unless that can be done at the outset, why struggle
with these statistics?
Now, here, to illustrate, the aspect of the
jury selection process that the Sixth Circuit thought
was unreasonable was the prior practice of choosing
the jurors first for the district courts, the
misdemeanor courts, rather than the circuit courts,
the -- the felony courts. But the -- the trial judge,
it seemed to me, address this in -- in a very
thoughtful way, and he said there just isn't any proof
that this old system had that effect.
And it's hard for me to see how it could
have that effect, unless the -- the number of jurors
chosen for the district courts in Grand Rapids was
disproportionate to the number chosen for the district
courts in the other jurisdictions within the county.
So that seems to me to be the end of the case.
And why does it make sense to -- to struggle
with this rather complicated statistical problem, if
at the end of the day, it's going to come down to
something of that nature?
MR. RESTUCCIA: I think that may be the
easiest way to resolve this case, because under the
third prong, the Michigan Supreme Court on the
question of jury assignment concluded that Mr. Smith
had failed to factually show that there was any
underrepresentation that arose from that process.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Didn't the Michigan
Supreme Court do essentially what Justice Alito
suggested, that they said: We’ll give you the benefit
of the doubt, go on to the third.
But on that third, it seems to me there’s
nothing that shows us what was the representation in
the district before they made the change vis-à-vis the
circuit courts, was there?
MR. RESTUCCIA: The -- the information that
Mr. Smith's expert provided is he -- he had -- there
are two jury terms that were described, one for 6
months, in which this juror assignment to the local
courts first occurred, and then 1 year for the
following year, in which the jury assignment did not
send them to the local courts first. So you have two
different pools that are being compared.
The -- if you look at page 13 of the blue
brief, it outlines what the disparity was according to
Mr. Smith's expert for the time which the assignment
to local courts occurred. And in that diagram, it
shows, at the end, that there was an 18 percent
comparative disparity. And that's the final column in
the totals.
Now, that's what occurred at the time of
which the jury assignment to the local courts occurred
first. The following year, the comparative disparity
was 15 percent, where the -- where the jurors were not
sent to local courts first. In other words, there was
a difference of a 3 percent comparative disparity.
Now, no one suggests that a 3 percent
comparative disparity could -- could justify a claim
of a violation of Duren. It's -- it's not
statistically significant, because when you talk about
percent comparative disparity or 4 percent
comparative disparity, you are talking about two or
three jurors over the entire time period --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That -- that's in the --
in the circuit court. Do we know what the figures
were just for the district court?
MR. RESTUCCIA: No. There -- there was no
information -- the reason -- the Michigan Supreme
Court ultimately rejected the claim on the jury
assignment process because there was no evidence other
than anecdotal testimony about how sending jurors to
local courts would result in a deficiency of African-
Americans in the circuit court or the felony court --
courts. So that was the basis.
They -- so in a way, this touches on Wood v.
Allen. It was a factual determination, whether it’s
under 2254(d)(2) or 2254(e)(1). The Michigan Supreme
Court's conclusion that Mr. Smith had failed to show
factually that there was any underrepresentation that
arose from the jury assignment process is entitled
deference.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But isn't it possible --
it's awfully hard to get these percentages when you
get small numbers, as you do. But doesn't it seem
intuitively obvious that if you give the district
courts first crack of -- of the size of the pool that
has more of the African-American potential jurors in
it than the other, that it's -- it's bound to have an
impact?
MR. RESTUCCIA: No. There’s -- there’s no
logical necessity that sending courts -- because you
understand that you have the entire county, and the
county is then broken up into districts?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. RESTUCCIA: And the districts are the
local courts, and they are misdemeanor courts.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But -- but there’s a much
higher percentage of African-Americans in Grand Rapids
than there is in the county as a whole.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right. But all those
other outlying areas also have to send their jurors to
the district court first, too. It's not like it's
just one segment gets sent to the district court. All
of the jurors get sent to the district courts first.
The only -- the -- the proof required to show that
somehow the district court for Grand Rapids went
through more jurors than did the other local courts
proportionately --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But -- but the jurors that
served on the district court, were they -- were they
taken from the entire county, too, or just from Grand
Rapids?
MR. RESTUCCIA: No, they were -- all of the
-- all of the district courts -- Grand Rapids,
Rockford, all of these small municipalities -- drew
from the circuit court pool.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So the district court
jurors could -- could include as many jurors who are
not from Grand Rapids as they could from Grand Rapids?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Exactly.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I see.
MR. RESTUCCIA: In other words, the proof --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. That --
I'm confused.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That’s all right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought it was the
other way around. I thought Grand Rapids gave however
many -- you know, 30 percent to the pool and then took
Grand Rapids people back?
MR. RESTUCCIA: It does take Grand Rapids
people, that's right. That’s how it happens. You’re
drawing from the entire county.
I'm sorry if I -- if I've -- if I've stated
it in a way that's misleading. I apologize.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I -- apparently, we were
not communicating correctly.
--
MR. RESTUCCIA: All of the jurors from the
entire county are drawn into one pool.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. RESTUCCIA: And then the -- the local
courts can identify those people that came from within
their jurisdiction and draw them out.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So the --
MR. RESTUCCIA: Everyone does it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So the jurors who served
on the district court were primarily from Grand
Rapids, rather than Kent County as a whole?
MR. RESTUCCIA: The -- there’s no
information to -- in the record --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, let me just ask you
MR. RESTUCCIA: -- that indicates that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- a factual question.
Could they put on the district court jurors who did
not come from Grand Rapids?
MR. RESTUCCIA: No. The -- the district
court for Grand Rapids had to be Grand Rapids
residents. You're exactly right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So, then, inevitably, if
you give the district court jurors first, a pool of
African-American jurors are going to be larger serving
in the district court than in the -- in the felony
court.
MR. RESTUCCIA: It all depends on the local
courts and their usage of jurors. If -- if Grand
Rapids actually required fewer jurors, it would -- it
would result in a larger number of African-Americans
being present on the circuit court.
The whole concept underlying the claim that
-- that this had a disproportionate effect is the idea
that Grand Rapids must have needed proportionately
more jurors than the other local courts might.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So, is there anybody
who said whether -- if all -- they all take their
jurors first, the districts, and Grand Rapids uses a
higher percentage of jurors. So now there -- and they
have more of the black jurors, so that there are fewer
left over --
MR. RESTUCCIA: That would be the argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: That could be. Now, is
there any -- in this record, does anybody say whether
that's okay or not? I mean, to -- to have people
serve jury duty near where they live or nearer where
they live, on its face, is not so bad. Did -- did
anybody say whether this is good or bad?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, there wasn't really
testimony whether it was good or bad. The -- the
anecdotal information was that it -- it took African-
American jurors out of the larger pool. The anecdotal
information from the court administrator was: We were
afraid this process was draining -- “siphoning” was
the language -- siphoning jurors from the circuit
court.
JUSTICE BREYER: Are you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you have to be a -- a
resident of the district in order to serve as a juror
in the district court?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have to be?
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So then if this system were
not in effect, and if Grand Rapids had to take white
jurors from other counties as opposed to a larger
percentage of black jurors from Grand Rapids, then
you’d have a claim in Grand Rapids, wouldn't you?
MR. RESTUCCIA: It would create a problem in
Grand Rapids. That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you -- you’d have a
jury pool in Grand Rapids that wouldn't reflect the
larger number of blacks in Grand Rapids.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's exactly right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you’re damned if you do
and damned if you don't, right?
MR. RESTUCCIA: I think that's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- so do we have
any evidence in the record that -- I gather this whole
claim depends upon Grand Rapids having more need for
jurors per capita than anywhere else?
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's exactly right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So do we have any
evidence in the record that that’s the case?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Nothing other than the
anecdotal testimony. Like, for example, the court
administrator said it is believed that this process
results in a reduction in the number of jurors -- of
African-American jurors --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I would suppose
that’s something we can find out pretty easily, right?
I mean, you look and see how many jurors are pulled
for -- how many jurors Grand Rapids needs in a
particular period --
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- compare it to how
many jurors Rockland needs.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Right. And that information
was not provided, and that’s one of the reasons the
Michigan Supreme Court rejected the claim factually,
that it had not been demonstrated.
And, in fact, if you look at the information
that Mr. Smith's expert put forward, it really
confirms that the -- even the best showing for Mr.
Smith is a very small correlation. I mean, you’re
talking about a 3 or 4 percent comparative disparity
difference.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let me get that. If -- if
a procedure routinely results in statistical
underrepresentation that is significant, is that not a
clear showing of systematic exclusion?
MR. RESTUCCIA: It would have to be
significant, and I don't think there's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, yes -- no, that's --
it's a hypothetical.
MR. RESTUCCIA: Oh, if the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Routinely results in
significant underrepresentation, then that is
automatically systematic exclusion?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Not -- not under my reading
of Duren. I don't think that would be -- I don't
think that's the -- the proper rule. And I -- the
reason --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then they would not
have -- have gone on to the systemic issue, because
the disparity was so marked, just on the -- just on
the numbers?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Well, I -- I don't think the
numbers were sufficient to justify --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, isn't the -- I'm
trying to think about the third prong of -- of --
MR. RESTUCCIA: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- of Duren. Isn't -- if
it's routine and it's predictable and it's constant,
isn't that always due to systematic exclusion?
MR. RESTUCCIA: And that's the argument
being raised by Mr. Smith. No, I think the answer is
no. And the reason I say that is this: You have --
the Federal courts, on direct review, have looked at
voter registration and challenges to voter
registration. Voter registration may have a disparate
-- or affect distinct groups differently.
In the same way that the Second and Tenth
Circuit have looked at cases where they failed to
follow up on non-returns, that -- if you don't follow
up on non-returns, it may affect distinct groups
differently. The analysis of the Federal courts on
that issue has been that the decisions to exempt
yourself from jury service or the failure to respond
to an invitation for jury service is outside the
system. Even if it occurs regularly and is
persistent, it's still not inherent in the process.
That's what the Michigan Supreme Court said
here about the excuses for hardship and transportation
-- for the excuses. But it's also true that the
process by which you select jurors in district courts
is not something that is a systematic exclusion of
anyone. It's -- on its face, it is neutral, and if
you -- if this Court concludes that neutral practices
like sending out -- using a certain body, whether
voter registration or if it's driver's licenses and
Michigan identification cards, or not following up on
non-returns, or allowing excuses for hardship, or --
or assigning jurors to a district court first, if that
is -- can result in systematic exclusion, what's going
to happen is that all these neutral processes that
Michigan has may result in disparities.
And so, as it stands now, Kent County
doesn't identify the race and ethnicity of all of its
jurors. Well, it's going to have to if it's going to
have to have this perfect correspondence of the jury-
eligible population. It will no longer have this kind
of blind neutrality --
JUSTICE ALITO: But concluding that it's
systematic doesn't mean that the defendant wins. It
just means that the State has to -- has to justify the
-- the mechanism that's causing -- that's causing this
-- this situation.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's true. There is --
there is then the rebuttal. But then what happens is
you are subject to these challenges. The question is:
Does the court -- does the State ever wish -- ever
wish to be in a position of having to be subject to
the challenge?
But -- but I think I want to come back to --
one of the prevailing points of all of this is that
this is also the Michigan Supreme Court. There’s no
question that it had reached the merits and was
entitled to AEDPA deference. And the -- the question
was: Was there adequate guidance to the State of
Michigan to know that this was both systematic -- that
this was systematic exclusion and inherent in the
process? And Duren was not clear on that point.
The -- the analysis of the Michigan courts
really corresponds quite closely to what the Federal
courts have done, so it cannot be objectively
unreasonable. And if there --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: One point of information:
What is the Michigan ID?
MR. RESTUCCIA: Oh, what happens if you
don't have it -- some people don't have a right to a
driver's license, so you can still obtain an
identification card even if you are not able to drive.
So it’s trying to get as wide a group as possible for
your pool of jurors.
And if there are no --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask this factual
question: Am I correct in understanding that Michigan
in fact has changed the practice with regard to giving
priority to --
MR. RESTUCCIA: That's right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. RESTUCCIA: That’s right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Lawrence.
MR. LAWRENCE: Okay.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JAMES STERLING LAWRENCE
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. LAWRENCE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
If the annual jury call of minorities at the
courthouse in Grand Rapids is down by 7.28 percent of
the total number of jurors called, that means if it
happens in Detroit, that means almost nothing, but if
it happens in Grand Rapids, that's every minority.
The Petitioner's goal is to have this Court enshrine
into law a rule that the two situations are exactly
the same.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you had a
community with one African-American, your argument
would be the same, if that's the disparity? That
means every -- every minority is left off the jury.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I think that certainly
if you adopt the Petitioner's test for 60 percent of
the country, Duren would not apply regarding African-
Americans; 90 percent of the country, wouldn't apply
to Hispanics; and Duren protections would never apply
to Native Americans anywhere.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess I'm -- I
guess I’m echoing Justice Stevens’s question of
whether or not this type of statistical analysis
really works when you’re dealing with relatively small
numbers.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I would make this
observation: That in Duren v. Missouri, on page 366,
the Court stated, "His undisputed demonstration that a
large discrepancy occurred, not just occasionally, but
in every weekly venire for a period of nearly a year,
manifestly indicates that the cause of the
representation was systematic -- that is, inherent in
the particular jury selection process utilized."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but there you were
dealing with an express exemption. There was an
exemption for a woman, and also in the record was that
the jury clerk was sending out notices saying: Women,
if you do not wish to serve, return the summons to the
judge named on the reverse side as quickly as
possible. And then, further -- systematic -- if the
card was not returned, if a card sent to a woman was
not returned, it was automatically assumed that she
did not wish to serve. There was no follow-up.
So there was all kinds of evidence of
systematic problems in Duren that are not present
here.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, first of all, that's
completely correct; however, the rule in Duren, the
U.S. Supreme Court stated that the numbers alone prove
systematic. Then the Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where did the Court say
that?
MR. LAWRENCE: On page 366. And then in --
the Court went on to say that the State is arguing
that there's various neutral, benign reasons for the
underrepresentation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. You -- if that
statement is true, then -- then there is -- there’s no
third part to the three-part test. I thought Duren
established a three-part test.
MR. LAWRENCE: It did.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the third one was that
you had to establish -- after having already
established the disparity, you had to establish that
there was a selection process which caused the
disparity. And you are telling us that you don't have
to proceed to step 3. Once you show the disparity, it
is assumed that it is the product of the system.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, Justice Scalia, my
reading of Duren does indeed include that third test,
but the problem is, is that Duren puts the burden of
proof on that test on the State. They said at pages
8 to 369 that the State is claiming there were all
sorts of neutral, legitimate reasons for the
underrepresentation --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Oh, that was after --
that was after showing the systematic factors. It was
the plaintiff's burden -- or the defendant in the
case, Duren -- burden to show there was a systematic
factor. That was the automatic exception for a woman
and how it worked in practice. After all of that,
then Justice White tells us, the State could still
come back and say yes, that's true, but there were
other reasons why women didn't show up. Maybe they
were disproportionately elderly, or maybe they were
involved with child care.
That's what -- that's what Duren said, that
the -- showing a systematic factor was the plaintiff's
burden, and then the State could justify why the
numbers came out that way.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, we did show a number of
systematic factors, but if you look at Duren itself,
on page 366 it says, the numbers alone proved it. On
-- further on 366, they stated that Duren --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How do you reconcile that
with the third test? Please tell me how you reconcile
that statement with the fact that it did set forth a
three -- a three-prong test.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I believe that we met
the three-prong test, but I feel that it is an error
in reading Duren to say anything other than that: The
State must show how this came about, not the
defendant.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where does it say that?
MR. LAWRENCE: -- did show it, and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where does it say that?
MR. LAWRENCE: It says that at pages 368 to
9. And the --
JUSTICE ALITO: It says that the State has
to show that it has a reason, a good reason, for --
the aspect of the selection process that has been
identified as causing the disparity.
But does it say that it's the State's
obligation to go through every factor that may cause
the disparity and justify every one? Or is it the
defendant's obligation to point to some aspect of the
selection -- of the -- of the system that causes the
disparity? Then once the defendant identifies that,
then the State can show if it -- can try to show that
there's a good reason for it.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I would read one
sentence from Duren, if I could: "Assuming, arguendo,
that the exemptions mentioned by the court below would
justify failure to achieve a fair community cross-
section on jury venires, the State must demonstrate
that these exemptions caused the underrepresentation
complained of."
And I think that all of the courts, all
along the way, including Michigan's supreme court,
have overlooked that important principle.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do I understand your
siphoning theory to depend upon Grand Rapids drawing a
disproportionate number of jurors from the pool?
MR. LAWRENCE: That is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That results in
fewer minorities going up to the county court, right?
MR. LAWRENCE: That's right. Because those
jurors that were pulled out for district court, many
of them did not serve in district court. The majority
did not, but they were still removed from --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Removed from the
county --
MR. LAWRENCE: -- from the overall pool.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where -- where in
the record is it established that Grand Rapids had a
disproportionate need for jurors from the pool?
MR. LAWRENCE: I don't believe either side
established that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if it's -- if
your theory depends upon Grand Rapids drawing a
disproportionate number and it is not in the record
that Grand Rapids drew a disproportionate number, I
think that means you lose.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I would respectfully
disagree with the Court because it is not necessary,
in our view, that each specific item that led to
underrepresentation be, itself, something that's
unconstitutional, but rather, the collective nature of
it, that 15 out of 17 months persistently and
repeatedly came up with substantial
underrepresentation. You are talking about 34.8
percent here.
JUSTICE ALITO: But that's the only factor
that the Sixth Circuit identified as illegitimate, was
this -- was this siphoning system.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I feel that --
JUSTICE ALITO: It rejected everything else,
didn't it?
MR. LAWRENCE: I feel that there are a
number of factors. I suppose that we could do it on
the basis of height and then be surprised when there's
fewer women on the jury.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, why is it -- I’m just
not clear in my mind. Why is this siphoning bad? My
impression, which may be wrong, is you -- you have a
thousand people in the room, let's say, and if you let
the district courts choose first, people will serve
nearer where they live.
Now -- and so most of them would rather
serve nearer where they live. And the result of that
could be, for the reasons that were stated, that then
there are fewer minorities on the more general jurors
that draw from a wider area, and I don't know about
the merits of that.
I mean, I see a negative, and I see a
positive. So is it -- it doesn't seem to me obviously
bad, nor is it obviously good. So what should I do?
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, the record showed --
JUSTICE BREYER: Right.
MR. LAWRENCE: -- that the people who were
actually showing up for the jury panels at circuit
court were very heavily overrepresented in the rural
areas of Kent County and heavily underrepresented --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, but -- but that's
just the explanation of the problem that we're seeing.
MR. LAWRENCE: Right. Well, I guess --
JUSTICE BREYER: The problem we're seeing is
that if Grand Rapids has a higher juror utilization
rate and they have a higher minority population, then
you will end up with the leftover juries having a
lower minority population.
Now, the explanation for that is that you
choose the district judges -- you choose the district
jurors first. My question to you is: I -- if you're
just a -- I'm not instructed in this area. If you
were just to tell me, what do I think of that, I would
say I'm not sure.
I think you have fewer minorities, that's
true, but people get to serve closer to home. Now --
now, can you enlighten me a little bit about this?
MR. LAWRENCE: Yes. Well, first of all,
Grand Rapids has several district courts, and the
largest one is the district court for the city of
Grand Rapids. And as one would predict, the judicial
business of a large city is certainly going to be more
extensive than the judicial business in rural areas.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Of course. Of
course, but we have to look at this on a proportional
basis, right? Grand Rapids is also sending a higher
number of jurors to the pool than -- than the small
rural county.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your -- your theory
depends upon Grand Rapids drawing not just a
proportional number, if it's contributing 30 percent
and it draws 30 percent; your theory depends upon
Grand Rapids contributing 30 percent to the pool and
drawing 40 percent.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I guess I would simply
say that the court administrator testified and the
district judge found that they had substantial
underrepresentation that was very noticeable, very
visible, a severe problem, and after my client's
trial, they -- they concluded that the best way of
dealing with this was to end the siphoning process,
which they did.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so, what -- what did
it result in? It resulted over a 6-month period and a
difference between 18 percent underrepresentation and
percent. And your adversary says that's not
statistically meaningful difference, that 3 percent,
because it only takes a difference of a couple of
people to change it from 18 to 15.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What's -- what's
unreasonable about that argument?
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I have two answers to
that. The first one being that what -- one thing that
was eliminated was the spikes, like we had in my
client's month, 34.8, even though the average
underrepresentation was only 18.1.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You can't -- you are
comparing apples and oranges, because your pre-spike
was over a year and your post-spike was over 6 months.
We don't know what would have happened -- or didn't
have statistics of a year or longer.
MR. LAWRENCE: Okay. Well, in the case of
Duren, you’re talking about -- they had a 10-month
period that was involved, but as for the numbers being
small, I can only refer you to cases that I very much
disagree with -- United States v. Sanchez-Lopez, cited
in my brief, where Hispanics comprised 5.59 percent of
the southern district of Idaho -- and the court
basically said: Since that's less than 10 percent,
who cares if there are Hispanics on the juries? The
same in United States --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I wouldn't say that,
but I still haven't -- I will try again. Forget the
cases.
As I’m hearing this, all I’m hearing is:
Well, if you let the -- if you say that the wider area
should choose first, you will get a higher number of
minorities, but very tiny number; I mean a very small
addition, one or two people. And if you do it the way
they’re doing it, you'll lose those one or two people,
but you will let people serve closer to home.
So I just think -- as a person, not as a
judge -- that's why I am letting you answer it as a
judge -- but I mean, I’d say, well, it doesn't sound
like much of a big deal. And -- and I do see an
advantage in this, of the way they are doing it, so,
now, you tell me what's -- what's wrong with that?
MR. LAWRENCE: Okay. Well, first of all,
Kent County is not really that big. It's -- anybody
can drive from the farthest end of the county to
downtown Grand Rapids in approximately 20 to 30
minutes. It wouldn't be that difficult to get there.
I bet members of this Court have a longer commute.
But, more importantly, the -- the fact that
you're only talking about 25 people out of 2,250
people simply means that the problem will be easy for
court administrators to solve, if they have an
incentive to do it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How is that? Don't
those people then have to become professional jurors?
They have to serve on every jury, or you’re going to
have the disproportion that the statistics show.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, the statistics showed,
for example, that African-Americans had a much higher
rate of not having an automobile. And so if you say,
well, if you have trouble getting a ride, you could
tell somebody, come on down anyway; or you can say,
that's all right, take the day off.
And if African Americans have a very
substantial higher rate of single-parent households,
well, then, of course, it's going to be harder to get
a babysitter. Now, you can tell those people, well,
that's okay, stay home; or you can say, try to get
down here anyway.
And the court -- and if somebody simply
didn't show up, statistics have shown, in the brief --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May I stop you there for
a moment? Because one of the things that was in the
Duren opinion was that a child care excuse would be
okay. I think Justice White said at the end, now, I'm
not touching the typical hardship excuses, and one of
them was child care, and that is -- certainly, in the
early '70s, was going to disproportionately affect
women. You have far fewer women if you give a child
care exemption.
MR. LAWRENCE: No doubt that that's true,
and I am not saying that it is wrong to give real
hardship exemptions. Here --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But this -- he wasn't
talking about individual cases.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, in this case, one of
the things that happened is that, if somebody didn't -
- simply didn't show up, that's it. Now, judges --
the court administrator said, yes, we tried. The
judges would issue orders to show cause, but the
police department made a decision that they were not
going to have anything to do with the serving or
participation in these orders to show cause, orders to
show up.
And isn't that police department decision
part of the system? It is systematic. When the
police --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me just --
MR. LAWRENCE: -- tell the courts what to
do, shouldn't the courts tell the police what to do?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me make sure I
understand your position. Assume that there is an --
an identifiable disparity of 2 percent or 3 percent,
or whatever it might be to get to the threshold of
being significant, that’s entirely caused by the fact
that the members of the minority have personal excuses
that justify non-service. What do you do with that
case? Do you find that it was -- it’s
unconstitutional, or don't you?
MR. LAWRENCE: If you find that it is
persistent, month in and month out --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It is. It's assuming --
MR. LAWRENCE: -- then you have a problem
because society benefits when jurors are drawn from
the broadest spectrum of the system.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I didn’t --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that's policy.
Can't you say that that is systematic exclusion
because it's part of the system?
MR. LAWRENCE: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But is it
unconstitutional, is what I'm trying to find out.
Society benefits because -- if you make them serve;
the society benefits if you grant the excuses, too.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, overall, there's
nothing wrong with granting excuses for genuine
hardship; however, when you have this factor and
factor 2 and factor 3 and factor 4, and they
persistently come up with all-white juries, that's
what Richard Hillary testified to, 98 percent of the
time, nothing, but all-white juries.
And if somebody could --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there -- is there a
Federal district that corresponds to this Kent County?
Is there a Federal district court that would be
calling jurors in -- in the same geographical area?
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, there is the United
States District Court for the Western District of
Michigan that covers a very large amount of territory,
and, frankly, I have not studied their statistics, but
I know, from personal knowledge, that the African-
American population in the Western District of
Michigan would be smaller than in Kent County or in
the city of Grand Rapids, where --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you don't have -- you
don't have comparable -- comparable records for what
was going on in the -- in the district court?
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, if you mean the United
States District Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. LAWRENCE: No, I -- I have not studied
that situation, and --
JUSTICE ALITO: Are there -- are there
courts that you know of that do what you are
suggesting needs to be done? When a juror does not
show up, the judge issues a bench warrant, and -- and
the police are sent out to arrest the person and drag
the person into court, or somebody says, I am a single
parent, and I have children, and I'm too poor to have
a nanny or an au pair, and, therefore, please excuse
me; and they say, no, you have to find some way of
getting here.
Are there courts that do that?
MR. LAWRENCE: I don't know of a court that
arrests people, and I -- in this case, it wasn't a
question of arresting. The local judges made a
decision: We are going to issue orders to show cause;
people will be required to come in. The police
decided, no, we’re not going to have anything to do
with that.
And I feel that that's part of the system
because the police are part of the system.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Sterling, I don't --
you seem to acknowledge that, to make your case, you
have to show that Grand Rapids district drew from the
pool a disproportionate number of people.
Why -- why do you have to prove that? If
Grand Rapids contributes to the pool an inordinate,
disproportionate number of the minority -- blacks in
this case -- even if Grand Rapids simply took back a
proportionate number from the pool, it would still
have a disproportionate effect on reducing the number
of blacks in the overall pool, wouldn't it?
MR. LAWRENCE: In order to solve this
problem, all that Kent County would have to do is to,
if you take people to district court, put back the
ones that aren't being used. That would certainly
help, but, instead, they take an excess number, like
any court does, but the excess people are totally
removed from the system.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your answer to
Justice Scalia's question is -- is no, right? Because
the idea is, if Grand Rapids sends up a pool that’s 30
percent minority and if it takes back the same number
as everybody else, it's going to get -- the county is
going to get the same proportion.
It's only when they take back more. They
have the more heavily African-American pool, and they
are going to draw from it more than everybody else is
drawing from theirs, so there will be fewer African-
Americans to go to the county.
MR. LAWRENCE: That is what's happening, but
I don't believe --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you have no
evidence that Grand Rapids takes back more than its
share, proportionally, than anybody else.
MR. LAWRENCE: We know that the -- as soon
as they stopped doing it, this created a substantial
increase in the number of African-Americans on the
juries, and I think that that’s --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: At the county level?
MR. LAWRENCE: At the county level.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes. Was there any
evidence that your venire -- that minorities were
underrepresented on your venire?
MR. LAWRENCE: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where is that in the
record?
MR. LAWRENCE: Okay. The -- well, it is in
the testimony of -- well, if you look, it's -- I'm
sorry that I don't have the page number, but right at
the time, it was said, we have two or three African-
Americans within this group, that was either 60 or
0.
And I'm sorry that the record is less clear,
but even if it is 3 out of 60, you’re talking about 5
percent, whereas the population is 7.28 percent. If
it just happens once or twice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Help me --
MR. LAWRENCE: -- not a problem, but it
happens every month.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Help me -- help me
with the math. If there were one more African-
American, what would the percentage be? Pretty close
to what you’re saying it should be, right?
MR. LAWRENCE: If there were two more, it
would be right on target, just -- it would only be .28
percent low, which, if you simply send out a second
letter, because the testimony of Kim Foster was that,
later on, when they started sending out the second
letter, half of the people who did not respond would
respond --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can we go back to your
point about -- that there was a big change when the
draw came from the circuit first, before the
districts. I thought it was agreed that, before,
there was an 18 percent, on average, comparative
difference and, after, 15 percent. That doesn't sound
like a big change.
MR. LAWRENCE: But it's a step in the right
direction, and what we want to do is we want to
promote more minority participation on jurors --
juries, instead of creating a rule that tells court
administrators all over the country, the heat's off,
you don't have to do anything.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But a step -- a step in the
right direction is not enough. You were adducing that
to prove that the prior system had a significant
effect, and it turned out, it didn't have a very
significant effect. It doesn't prove your point to
say, well, it's a step in the right direction.
If it's insignificant, it's insignificant.
Whether it's insignificant in the right direction or
the wrong direction doesn't matter.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, one element of the
entire system might be insignificant, but you are
talking about numerous elements that went together,
and Duren says they have to show what caused the
underrepresentation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I still don't -- I don't
understand this problem of -- of you have to show that
they took back more than they contributed.
Let's assume that Grand Rapids is -- is
entirely black, and its entire delegation that goes to
the pool are all black, okay? And let's assume that
those blacks are 10 percent of the -- the totality,
and there are no blacks from anywhere else, okay?
Then Grand Rapids takes back simply the number of
people it -- it took, its set, which would be 10
percent, and it takes black -- takes back all of the
blacks, who are the Grand Rapids residents.
All of the other districts would thereby
have zero percent blacks instead of 10 percent, which
is what they ought to have.
MR. LAWRENCE: Each district, the jurors are
acquired from that district --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly.
MR. LAWRENCE: -- and the circuit is
acquired from all the districts of the county.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly. So why expect the
other districts to have 10 percent blacks simply
because Grand Rapids contributed 10 percent of the
totality, all of whom were black? There -- then
there’s a requirement for each district to have 10
percent blacks, right? But if Grand Rapids takes back
its -- its -- the people it sent, there are no more
blacks left to go around.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I don't expect those
outlying districts to have more -- a larger percentage
of blacks than the population; I'm only expecting that
from the county.
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't that the case --
JUSTICE BREYER: So what if --
JUSTICE ALITO: If -- if Grand -- if Grand
Rapids uses a disproportionate number of jurors in its
district courts, then you are going to have this
problem -- the only way to fix the problem would be to
have a separate jury system for the district courts.
If you have the -- the circuit courts going first,
then the people in the district courts are going to
have the problem that you identify.
If you have a system in which it's all done
randomly -- circuit court, district court -- the
people who come toward the end are going to have the
problem. So I don't see any way out of this, if in
fact there was a statistical basis for it, other than
having a separate selection process for the district
courts. Is that what you think is necessary?
MR. LAWRENCE: I think that we should allow
a great deal of flexibility to local court
administrators. As I mentioned in the brief, in the
Parents Involved in Community Schools case, there was
a discussion in the concurrence by Justice Kennedy
about exactly what local governments --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So is --
MR. LAWRENCE: -- can do to -- to get an
appropriate representation of minorities without using
racial classifications.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That was a question of
what was permitted. Here you’re trying to say this is
required. The school’s case was, these are measures
the district could take if it wanted to. But you are
saying these are measures the district must take
because the Constitution requires it. They are quite
different settings.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, I admit that it is a
different setting. However, I feel -- well, no, I
won't say “I feel.” Duren holds that there must be a
reasonable connection between the African-Americans
that appear on the jury arrays and the population as a
whole.
JUSTICE BREYER: What about the -- the more
I listen, the more I think you think there are a lot
of things people could do. They could send three
letters; they could explain in the letters why it's
important to come; they could try reversing the thing
a little bit with the districts first or not first --
all kinds of things.
But what -- but now you’re forcing them into
this legal rubric. So what about a decision, which
you wouldn’t like, probably, but it would say we can't
say that they’re unreasonable in respect to not having
all of these, but there -- who knows? You know, when
they get around and others try them, et cetera.
In other words, unreasonable/reasonable is
one standard, and ambiguity plays a -- a role here,
too, that might be helpful.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well, you are certainly
correct, and I would simply say that the people of
Grand Rapids looked up at the juries; 98 percent of
the time they saw nothing but white faces. I think
that Duren requires that the local system do something
about it. There's a lot of options. So you should
give them flexibility.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. LAWRENCE: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Restuccia, you
have 2 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF B. ERIC RESTUCCIA,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. RESTUCCIA: I just have two brief
points. One is that -- I want to just remind the
Court that this is a case under AEDPA review, so that
the Michigan Supreme Court has to be not just
incorrect; it has to be objectively unreasonable.
And its conclusion, I think probably the
easiest analysis here is the conclusion that there was
no showing of systemic exclusion, because Mr. Smith
failed to show that there was any underrepresentation
that arose from the jury assignment process, is
probably one of the strongest points, because if you
look at the 3 percent comparative disparity, that's
less than half of 1 percent absolute disparity. No
one claims that that’s statistically significant.
So I think whether it's reviewed under
54(d)(2) or 2254(e)(1), this Court should reverse.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:14 a.m., the case in the
