NEW PROCESS STEEL, L.P., :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-1457
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD :
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, March 23, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:08 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
SHELDON E. RICHIE, ESQ., Austin, Texas; on behalf of
Petitioner.
NEAL K. KATYAL, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
SHELDON E. RICHIE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
NEAL K. KATYAL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
SHELDON E. RICHIE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:08 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument this morning in Case 08-1457, New Process Steel
v. The National Labor Relations Board.
Mr. Richie.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SHELDON E. RICHIE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. RICHIE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The issue in this case is whether the
National Labor Relations Board can continue to issue
adjudicatory decisions when its membership falls to two.
The National Labor Relations Act clearly states that at
all times, a quorum of the board will be not less than
three members. The board's interpretation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it your position that
all of the actions of the board, including those taken
by the regional offices and by the general counsel and
by everybody else, is inoperative once -- once the
membership falls below three?
MR. RICHIE: No, Justice Scalia,
particularly with respect to the general counsel, the
statute at 153(d) has a separate enumeration of -- of
obligations and powers and authority, so we don't think
that that fails.
We also think that, with respect to certain
administrative type functions --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it has a separate --
a separate authorization for these three -- three-person
adjudicatory panels as well, doesn't it?
MR. RICHIE: It has -- it does,
Justice Scalia. It does have a separate authorization
for panels of three or more members. It does not have,
as in this case, a separate authorization for panels of
two members.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. But that's a
different argument from the argument you were starting
off with, which, as I understood it, was once the
membership of the board falls below the quorum of three,
by reason of that, the three -- former three-member
panels, of which there are now only two left, cannot
act. Is that your argument?
MR. RICHIE: It is our argument that the --
that once the membership falls below three, that the
National Labor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The membership of the
board?
MR. RICHIE: I'm sorry, Your Honor?
JUSTICE SCALIA: The membership of the
board?
MR. RICHIE: When the membership of the
board falls below three. But we also believe that when
the membership of the group falls below three, that the
delegee group's authority to make adjudicatory decisions
lapses.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understood that argument
and I thought that was the only one you were making.
But you are making a broader one, that it also happens
whenever the -- whenever the board's quorum disappears.
MR. RICHIE: You are correct,
Justice Scalia. We are making that argument. It's
because of the first sentence of 153(b), which states
that the delegations have to be to members of three or
more members.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the regional offices
can't function, of the NLRB?
MR. RICHIE: Well, we believe they can
function. They can receive, for example, unfair labor
practices complaints. They can't make adjudicatory
decisions. And we think that that is exactly what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can the board pay salaries?
MR. RICHIE: We believe they can, because
there is probably a different statute that enumerates
that, Justice Scalia, other than this statute with
respect to the authority with respect to adjudicatory
decisions.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm really reluctant to
rely upon this first argument that you are making,
because I really don't know what it does to all of the
functioning of the board.
MR. RICHIE: Well, one of the --
Justice Scalia, one of the things that we think is clear
is that the remedy for fixing an undersized board is not
for the board to redefine itself and to read the
statute, but for Congress or the president to act. And
there are many ways in which the president and Congress
could -- could fix the problem of an undersized board.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But here the court of
appeals said that the Act does two things. First, it
said that the full board can delegate full powers to any
three-member group. That was step one, and that was
done here.
And then it says there's this rule that a
quorum is three, but then it said: Except as to one of
these three-member groups that has been designated,
except, and there the quorum is two. So why doesn't the
statute answer the question that, yes, a quorum is
three, except when it's two?
MR. RICHIE: Well, I think there is two
answers to that, Justice Ginsburg. One is here the
government -- the board takes the position, as they say
on page 29 in a footnote to their brief, that when a
delegate group possessed of all of the board's power
acts, it is acting as the board and not as an agent of
the board.
So first, we would say that the second
quorum provision isn't even applicable to this group
that was established -- of members Kirsanow, Liebman and
Schaumber. And so we think the three-member quorum --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I didn't understand that.
Would you -- would you make that argument again?
MR. RICHIE: Certainly, Justice Scalia. The
government -- I'm sorry, "the government." The NLRB in
its brief in footnote 21 on page 29, as well as in the
delegation, the minutes of the delegation in 2007, which
are found in our brief in the appendix on -- I think
it's pages 4a and 5a. Both say that when -- the NLRB
says in the footnote "When the delegee group possessed
of all of the board's powers," which is what we have
here, "acts, it is acting as the board and not as an
agent of the board. So our position is that when you
become the board, as this group did, now you are subject
to that minimum three-member delegee -- three member
quorum requirement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it's not an agent of
the board because the three-member group that has a
quorum of two has the full powers of the board. So the
statute doesn't say anything about a three-member group
that has a quorum of two being an agent of the board.
MR. RICHIE: It's a -- it's a group that is
delegated authority, and therefore, whether it's a full
delegation or partial delegation, we believe that the
common law principles of agency and principal make that
delegee group an agent.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But where does the
statute make that three-member group with a quorum of
two, a quorum of two, an agent? It says they may be
designated to exercise any and all powers?
MR. RICHIE: Justice Ginsburg, it does not
say the word "agent" in it. But the delegation that
it's referring to is at common law a principal-agency
relationship. So it's our position that once that
delegation occurs that the -- in a normal situation,
because you could have a three-member group of four
members, a board of four or a board of five, and you
could have a group with three members. When the
delegation is made, it's our position and we believe
that this is the position that the D.C. Circuit took as
well, that that's an agent of the board.
JUSTICE BREYER: You should -- you should
have a very direct answer to this question.
Were you finished, because I don't want to
interrupt that train of thought?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The D.C. Circuit I think
was the source of your opening argument because they
said when the number drops below three there is no
board, and I guess that's what your opening argument was
based on.
MR. RICHIE: Yes, Justice Ginsburg, it did
say that. But it also went on to say that it was
applying the rules, the common law rules of principal
and agency, and that when the board without three
members lost its authority to act, that the delegee
group to which the delegation was made also lost
authority to act. And in this case that's exactly what
happened. We had a three-member board -- we actually
had four delegate to three, and then two terms expired.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, just on this same
point before Justice Breyer I think moves to another
point. The statute does use the word "quorum" twice
and, as Justice Ginsburg has pointed out, except that
two members -- in its last phrase it uses the word
"quorum" twice: "Except that two members shall
constitute a quorum." It doesn't say two members may
act.
MR. RICHIE: Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It says shall constitute a
quorum."
MR. RICHIE: Justice Kennedy, I think we
have to start first -- and you are correct, there are
two quorum provisions, but "quorum" is not defined
differently. Quorum -- I think we agree within NLRB
that a quorum is the minimum number of members of a body
necessary to transact business. We have two different
bodies defined in this statute. We have the board as
one body and we have the group as a different body. And
so when the -- when the exception appears in the
statute, we agree again with the D.C. Circuit's
interpretation of that as simply defining two different
numbers of people necessary to fill out a quorum of
these two different bodies that are defined within the
statute.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can you -- can you -- if
you are right, it seems to me you should have a very
clear, concise answer to the question that I'm just
going to ask you. And this is the question: Imagine
that there was no delegation, none. Now we have five
members; is that right? One of them dies. So there is
a vacancy. Now, can the remaining four exercise the
board's power?
MR. RICHIE: Clearly.
JUSTICE BREYER: Clearly. Okay. So what is
the difference between the situation I just described
and this situation where the Board simply delegated its
power to three people and one of them dies? What's the
difference? I can't find any difference in the
language. So what is the difference?
MR. RICHIE: Justice Breyer, the difference
is that in this statute there is a clear statement that
at all times the board must have a three-member quorum.
In your hypothetical there were still four members.
JUSTICE BREYER: Correct.
MR. RICHIE: The board was still in place.
JUSTICE BREYER: Except that two members
shall constitute a quorum of any group designated
pursuant to the first sentence, which says "The board is
authorized to delegate to any group of three all of the
powers which it may itself exercise. " So, what's the
difference?
MR. RICHIE: Well, the difference is that
once the -- the difference between the hypothetical and
the situation we are in is that there were four members,
and the statute --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I know that, but I'm
asking why does that make a difference?
MR. RICHIE: It makes a difference because
the statute requires that at all times the board shall
have a quorum of three members, a minimum quorum of
three members.
JUSTICE BREYER: Except.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But isn't that tied to a
quorum for the board as a whole to act? Once it's
delegated a responsibility to a three-member board, it's
already said, unless it takes another vote, that it's
going to let those three people decide. It has -- I
understand the word "delegated" to mean it's given over
its power to a subgroup. If it wants to take it back,
it needs a quorum to do that. That's what I understand.
MR. RICHIE: Well, I think the problem is,
Justice Sotomayor, that the delegation to a group of
three is indeed a valid delegation. We don't contest
that. But what we have here is a phantom group. And
what the -- what the board said, because member
Kirsanow's term expired in December, about 11 days after
the delegation. And if you look at the minutes of the
board when they are delegating to the group, it says in
the minutes that they "are continuing to be a two-member
quorum of a three-member group," as if member Kirsanow
is a phantom . It's a fiction. The group ceases to
exist and the board -- it's not just that the board
falls below three and the board ceases to exist with all
delegated powers to this group. The group ceases to
exist.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that brings you back
to Justice Breyer's hypothetical. There's five members
on the board. Clearly they can delegate under the
statute. Now there are only four members. Something
happens to the fifth. Under your theory, the entity
that originally delegated no longer exists and therefore
the group, the entity that received the delegation of
powers, must cease, must cease to act.
MR. RICHIE: Justice Kennedy, I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If the quorum of three
that authorized two to act disappears and that means the
principal is no longer there, so the agent can't
exercise the authority, why isn't it the same when five
become four?
MR. RICHIE: Well, we believe that the
reason that it isn't, Justice Kennedy, the same is --
terrible sentence. It's not the same because the
statute contemplates vacancies on the board and multiple
vacancies, so long as they don't go below three. The
statute -- the vacancy clause in the statute doesn't
apply to a group at all. So the delegating group in the
hypothetical clearly is still in place as the board
because it's the board that delegated. And the board
still exists.
JUSTICE ALITO: As far as the interests of
your client are concerned, is there any functional
difference between what happened here and what could
happen very routinely even if the board had five
members, namely that after the case was assigned to a
three-member panel one of the three members of the panel
became unable to sit on that case, but the remaining two
members were able to reach agreement so the case could
be decided?
MR. RICHIE: Justice Alito, the difference
is that here there was never a way to reconstitute this
board -- I'm sorry, the group -- as three members. When
you have five or you have four members of the board and
a member of a three-member group is unable to perform
his or her function --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't there another
difference? Is it not the case that the decisions of
these panels can be appealed to the full board? Are
they automatically final? Can the board not revise the
decision of one of its panels?
MR. RICHIE: Well, I believe that the board
could revise the decision of one of its panels.
MR. RICHIE: The adjudication is final.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The adjudication is final.
MR. RICHIE: Of the three-member group.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There is no appeal to the
full board?
MR. RICHIE: That is correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then what is the reason --
I now see. Your answer to my question is that the
JUSTICE SCALIA: You've got to tell me more
than you believe it. What is the case?
vacancy clause applies to the full board but not to the
group.
MR. RICHIE: That's correct, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, got that
answer. And now I see how you could read the statute
that way. So, now I would like -- and that would be in
your favor.
MR. RICHIE: That's true.
JUSTICE BREYER: And -- and, therefore, I
would like to know, since you could also read it the
other way, why should it be read your way? I mean, I
can think of a lot of reasons why not. One is something
that Justice Scalia was raising: It may work havoc as
to what remains effective, what doesn't, what about the
board staff decisions, which are, which aren't. I can
see a lot of reasons for not doing it.
But what are your best reasons for reading
that vacancy clause the way you want me to read it?
MR. RICHIE: Justice Breyer, we -- we
believe that it is important to have a promote -- to
have a robust debate and an expression of -- a potential
for expression of dissent. And what you have here is
you have two members in a group and -- who have publicly
announced that on more than one occasion over the last 2
years plus 3 months when this board has sat with only 2
members, that they have sometimes compromised their
opinions in the interest of the institutional purposes,
basically to keep the doors open.
And so you don't have a full and robust
debate. You don't have the potential for an expression
of a dissenting view, and that's the -- that's the
distinction that we see.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But the problem is that
that exists whether we read your rule or not in the way
you want. You have -- you've conceded that a
three-member board could lose a member, a three-member
group could lose a member and its acts still be binding,
as long as you say there is -- there is three members on
the full board. But this lack of opportunity for
dissent exists any time there is a vacancy. You just
don't like the system.
MR. RICHIE: Justice Sotomayor, if we
consented that when there was an absence, a member who
dies, retires, is incapacitated, that the two members of
a properly constituted three -- three-member group could
still function, I certainly did not mean to say that.
We do not consent to that or agree with that
proposition. What -- what somebody --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. You are now
saying that the group always has to be three members?
MR. RICHIE: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That somebody can't die,
leave, recuse themselves from that group without
invalidating the actions of that subgroup. Where in the
statute do you read that limitation when it says a
quorum of two is okay to act?
MR. RICHIE: The definition of a quorum,
Justice Sotomayor, is the minimum number of persons of a
body necessary to transact business. The body here is
defined as three or more people. So, when the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, I am talking about
the group.
MR. RICHIE: I am, too.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So the group is not
defined as three or more people. It's defined as three.
The board is defined as three or more. The group is
defined as three. So I'm -- I'm a little confused.
MR. RICHIE: In the statute, the group is
defined as -- the board is authorized, and I'm reading
from 153(b), Appendix 1a to our brief: "The board is
authorized to delegate to any group of three or more
members" --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I see.
MR. RICHIE: -- "any or all" -- that is
where we find it necessary that the group must contain
at least three members.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's -- that's a totally
different argument from the one that relies upon the
size of the board, right?
MR. RICHIE: It is, and we think it's an
additional argument. We think there's multiple --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even if the board were
still properly constituted and had a full five members,
if one of the three members to a -- a board should die,
it would no longer be a three-member board and could no
longer be, as your argument goes, the recipient of the
delegation, right?
MR. RICHIE: That's correct, Justice Scalia.
But what's happened routinely for -- for 60 years since
47 when Taft-Hartley was passed, is that what the
board did was it reconstituted the panels any time a
member died or retired.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There have been
situations before where the board dwindled to two
members. Is this the first time that the board has
continued to adjudicate the cases that they can, or when
there were prior periods with only two did the board
continue to adjudicate?
MR. RICHIE: This is the first time, yes.
For over -- from 1947 through 19 -- up to 2007, any time
the board fell to two members -- as far as we know, any
time the board fell to two members, the board
reconstituted -- I'm sorry. Any time a group fell to
two members, the board reconstituted the group to a
three-member group.
JUSTICE ALITO: There is a well-established
practice on the court of appeals that when a three-judge
panel for some reason loses one of the members due to a
death or resignation or recusal, the panel can continue
to decide the case if the remaining two judges can
agree. And -- and do you see -- do you think the -- the
situation is different with the NLRB for some reason?
Or do you think that that -- that those decisions on the
courts of appeals are unlawful as well?
MR. RICHIE: Well, Justice Alito, I think
it's a different statute. But we also -- I also think
the court of appeals, which is the delegating body that
forms the -- the three-member courts, still is in
existence. And if we just --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you are shifting
arguments. You can't keep jumping back and forth
between the two arguments. The one is that the
appointing body has to still be fully constituted, or at
least have a quorum, and the other one, which I thought
Justice Alito was addressing, is the quite separate
argument that the recipient of the delegation has to be
three. And when it falls below three it's only two.
And I don't know that you have a response
to -- to -- to his point, with respect to the latter
argument, except -- except that it's a different
statute.
MR. RICHIE: Well, Justice Scalia, it's a
different statute but it's also a very temporary and
limited circumstance. You have a panel that was formed
to hear a case. Here you have got a delegation of all
the authority, the board has -- the group has become the
board, and we effectively have a two-member National
Labor Relations Board.
JUSTICE BREYER: So I would have thought,
but this is only me -- other people don't necessarily go
in for this kind of argument. But in thinking of the --
the -- the arguments in your favor, the one that sort of
resonated a bit with me was that this is a very
Republican Congress in 1947 that passed Taft-Hartley,
and one of the things they were really aiming at was to
move the board from three to five. And this is a way so
that that just doesn't happen.
But I assume from the briefs filed that
there is no supporting legislative history for that,
what I've just said, so I better wipe it out of my mind.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: If there is no legislative
history, it could be true.
(Laughter.)
MR. RICHIE: Justice Breyer, the legislative
history I think is -- there is no legislative history on
what happens when the board falls below two members.
But it is clear that from 1935 to 1947, the board was
made up of three members, and the statute clearly said
under the Wagner Act two members could be a quorum of a
three-member board.
In 1947 when Taft-Hartley was passed,
Congress intentionally increased the quorum and
increased the size of the board. If it had intended to
have only two members serve at any time as a two-member
board, they would not -- that would be a strange way to
do it, in a statute that not only increases the size of
the board, but changes the minimum quorum requirement
from two to three.
JUSTICE ALITO: I was surprised by your
answer to -- I was surprised by your answer to one of
the earlier questions, because one of your amici says
that any member of the board, regardless of whether he
or she sits on the panel hearing a case, may request
that the case be heard by all five board members. Is
that -- is that not correct?
MR. RICHIE: That is correct, but that's to
hear it as opposed to overturn it once the decision is
made.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Heard an initial -- an
initial decision. But just -- the review of the panel
is in the court of appeals, right?
MR. RICHIE: That's correct,
Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So you could have
initially a panel of five, but that would not be
reviewing the panel of three?
MR. RICHIE: That's correct,
Justice Ginsburg. The -- the -- the five-member board
would not review the three-member group's decision. But
in response to Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What's the use of having a
five-member board, then? I really don't understand
what -- what has been accomplished --
MR. RICHIE: What was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- if you have a -- you are
changing, oh, we had a three-member board, that's no
good, we thought that's unfair. We are going to make to
five. But then we allow the five to convert themselves
to three for finally deciding all the cases. What --
what has been accomplished?
MR. RICHIE: Multiple --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Nothing.
MR. RICHIE: I'm sorry, Justice Scalia.
Multiple members of three. And so before
you had a -- a -- without a delegation, you had a group
of three members. They could -- that group could
hear -- or board --
JUSTICE ALITO: The amicus says that the
members of the board not serving on a panel are given
the opportunity to review draft decisions, thus no case
will issue unless it reflects the majority opinion of
the full board.
MR. RICHIE: It's a draft --
JUSTICE ALITO: So that can be, in effect,
the opportunity for full board review before a draft
decision is issued in final form; is that the way it
works?
MR. RICHIE: Yes, Justice Alito, it does.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Only --
MR. RICHIE: That's not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Only if a majority
of the board wants to do that, right?
MR. RICHIE: No, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One member of the
full board can overturn a group delegation, in other
words, and hear the initial decision?
MR. RICHIE: No, Mr. Chief Justice. They
can agree to -- to review the decision and they can
agree before the decision is made to join the panel,
basically is what they do.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if one board
member wants to do that and four don't? What happens?
MR. RICHIE: One member wants to join the
panel?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One member wants to
review the group's decision.
MR. RICHIE: That member would review the
group's decision. He wouldn't be able -- he or she
wouldn't be able to overturn the group's decision.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- I am really
confused now.
Is it or is it not the case that the full
board has the power to review a decision of one of these
panels? Before you said no; before you said it's final.
MR. RICHIE: The decision is final once it
is rendered. They can review the decision in draft form
before it is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that is -- that is my
question, whether they -- they can review it before it
is rendered, is that what you are saying?
MR. RICHIE: They can do that or they can
ask to be included on the -- on the panel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They can review it before
it is rendered. Okay.
MR. RICHIE: But they can't overturn it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is this different from
the practice that some courts of appeals follow of
circulating a panel decision to the full court some days
before it's issued to the public? That doesn't put the
non-panel members on the panel. Is this practice that
you are describing the same or is it different?
MR. RICHIE: I believe it's the same,
Justice Ginsburg, that it's exactly the same. But --
but you have an additional opportunity --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's quite
different from the court of appeals sitting en banc.
The practice of circulating the opinion does not put all
of the members of the court on the panel.
MR. RICHIE: That is correct,
Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE ALITO: But it provides an
opportunity for them to vote to hear the case en banc
before it's ever issued.
MR. RICHIE: That's correct, Justice Alito.
It does. And it -- and therefore you have what we don't
have here, is an opportunity for a robust debate.
If there are no other questions I would like
to reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Katyal.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF NEAL K. KATYAL
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. KATYAL: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
We agree that the plain text controls this
case and there are three features to that text.
First, section 153(b) permits delegation of
any or all of the board's power to three or more
members. Second, that section sets out a general quorum
rule of three members. And third, as Justices Alito --
Justices Alito, Kennedy and Ginsburg have pointed out,
there is the phrase "except that" in the rule, a special
quorum provision that sets up panel quorums at two
members.
And in this case, faced with a vacancy
crisis, the board validly delegated its powers in
December 2007 to a three-member panel, and Petitioners
have never contested otherwise. Rather, they argue that
when the board dropped it down to two members --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Just before the third
member no longer became -- no longer was a member of the
board.
MR. KATYAL: That's true.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So knowing when it gave it
to this three member panel that it would shortly become
a two-member panel, and that thereby the board would be
able to act with only two members instead of with three,
which is what the quorum requirement for the board is.
I must say that seems to be a very strange
procedure when you have a statute that says the board
has to -- has to have three for a quorum. When the
board sees, oh, God, we are about to lose our third
member, let's set up a three-member panel with this guy
who's about to go off. It will immediately become a
two-member panel and then we can act with only two
members. That's wonderful.
It doesn't seem to you like an evasion of
the whole purpose of the -- of the quorum requirement?
MR. KATYAL: I don't think so. I think it's
precisely what was -- what the text allows, because it's
not, Justice Scalia, simply a three-member quorum
requirement. It's a three-member quorum requirement,
"except that."
JUSTICE STEVENS: Except -- may I just
interrupt a bit, just on the "except" clause at the very
bottom. When you are talking about individual cases
it's easy. Sure, one member dies; the other two can
finish. But you are talking about long-run governance
of the board. The two members -- two members shall
constitute a quorum of any group designated pursuant to
the first sentence.
Now, 2 years later, after -- what is the
group designated pursuant to the first sentence at the
time of the decision 2 years later?
MR. KATYAL: It is the same group of people
that were --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But there is no such group
exists at the time that that power is being exercised.
MR. KATYAL: Well, Justice Stevens, the
language is written in the past tense. It's "any" --
the language in this is found in the government's brief
at 10a.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, it's not the past
tense. "Two members shall constitute a quorum."
MR. KATYAL: "Of any group designated
pursuant to" the first sentence.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But there is no group
around at the time they're -- that this case is being
decided, that was designated before.
MR. KATYAL: That group was designated on
December 20, 2007, and that met the requirements of --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But your -- your inquiry
is focusing on what happens 2 years later.
MR. KATYAL: And -- and with respect to 2
years later, I submit to you that that penultimate
sentence in 153(b) is met. That is a designated group
pursuant to the first sentence.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I don't know how you
could write the sentence without the "ed" unless you
want to say -- to make your point, if the statute had
been written the other way, to any group continuously
being designated.
MR. KATYAL: Sure, I think you could say
something like constitute a -- that two members shall
constitute a quorum of any group that continues to meet
the requirements of the first sentence thereof, or
something like that.
JUSTICE BREYER: To read -- you can read the
language the way you want, that -- because of the
vacancy clause. You see, there is a sentence there that
says "A vacancy shall not impair the right of the
remaining members to exercise the power." That implies
in the absence of that clause, five to four, they
couldn't. Okay?
Now, you say that clause applies to the
remaining members, i.e., to the three. And now we don't
have three. And since we don't have three, there are --
and you have to have three. Because they're not --
there's not -- there are not the remaining members, you
see.
MR. KATYAL: Right. So let me say a few
things about that. The first is --
JUSTICE BREYER: As long as there was
another member, you could -- you could do it. But
without that remaining member, you can't.
MR. KATYAL: So the first thing to say about
that argument, Justice Breyer, and it's one that
Justice Scalia brought up to my friend before --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. KATYAL: -- it is a totally different
argument. It really does rest on the first sentence of
3(b).
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Yes.
MR. KATYAL: And my friend admitted, it's a
totally new, different argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. KATYAL: It's not in the question
presented. It's not before the Court. But were the
Court interested in it, I do think that the language of
the quorum provision, "quorum" meaning a number
sufficient to transact business, is the most relevant
language, and that suggests that two is enough so long
as you have that initial delegation to a group of three
and then one member drops off.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, don't -- don't you
think it is significant that the -- the vacancy clause
that you were discussing -- where is it? It's in (b).
"A vacancy in the board shall not impair the right of
the remaining members to exercise all of the powers of
the board." And it says nothing about a vacancy in the
group not impairing the power of the group.
MR. KATYAL: The -- the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which -- which buttresses,
it seems to me, the argument that when the group is no
longer a group of three the delegation is no longer
effective.
MR. KATYAL: I don't think so. The -- the
language is "A vacancy in the board -- in the board
shall not impair the powers of the remaining members of
the board."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of the board.
MR. KATYAL: Of the board. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it doesn't say that
about the group. That's my point.
MR. KATYAL: Well, but by definition,
Justice Scalia, the members that had been delegated this
power on December 20th are members of the board. And
they are not -- they are not simply extraneous actors.
And so the vacancy clause, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. The -- this whole
passage distinguishes between the board and the group.
I mean, it's -- it doesn't -- it doesn't mean the group
when it says "the board" and the board when it says "the
group."
MR. KATYAL: Well, I think it -- I don't
know that there is a distinction. I think that there
when they say the board, it by definition includes the
group, because that is part of the board. They aren't
extraneous individuals.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, counsel, if I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, go ahead;
finish.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The quorum for the group
should be three, then. Right?
MR. KATYAL: The quorum -- well, except
that, Justice Scalia, it says -- it goes on to say that
the quorum is actually two.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Let -- let's say the
board delegates to a group the authority to act as the
board until December 31st, 2010. And on December 30th,
10, the group delegates to itself because it's acting
as the board the authority to act until December 31,
11. Is that valid?
MR. KATYAL: Well, if -- if the initial
delegation did give any and all of the powers to the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All the powers of
the board until December 31st.
MR. KATYAL: And then -- then I take it,
yes, they could exercise that delegation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So a delegee can
delegate to itself the full authority of the -- the
master in the master -agent relationship?
MR. KATYAL: Under the statute. Now, there
may be other problems with it. So 153(a), which is
found in our brief, in our government brief at page 10a,
sets out, for example, removal for cause. And if some
members of a group were somehow --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no; they are
just -- you know, they make the distinction that the
board should continue to function.
MR. KATYAL: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even though their
original delegation was limited to 2010 --
MR. KATYAL: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- they, acting as a
board, get to delegate to themselves as the group the
authority to go beyond that.
MR. KATYAL: Right. I suppose that -- I
mean, it's not presented here but yes, I suppose that
would be permissible.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, what if the
board, consisting of five members -- let's say three
Democrats and two Republicans -- the three Democrats
delegate to a group the authority to act as a board.
They designate themselves as the members of the group.
They have at that point, authorized themselves to act as
the board with as little as two members, even though
they couldn't have done that as members of the board.
MR. KATYAL: I think that's right,
Mr. Chief Justice, and it underscores that the statute
itself can't control all of those problems and whether
you set the quorum at three or two, even if you have a
full board of five, you can have these machinations that
are potentially --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even though the
whole -- even though the whole purpose of expanding from
three to five was to ensure that more than two are
required for the board to act?
MR. KATYAL: Well, I think that the purpose,
as the legislative history reveals, and it's set out in
our brief, was to increase efficiency and to have
overlapping panels adjudicating cases. I do think that
there's a -- there's ways to prevent your situation from
happening; that, and they include not just removal for
cause, which I think this would be the paradigmatic case
if three members of the body were trying to cut out two
members from doing their job.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Not trying to, but
succeeding in doing so.
MR. KATYAL: Succeeding, absolutely. And I
think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I mean, it
depends upon who would remove them for cause.
MR. KATYAL: Absolutely.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, who would
remove them?
MR. KATYAL: It would be the president.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what if he's
perfectly content to have two Democrats?
MR. KATYAL: And then you would have
other -- you would have other checks as well. If you
had one-party government and all of these factors
aligning in the way you are suggesting, you would have
the possibility that the circuit court's review under
0(f) might come into play, I mean, because each board
decision can be potentially appealed to a circuit court.
There is budgetary processes and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I just want to make
sure there is nothing to constrain -- if you have three
Democrats, three -- or two Republicans or, of course,
the other way around, nothing to constrain them from
acting fully as the board with only two -- two
Democrats?
MR. KATYAL: I don't think the statute
itself constrains it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In the statute.
MR. KATYAL: -- under either my friend's
reading or mine. I think that rather, it is a matter of
etiquette, practice, tradition, and all sorts of
institutional checks that are laced into the way in
which the board --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any other legal --
this is what -- one thing, if I were thinking without
the language for a moment, and I -- the Taft-Hartley
Congress did, I think, want to limit the powers in a
number of ways of the board, maybe expand the membership
to be sure there would be both parties in larger
numbers.
If you could limit this to adjudications,
you would say, well, then they can't set major policy
with just two members. But I don't see a way to do
that, particularly since the board has often set rules
in adjudication which have broad application.
So am I right in thinking that we have to
decide either, it is okay for two members to set the
most major policies, or we have to say they can't even
conduct adjudication, even the simplest adjudication,
even the least significant?
MR. KATYAL: I think -- I think, Justice
Breyer, that the board traditionally doesn't engage in
much rulemaking. It does make its decisions --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no. But that is a
rule. They set a rule in the adjudication --
MR. KATYAL: And I do agree that -- that at
stake here is the potential to decide cases. Now, when
you mention the Taft-Hartley Act, I think that that
legislative history is important for a different reason,
which is up in -- from 1935 to 1947, and this is set out
in footnote 1 of our brief, that board decided over
0 cases as a two-member body. There was a vacant
third position.
And there were 2 years of debate,
contentious debate, as you alluded to before, about
Taft-Hartley, and yet they left that piece intact. They
permitted two-member bodies to decide these cases. And
so to the extent legislative history is relevant for
members of the Court, we suggest it strongly suggests
that what the board did here, faced with this vacancy
crisis, mirrors what happened between 1935 and --
JUSTICE ALITO: It begs the question --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose -- suppose our
first inquiry were agency law, and we concluded that
under agency law when the principal ceases to exist the
agent may no longer function. Let's assume we conclude
that under agency law. Could you then cite us a case or
a rationale for saying that agency law should not apply
to a government agency, to a problem of this type, and
if so, what is your authority?
MR. KATYAL: Sir, they are set out at page
of our brief. They are United States v. Wyder, the
two Donovan cases. I think it is a long-established
principle that principal/agent relationships, which we
don't think necessarily apply to this case, but even did
you -- even were you to disagree, as the premise of your
question suggested, that government delegations survive
the loss of that principal.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is your point that
official acts done stay in effect even though the
official is gone, until the official's successor in
office is appointed and that successor can remand the
instruction?
MR. KATYAL: That's -- that's precisely
correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that is like the de
facto officer doctrine. It could be that, if the
Petitioner prevails here, the de facto officer doctrine
would leave in place everything that has been done.
MR. KATYAL: Justice Kennedy, those --
that's a different --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it seems to me that's
quite a different -- different point.
MR. KATYAL: Absolutely. That's a different
point. What I'm saying and what these cases say is
that, for example, when an attorney general designates
their power to -- the wiretap authority to a
subordinate, an assistant attorney general, and then
that attorney general leaves office, that wiretap
authority nonetheless continues in the subordinate until
it is revoked by a successor.
JUSTICE ALITO: But hasn't the situation
that has prevailed now for some time changed the -- the
decision-making process of the board in at least two
important ways? First, there isn't any opportunity for
full board review of cases. But more important, if you
have only two members on the board and only two members
on the panel, the process is very different from a panel
in which there were three members, or in which two
members can be supplemented with an additional member if
they can't agree.
What are the two to do? They have to --
they have to split the difference all the time. And
there have been decisions in which the members have --
basically have suggested that that's exactly what has
happened.
MR. KATYAL: Justice Alito, I am not here
suggesting that the two-member board is ideal or
equivalent or optimal to a -- an optimal thing.
Congress set out five. But faced with a vacancy crisis
and shutting down the board entirely, I think the board
did the prudent thing here by continuing to operate,
continuing for these 800 or so days to decide these
cases.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, not only is the
two-member board not -- not ideal. Do you think it is
reasonably possible that Congress back in 1947
contemplated this particular problem and would have
solved it the way you suggest?
MR. KATYAL: I do think that Congress had
before it a well -- it was well-known that over 460
times the board had decided cases with only two members,
with the third being vacant. And I think that's what --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But that's always when
there is -- there is in existence three people who could
have served. But the particular problem we've got now,
going on for 2 or 3 years: All the decisions by two
members. Do you think Congress would have authorized
this?
MR. KATYAL: As opposed to shutting down the
entire board, yes, Justice Stevens. I think that's the
purpose of the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It depends. I mean, if
shutting down is the only way to put pressure on
Congress to -- I mean, you may have a Congress that is
just delighted to have only two Democratic members left
on the board and all the cases decided by two Democratic
members. What possible incentive does that Congress
have to increase the board to -- to the level that it
should be? None.
If you want to solve the crisis that you are
so worried about, the only way to solve it is to say:
Boy, you know, there is -- it's Armageddon coming; we
are going to not be able to act at all. That would
solve the crisis.
MR. KATYAL: Well, I think the politics in
Armageddon could cut different ways, depending -- I
mean, these are nomination battles that are focused on
individual personalities. And, Justice Scalia, the only
empirical evidence we have -- this is not the first time
the board has done this, contrary to my friend's
suggestion earlier.
In 2005, the board was faced with the exact
same situation. The board was going to go down to two
members. They decided to do the exact same delegation
and give -- give all the powers to a group of three, and
four days later, Congress fixed the problem with the
president.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm much more impressed
by -- by your opponent's assertion, which I don't think
you have contradicted, that for many years whenever
there was a death in one of the three-member panels,
that panel was reconstituted. A new person was
appointed, instead of just letting it continue to
operate with only two. Doesn't that mean something?
Doesn't that suggest that these panels were viewed by
the board as requiring three people?
MR. KATYAL: No, it suggests that they
thought three was optimal, where it was -- where they
could get three bodies. But here, when they only have
two -- and again, faced with shutting down and not
deciding the lion's share of cases, which aren't the
controversial ones that give rise to the disagreement,
Justice Alito, that you were positing -- they've decided
to go and do it -- and do their business and try and
resolve these.
And they have done, I think -- the corpus
reveals a really remarkable job at reaching agreement in
a large number of cases on the basis of existing
precedent. Are these decisions --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How -- how has it -- how
has it worked? And I understand that they are not
dealing with controversial decisions. How many
decisions are there now?
MR. KATYAL: I believe that there is 586 or
so decisions that they have rendered, and of those they
have set aside about approximately 70. It was 65 as of
a few days ago and it's gone up, because they involve
questions about overturning precedent or novel issues,
and so they haven't reached agreement in those.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What actually
happens on -- on the ground? Somebody complains about
an unfair labor practice to the board, and let's say the
petitioner prevails and the board can't function. What
happens next? Is there -- I don't know if there would
be a review or not, but can you go to the court of
appeals?
MR. KATYAL: If -- if -- if the board is
disabled?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, assume there is
no board. As you say, the -- the problem that would
happen if you don't prevail?
MR. KATYAL: Well, if there is -- if there
is no board, then I take it the cases would get stuck
after the ALJ. There is nothing to take exception to,
and so I'm not sure they could go directly to the court
of appeals, because the statute, 160(f), I think,
doesn't permit review from an ALJ decision directly up.
It permits review only of the board's decisions. And if
there is no board decision, then presumably these cases
get stuck until we have a three-member quorum.
JUSTICE BREYER: And is it -- is it correct
numerically that, in fact, under identical language
except the word "and" changes to "except for," the --
from 1935 to 1947, there were two-member panels and they
decided about 400 cases, and then they took the same
language, and now since 1947, roughly, what are the
figures? How many cases? Has it only been this
instance where it has been two members or have there
been other instances?
MR. KATYAL: Well, the -- the board only
went down to two members as a whole starting in 1993.
It has happened four times: In 1993 for 2 months; in
01, I believe for 1 month; in 2005 for only a few
days.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that when the 400 cases
that you are talking about were?
MR. KATYAL: The 460 cases were between 1935
and 1947.
JUSTICE BREYER: And 1947. And how many
cases were decided by two members about, I'm not asking
for -- during the times you are talking about before the
present two-member boards?
MR. KATYAL: In -- in -- in 1993 and in
01, the board didn't do this, because those were short
periods of time. In 2005, they did do precisely what
they did here, but Congress resolved the situation, so
there are only about 6 cases decided in that 4-day
period. And now from 2007 to now, approximately
6 cases or so have been decided.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But they never did it when
they had a full board?
MR. KATYAL: They never delegated --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whenever there was a death
of one of the members of a three-judge panel or a
three-member panel, they filled it and the panel did not
operate with two?
MR. KATYAL: Absolutely. We are not
standing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even though it could have,
even though the quorum provision was just as it is here.
MR. KATYAL: It could have, but it's not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Those panels did not
operate with two?
MR. KATYAL: Absolutely. It's not optimal,
Justice Scalia, to have two. But if -- if the choice is
shutting down or going with two, the board made the
choice in this circumstance to go with more.
And, Justice Breyer, you had mentioned
before the change in the word "except that," and I do
think that that is crucial language, because that is a
subordinating conjunction. And what it does is
essentially modify that. The two-member quorum language
modifies what happens before, the "at all times" --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, you need the "except
that" once you have language. You need it because now
you have a bigger board and it says there is a
three-member quorum.
MR. KATYAL: Precisely.
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought they -- they
simply are taking the earlier phrase, the earlier
statutory phrase, and they are changing those words
because grammatically you now need it?
MR. KATYAL: Precisely correct. You need it
grammatically because otherwise if you didn't have
something like that, it would suggest that the panel
quorum would be three as well. But -- but the language
is quite specific on this and, contrary to what the D.C.
Circuit found, "at all times" is modified by that
subordinating conjunction in the phrase that follows.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What -- what authority
does an ALJ purport and in fact exercise? He's not
acting or she's not acting for the board?
MR. KATYAL: The -- the ALJ is appointed by
the board and they essentially write tentative decisions
that the board, as I understand it, can approve or
disapprove. Exceptions can be taken by litigants up to
the board.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Under the Petitioner's
theory, if there is no quorum would those appointments
then be invalidated, too?
MR. KATYAL: Well, I -- and this goes to
Justice Scalia's first question of the argument, I -- I
think that it's possible. I think that there is -- the
D.C. Circuit's reasoning is -- potentially could be read
so broadly as to say that the entire board goes poof and
everything under it, including the salaries.
I think if the Court were inclined to -- to
write a decision like that, we would try to look to, as
you mentioned before, the de facto officer doctrine and
the specific language of the delegations to the ALJ's
and the specific language to the general counsels, to
try to see if there is a way to preserve all of the
board's action in this circumstance.
Of course, that isn't before the Court at
this point, but I understand that the dramatic
consequences, potentially dramatic consequences of the
D.C. Circuit's ruling, may inform the judgment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do -- do we have any notion
when -- when the board will reduce to one?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: When -- when -- when is one
of the two's term over?
MR. KATYAL: In the absence of any further
confirmations or other appointments, one of the members,
Member Schaumber, will leave on August 27th of this
year.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of this year. At which
point there will be some pressure on Congress, I guess,
right?
MR. KATYAL: There will.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There are -- there are
two nominees, are there not?
MR. KATYAL: There are three nominees
pending right now.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Three?
MR. KATYAL: Yes. And they have been
pending. They were named in July of last year. They
were voted out of committee in October. One of them had
a hold and had to be renominated. That renomination
took place. There was a failed quorum -- a failed
cloture vote in February. And so all three nominations
are pending. And I think that underscores the general
contentious nature of the appointment process with
respect to this set of issues.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And the recess
appointment power doesn't work why?
MR. KATYAL: The -- the recess appointment
power can work in -- in a recess. I think our office
has opined the recess has to be longer than 3 days.
And -- and so, it is potentially available to avert the
future crisis that -- that could -- that could take
place with respect to the board.
If there are no other questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Richie, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF SHELDON E. RICHIE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. RICHIE: First, let me address the --
the issue of what happens if we prevail, how will the
problem be fixed. There are two types of cases. There
are representation cases, and then there are cases
dealing with unfair labor practices.
The unfair labor practices,
Mr. Chief Justice, have a limitations period to them.
The -- the issues -- the issues with respect to
representation have no limitations. So in response to
Justice Ginsburg's comment -- I believe it was
Justice Ginsburg -- there's a -- when a successor comes
on board, these issues, if these -- if we prevail and
our decision is vacated, those are -- can be reheard by
the board when a successor is in place.
The D.C. Circuit --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. Just the --
just the representation cases, not the unfair labor
practice cases?
MR. RICHIE: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wouldn't the --
MR. RICHIE: Well, except to the extent,
Justice Scalia, that the statute of limitations has not
run on those unfair labor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, I understand.
MR. RICHIE: -- cases.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Wouldn't -- wouldn't
the statute of limitations at least be told during the
period when they can't do anything? I suppose that's a
different case.
MR. RICHIE: That's an argument. That's a
different case. I don't know the answer. And I'm sure
the litigants would argue that.
With respect to the issue of the -- whether
it's three members that are required on both the board
and the group, the D.C. Circuit didn't deal with that,
but they did deal with the exception issue. And they
said -- I'm reading from the appendix page 89 of our
petition: The board forum requirement therefore must be
satisfied regardless of whether the board's authority is
delegated to a group of its members.
A modifying phrase such as -- as this,
talking about the "at all times three members" denotes
that there is no instance in which the board forum
requirement may be disregarded.
And then the court said: "It therefore
defies logic as well as the text of the statute to argue
as the board does that a Congress which explicitly
imposed a requirement for a three-member quorum at all
times would in the same sentence allow the board to
reduce its operative quorum to two without further
congressional authorization."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Except that it said
"except."
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE GINSBURG: At all times "except."
MR. RICHIE: And, Justice Ginsburg, that was
what the D.C. Circuit was referring to was the "except
that" language, and saying in that same sentence, where
there is a requirement at all times of a three-member
quorum of the board, that it is -- it defies logic that
Congress would in that same sentence state except when
there is three that falls to two.
And I think the other thing I would like to
conclude is that the -- my time's up. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
