IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ERIC H. HOLDER, JR., :
ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 08-1498
v. :
HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 09-89
ERIC H. HOLDER, JR., :
ATTORNEY GENERAL, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, February 23, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:09 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DAVID D. COLE, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for Humanitarian
Law Project, et al.
GEN. ELENA KAGAN, ESQ., Solicitor General, Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; for Eric H. Holder, Jr.,
Attorney General, et al.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DAVID D. COLE, ESQ.
For Humanitarian Law Project, et al. 4
GEN. ELENA KAGAN, ESQ.
For Eric H. Holder, Jr.,
Attorney General, et al. 31
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID D. COLE, ESQ.
For Humanitarian Law Project, et al. 59
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:09 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-1498,
Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project and the
cross-petition.
Mr. Cole.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID D. COLE
ON BEHALF OF HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT, ET AL.
MR. COLE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This as-applied challenge asks whether the
government can make it a crime for Ralph Fertig and the
Humanitarian Law Project to speak in association with
the Kurdistan Workers Party. Specifically, they seek to
advocate for legal reform in Congress and the UN, to
write and distribute articles supportive of Kurdish
rights, to inform the Kurds of their international human
rights and remedies, and to advise them on peaceful
conflict resolution. It is undisputed that the
Kurdistan Workers Party engages in a wide range of
lawful activities and that plaintiffs seek to support
only lawful ends.
The government has a concededly compelling
interest in combatting terrorism, yet it has not even
tried to defend these prohibitions under strict
scrutiny. Instead, it rests its entire case on the
proposition that criminalizing plaintiffs' speech is a
regulation of conduct, not speech, and therefore can be
upheld under O'Brien.
That view is mistaken for two fundamental
reasons. First, as this Court has already held, O'Brien
is inapplicable where the government prohibits pure
speech --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But, Mr. Cole, don't you
agree that some of the speech could be regulated?
MR. COLE: Some of my clients’ speech?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Some of the speech of your
client.
MR. COLE: I don't think -- I don't think
any of it could be prohibited, Your Honor, unless the
government can satisfy the stringent scrutiny that this
Court applies when Congress seeks to prohibit pure
speech. So, no, I don't -- I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You think all of the speech at
issue is protected?
MR. COLE: I think that certainly all of the
speech that I've just identified, which is the core --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You identified quite a
bit.
MR. COLE: Right. Yes. It’s core -- and
I think the reason, Your Honor, is it is core political
speech on issues of public concern. It is advocating
only lawful, peaceable activities. This Court has never
upheld the criminal prohibition of lawful speech on
issues of public concern.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, could the
government, I assume -- I assume you will say "yes" --
could the government forbid any NGO or other
organization or person from giving tsunami aid to one of
these organizations, from giving them money?
MR. COLE: I think money is different, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could they -- could the
government prohibit that?
MR. COLE: I think money is different
because it's -- it's conduct, not speech.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Okay. Let's assume the
government could prohibit that. Then the next question
is: Could the government prohibit speech instructing
the terrorist organization how to get the tsunami aid?
MR. COLE: Right. And I think -- - I think,
Your Honor, that the answer is no, for the -- unless the
government can meet the higher standard of scrutiny that
applies when you’re regulating speech.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Brandenburg?
MR. COLE: Well, I don't know whether it
would necessarily be Brandenburg. I think for -- in
order to apply -- to decide this case, Your Honor,
all the Court has to find is that when the speech
advocates solely lawful, peaceable activities of the
sort advocated here, that's not sufficient. I think
specific -- we've suggested a specific intent standard,
which is lower than Brandenburg, would be appropriate --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but if you get
tsunami money, that frees up your other assets for
terrorist money. So why can't the government forbid
teaching how to get that money?
MR. COLE: Well, again, Your Honor, that --
if the government -- if the connection between the
speech and the government's concern were sufficiently
close, then maybe it could. But the problem --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why can't there
be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then what's the test?
Is it -- you say it's not Brandenburg?
MR. COLE: I think the test is whether the
-- whether the speech -- when it's speech, I think the
test is whether the speech has been provided with
specific intent or knowledge that it will further
unlawful, terrorist ends of the group.
CHIEF JUSTICE: What if it goes --
JUSTICE ALITO: And that applies --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if it goes to
the mere existence of a group? Let's say you have the
Nazi Party, and you are talking about advice or speech on
some purely mundane issue. The Nazis have a hospital,
and you are giving them advice on how to run a
hospital, but the government decides that anything that
legitimizes the Nazi Party, you know, promotes that
group's terrorist activities. Can the government make
that kind of determination?
I'm thinking of something like Regan v.
Wald --
MR. COLE: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- where they say,
look, you can't travel to Cuba because we don't want to
do anything that legitimizes the regime.
MR. COLE: Right. Well, two answers.
Does your question refer to the Nazi Party
today or the Nazi Party during World War II?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I meant during
World War II.
MR. COLE: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I’m just trying to find
an example that doesn't implicate the particulars of
the issue today.
MR. COLE: Right, right. So I think -- the
reason I ask, Your Honor, is that it may make a
difference if we are at war. The law of treason
prohibits aid --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I didn't -- my
hypothetical was confusing. I didn't mean to suggest we
were at war.
MR. COLE: Okay.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I meant to hypothesize
a group that the government could reasonably determine
should not be supported in any way --
MR. COLE: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- because it
legitimizes it. It's going to make their hospital run
better. People are going to like their hospital. So
the party, the group, will be legitimized.
MR. COLE: Right. Well, I think all the
Court held in Regan and Zemel was that it is permissible
for the government to regulate conduct -- not speech --
travel, and economic transactions, not speech. Those
were essentially O'Brien cases.
And, in fact, in Regan the Court
distinguished a prohibition on travel to Cuba across the
--
board from a prohibition directed at a group, the
Communist Party, in the Kent and Aptheker cases, where
the Court held that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if you can't travel
there -- suppose you want to travel there so that you can
meet with and discuss lawful activities with people
there. If you can't get there, you can't speak.
MR. COLE: That's right, Your Honor. But
that -- but that's essentially an O'Brien situation.
The prohibition is on a conduct, whether it's
draft card burning or travel. The individual who seeks
to engage in that conduct says, I want to do it for
speech purposes. But the Court says the government has
a freer hand in regulating conduct than speech, and,
therefore, as long as you’re regulating the
non-expressive element of the conduct, we'll apply
O'Brien. But what this Court has said is that when --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could the government
stop you from meeting anywhere with the terrorists?
MR. COLE: From meeting? No, I don't think
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Just meeting, traveling
to one of these countries to actually do your teaching
to a terrorist -- let's say the law said you're
prohibited from traveling to meet any of these
individuals. How would that be different than the Cuba
situation?
MR. COLE: Well, then, if it's -- if it's
traveling for the purpose of association, then it would
be targeted at association, not at the conduct of
travel. The whole --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But it's no different
than the Cuba situation.
MR. COLE: No, but the whole point of the
Cuba -- the Cuba travel cases is that -- again, as this
Court said, it was an across-the-board ban. It did not
apply to different political groups. It applied to
anyone who sought to travel to Cuba. And it was about
travel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, suppose it's a ban
just for travel to meet with terrorist organizations,
Justice Sotomayor's hypothetical.
MR. COLE: Right. Well, then I think -- I
think that's -- that’s different from this case, right,
because this case -- suppose it's a ban on speech
wherever it occurs.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But what about the -- what
about the hypothetical?
MR. COLE: Right. Well, with respect to the
hypothetical, I think the question, Your Honor, would be
whether the government's interest in banning that travel
is unrelated to the associational or speech purposes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's what the Chief
Justice says: In any context, support ultimately will
inure to the benefit of a terrorist organization, and we
have a governmental interest in not allowing that.
MR. COLE: There's no -- there’s no dispute,
Your Honor, that the government has a compelling interest
in cutting off aid to terrorism. The question is whether
it can do so by criminalizing pure speech.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it hasn't criminalized
speech. It has criminalized providing aid and
assistance to these organizations. Most of that aid and
assistance that is prohibited is not in the form of
speech, but it happens to include speech as well.
MR. COLE: Right, but, Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think that’s quite
different from a law that is directed explicitly at
speech.
MR. COLE: Well, I don’t -- I think it's not
in this -- in this sense, Justice Scalia. Imagine a
statute that banned aid to overthrow the United States
Government. And it had three provisions: One, you can't
assassinate the president; two, you can't provide bombs and
weapons to groups attempting to overthrow the government;
three, you can't advocate overthrow of the government.
If that were applied to someone for speaking in advocacy,
we wouldn't say it's a regulation of speech.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not the right --
that's not the right number three. The right number
three is you cannot advise and assist an organization
that is seeking to overthrow the government. That's
what is at issue here, not --
MR. COLE: Well, but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- not independently promoting
the objectives of these terrorist organizations. Your --
your clients are free to do that.
MR. COLE: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But when they assist
the organization by providing advice, that's a different
matter.
MR. COLE: Well, the government says if
they -- even if they speak in conjunction with the group,
they -- and they’re providing a benefit to the government,
that's prohibited. So, for example --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. When they provide a
benefit, right?
MR. COLE: So, for example, under that view,
the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the L.A. Times,
all of which published op-eds by Hamas spokespersons --
Hamas is on the list -- thereby providing a benefit to
Hamas, working with the Hamas spokesperson, they’re all
criminals. President Carter --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, we -- we can cross
that bridge when we come to it.
MR. COLE: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is an as-applied
challenge, and we are talking about the kind of advice
and assistance that your clients want to give.
MR. COLE: Right, and, Your Honor, there's
no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not a New York Times
editorial.
MR. COLE: Well, it is, though. It is, Your
Honor. I mean, it’s -- Ralph Fertig is not the New York
Times, and he's not President Carter, but it's the same
sort of support, right? President Carter --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no. No, no. I thought
that he was -- he wants to meet with the people. The
New York Times didn't meet with Hamas to tell them how
great their editorial was.
MR. COLE: No, but it's not about -- it's
not about whether you meet with them. It's about
whether you coordinate with them, and they've certainly
coordinated with the Hamas spokesperson in editing and
accepting and then publishing his editorial. That is --
that would be providing a service. It would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It depends on what
"coordinating" means, doesn't it? And we can determine
that in the next case.
MR. COLE: Well, let me -- let me also
answer it this way, Justice Scalia: If you look at the
specific speech which our clients seek to engage in, it
includes writing and distributing literature in
conjunction with the Kurdistan Workers Party in the
United States advocating their support. How is that
different from the New York Times?
JUSTICE BREYER: Supposing that -- what you
say is you want to engage in political advocacy on
behalf of the Kurds. That's your words. All right.
Suppose -- and these are two hypotheticals. Hypothetical
one, your clients, let's say, or some other people,
know that what the Kurds' hypothetical plan is, is to
pretend they're a political advocacy organization,
but to go around shooting the people who don't agree
with them. Okay? Case one, the hypothetical defendant
knows it. In case two, he doesn't know it, but it's true.
MR. COLE: Well, I think -- I think if
you -- if you specifically intend and know that your aid
will further the group in its terrorist activities, then
it's not protected speech. But if you're -- if you
don't know that and you don't intend that, and in this
case --
JUSTICE ALITO: And that goes for all forms of
training? No form of training or expert assistance can
be prohibited unless the individual specifically intends
to further -- that the training will be used to carry
out terrorist activities?
MR. COLE: Well, Justice Alito, this is an
as-applied challenge. So the question simply is whether
training in what international human rights consist of,
in how to advocate for international human rights, and
how to advocate politically in Congress and other bodies.
That's the speech that's at issue here.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, just out of curiosity,
I thought your position was that no form of training or
assistance could be prohibited -- -
MR. COLE: No, I was just --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- consistent with the First
Amendment. That's not your position?
MR. COLE: No. I think -- I think, again,
it depends upon the form of speech. There may be some forms
of training that are so closely connected to the -- to
the end that Congress seeks to -- legitimately seeks to
proscribe, like training in bombmaking or training in
military exercises.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The end that Congress seeks
to proscribe is the existence of these terrorist
organizations. And the theory of the legislation is
that when you aid any of their enterprises you’re
aiding the organization. Hamas, for example, gained
support among -- among the Palestinians by activities
that are perfectly lawful, perhaps running hospitals,
all sorts of things.
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that is what fosters the
terrorist organization and enables the terrorist
activities. Why isn't that a reasonable connection?
Any assistance you provide to these organizations cannot
be separated from assistance to their terrorist
activities.
MR. COLE: Right. Well, Your Honor,
that is precisely the argument that the United States
made to this Court in Scales. And here I’m quoting
from the government's brief: "Active membership can be
proscribed even though the activity be expended along
lines not otherwise illegal, since active support of any
kind aids the organization in achieving its own illegal
purposes."
That was with respect to an organization
that Congress spent 10 years studying, made findings
that it was an international conspiracy directed and
controlled by the Soviet Union with the aim of
overthrowing the United States by force and violence,
using terrorism. And, nonetheless, this Court in Scales
held you've got to distinguish between that aid and
support and membership which is furthering the lawful
activities and that which is furthering the illegal
activities; otherwise you are penalizing the exercise of
lawful speech. The Court said the same thing in De
Jonge.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Cole, as I remember,
Scales upheld a conviction, wasn’t --
MR. COLE: It did, Justice Ginsburg, but
only because it interpreted the statute to be -- to be
limited to specific -- to members -- active membership
that is specifically intended to further the illegal
ends of the group, precisely --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it didn’t -- it was not
a statute which involves banning financial or other tangible
support, and page 17 of your brief made -- this is a
difficult case for me. And the second paragraph, page
, you say: "The narrow focus of plaintiffs' claims in
this Court means that the case does not involve the
propriety of banning financial or other tangible
support."
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then you say: "Nor does it
involve speech advocating or teaching criminal or violent
activity."
But it does involve speech, let's say arguendo,
that is tantamount to material support.
MR. COLE: Well, I -- right, but --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the speech is
tantamount to material support in that it legitimizes,
encourages, or strengthens the organization.
MR. COLE: Well, two things in response to
that, Justice Kennedy. First, that is what the United
States argued in Scales. And, again, the Court, not only
in Scales but in a host of cases striking down
Communist Party statute, said you have to distinguish
between aid that’s intended to further lawful activity
and aid that’s intended to further illegal activity
when it's in the form of protected activity --
association, here speech and association.
And, secondly --
JUSTICE STEVENS: In those cases, the real
question was whether membership was enough, wasn’t it?
MR. COLE: Active membership --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. COLE: -- which the government says
constitutes more than mere nominal membership.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And this is support. It's
different.
MR. COLE: Well, Your Honor, in De Jonge,
one of these cases, one of this Court's first First
Amendment cases, the government argued that Mr. De Jonge
aided the Communist Party in its illegal ends by
conducting a meeting for them and being their lead
speaker at the meeting. And this Court said: We've got
to look at what he did, and what -- yes, he conducted the
meeting; yes, he was a member of the Communist Party;
yes, he solicited people to join the Communist Party.
But what did he do? He advocated lawful peaceable
activities. And this Court said --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But there wasn't a statute
on the books that prohibited material support --
MR. COLE: Well, I don't think it would --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And here there is, and this
is in aid of that prohibition.
MR. COLE: Right, but Your Honor, what would
-- if Congress came along after the Communist Party cases
and said, okay, you've said we can't make it a crime to
criminalize membership in the Communist Party; we are
now going to make it a crime to speak in conjunction
with the Communist Party -- do you think the
decisions would have come out any differently?
I don't think so, because this Court has said that
speech is different from money, that it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think it's very
unrealistic to compare these terrorist organizations
with the Communist Party. Those cases involved
philosophy. The Communist Party was -- was -- was more
than a -- than an organization that -- that had some
unlawful ends. It was also a philosophy of -- of -- of
extreme socialism. And -- and many people subscribed to
that philosophy.
I don't think that Hamas or any of these
terrorist organizations represent such a philosophical
organization.
MR. COLE: Your Honor, this -- this Court
accepted Congress's findings. Congress's findings were
not that this was a philosophical debating society, but
that it was an international criminal conspiracy
directed by our enemy to overthrow us through terrorism.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That may be, but people
joined it for philosophical reasons.
MR. COLE: Oh, sure --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They joined it for
philosophical reasons. These terrorist organizations
have very practical objectives. And the only reason for
joining them or assisting them is to assist those
practical objectives.
MR. COLE: Well, I don't think that's -- I
don't think that's fair, Justice Scalia. The
Humanitarian Law Project has no interest in furthering
terrorism, but the Kurdistan Workers Party are the
principal representatives of the -- of the Kurds in
Turkey. They do have an interest in protecting the
rights of the Kurds. They do have an interest in
encouraging the Kurdistan Workers Party to -- to disavow
violence and engage in lawful peaceful means of
resolving their disputes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Cole --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Cole, would you
distinguish -- I think this came up in the court of
appeals. There are a lot of groups on the list. I
think the Al-Qaeda was one instance that was mentioned,
and, at least according to the briefs, you conceded that
if you wanted to do just what you describe with respect
to the Kurdish group or the Tamil group, the ban would
be permissible, if the group -- if the group were Al-Qaeda,
and I’ll throw in the Taliban.
MR. COLE: Yes. We didn't actually concede
that, Your Honor. That's a misstatement on the part of
the government. If you look at the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, then -- then as --
suppose the group is not the two that we have here --
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- but Al-Qaeda and
the Taliban?
MR. COLE: Right. What we said, for the
record, is that it would pose a very different
constitutional question. And I think there are two
reasons why it might pose a different constitutional
question. One is -- and that was -- I’m picking up on my
question back to Mr. Chief Justice, is it during wartime
or not? And during wartime, Congress has broader powers
pursuant to the treason --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But I want to be sure I
understand that point. You think the issue in this case
would be different if we were at war?
MR. COLE: I think it might be different if
we were at war with these groups.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And if that's true, why
aren't we now at war, with regard to our opposition to
these organizations?
MR. COLE: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What is the difference,
as a practical matter?
MR. COLE: Well -- well, two things, Your
Honor. With respect to -- it might be different if
you -- if you’re talking about treason. Tokyo Rose,
for example, was engaged in speech, but she was doing so
with -- with the purpose of aiding the enemy and the
specific intent of betraying the United States. And
that's what's required. And what the Supreme Court has
said is that the -- the aid has to be to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But my question that I
want to be sure you are focusing on --
MR. COLE: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS -- but in the issues in this
very case --
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- would they be different
if we were now at war?
MR. COLE: I think it would depend, Your
Honor, because the -- what -- what treason requires is
aid to the enemy, and aid might be in the form of speech.
But it also requires a specific intent to betray the
United States. And when you aid someone with whom we
are at war, there is an -- there may well be an intent
to betray the United States. There is no betrayal of
the United States here.
And, number two --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, in a way there is.
What about -- what about aiding organizations that are
acting criminally, killing innocent civilians, with regard
to one of our allies? And we’re seeking to gain the
assistance of these allies against those terrorists who
aim their terrorism at us, and yet --
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- we -- we are supposed to
allow our citizens to assist the terrorist organizations
that are directing their violence against them?
MR. COLE: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why isn't that a
sufficiently serious reason for the government to do
what it's done here?
MR. COLE: I think the question, Your Honor,
is there -- is there any realistic nexus between writing
an op-ed, advocating before Congress, urging a group to
use lawful nonviolent means to resolve its disputes, and
killing Americans? And there just isn't.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you've
picked -- you've picked hypotheticals that are very easy
for you. What about personnel? Is there a connection
between providing personnel that participate in legal
activity on behalf of a terrorist organization, and the
organization can then say, well, because you are
providing this personnel, we can take them out and shift
them to bombmaking?
MR. COLE: Right. And -- and -- and I guess
my answer to that would be it would depend upon whether
the -- the -- what is being prohibited is speech. If
what is being prohibited is speech, I'm not sure that it
would be permissible for the government to say we’re
going to criminalize your speech, even though it’s
advocating lawful activities, because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, one of the
things that’s being prohibited here that you challenge
is providing personnel.
MR. COLE: That's right. And -- and that's
exactly what De Jonge was essentially charged with. And
the Communist Party was, again, found to be engaged in
criminal activity, to be a criminal syndicate,
essentially, by the Oregon statute. The Court didn't
question that. At that time it was illegal to even
advocate illegal activity.
He was charged with providing his person,
personnel, by conducting a meeting under the auspices of
the Communist Party and providing the lead speech there.
And the Court said, even though the argument was --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, is your
argument limited to personnel that engages in speech, or
does it cover personnel that -- a nurse at one of the --
if there are any, Hamas hospitals?
MR. COLE: Right. Our argument, Your Honor,
is -- again, this is an as-applied challenge with respect to
the particular speech that our clients seek to engage in,
so it would not -- it would not require the Court to
decide whether any nonspeech assistance could be
proscribed. In fact --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: When -- but the way you
define the speech that you want protected is speech that
is advocating some lawful activity.
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what’s unlawful
about teaching people medicine and how to cure people
from infection?
MR. COLE: If -- if that were what they were
doing, Your Honor, if it was teaching, then it would be
protected by the First Amendment. But if -- I took
Chief Justice Roberts's question --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So you see no
difference -- you’re not advocating a difference in
this case between training that could reasonably be used
in terrorist activities, because teaching people how to
care for the ill could be used to teach people how to
care for the wounded.
MR. COLE: Right. Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right? And the
political speech that your group is advocating, i.e.,
the petitioning -- you’re not willing to draw a
distinction?
MR. COLE: No, no. I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You are saying to us the
case stands and falls on whether or not we accept that
this statute regulates conduct as opposed to speech?
MR. COLE: No. Justice Sotomayor, what I'm
suggesting is, number one, the statute regulates speech.
It regulates speech because of what it conveys.
Therefore, the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, it regulates
training. And what -- the question I asked you --
MR. COLE: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- was whether there was
a way in your challenge, or whether you are advocating
any difference in the nature of the speech, that it's --
this is an as-applied challenge.
MR. COLE: Yes. Exactly. And that's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so the question --
because the only answer you have given us is if it's
lawful speech, it's protected.
MR. COLE: No, I -- I think -- I think, Your
Honor, that the answer -- maybe I wasn't clear in
responding to Justice Alito. But with respect to speech
advocating solely lawful activity of the type at issue
here, I think the connection between the government’s --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So give me an analytical
framework to address that question.
MR. COLE: All right. Well, I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The government says
under O'Brien even the speech that you want -- forget
about the tsunami aid speech. Let's just talk about the
political petitioning speech, the petitioning for --
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is there a difference
and under what analytical framework would we reach it?
MR. COLE: Well, I think the question -- the
question at the -- at the -- at the bottom would be
whether there is a sufficient connection between the
speech which is being expressed and the government's
compelling interest. And if -- certainly there would be
if it's -- meets Brandenburg. I think there might be if
it is specifically intended or known that it will further
terrorist activity. But where -- with respect to our
speech, there's really no realistic likelihood that the
speech that's being expressed here will further --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: We have to be conscious of
the white light. I have just one -- one question.
The old equity rule was that you don't
enjoin a criminal statute; you wait until something
happens. And the reason is then we have specific facts.
And if we said that here, you would say, oh, you’re
chilling speech.
What's your best case in the precedents of
this Court for our entertaining an challenge that --
this is not really -- we usually talk about as-applied
after the fact. Coates, there was a conviction.
MR. COLE: Right. Federal Election --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What's your -- what's your
best case?
MR. COLE: Federal Election Commission v.
Wisconsin Right to Life was a pre-enforcement,
as-applied challenge to the provisions of the BCRA.
If I could reserve the rest of my time.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you want to give an
answer to the Taliban and the Al-Qaeda?
MR. COLE: Oh, I'm sorry -- I'm sorry,
Justice Ginsburg. I thought I was, and maybe --
but the answer would be we are in a military conflict
with the Al-Qaeda and the Taliban. This Court has
recognized that. It’s authorized by the authorization
to use military force. Therefore, treason law might be
applicable, number one.
Number two, it’s not clear that the Al-Qaeda
engages in any lawful activities at all, and the -- the
principle this Court established with respect to the
Communist Party, a group that clearly engaged in illegal
activities of a very, very dangerous kind, but also
engaged in lawful activities, is that that’s -- that that
the group has to be a dual-purpose group. And here
there’s absolutely no dispute that the Kurdistan
Workers Party and the LTTE engage in a wide variety of
lawful activities and that all our clients seek to do
is support those lawful activities. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Cole.
General Kagan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GEN. ELENA KAGAN
ON BEHALF OF ERIC H. HOLDER, JR., ET AL.
GENERAL KAGAN: With your permission,
Mr. Chief Justice. This may take some time.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: I'm sure it will on the
other side, too.
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the
Court:
The material support statute is a vital
weapon in this nation's continuing struggle against
international terrorism. The statute prohibits, in
terms that ordinary people can understand, the provision
of material resources, material resources of all kinds,
to foreign groups that engage in terrorist acts that
threaten the security of the United States or its
citizens.
The statute does not prohibit in any way
Petitioners' independent advocacy. Petitioners can say
or write whatever they wish about the PKK or the LTTE,
and all their activities both legal and illegal. What
Petitioners --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If a terrorist was
arrested in the United States from one of these groups,
would they be barred under the statute from serving as
their attorney in a U.S. court?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Sotomayor, if -- if
there are --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Isn't that material
support under the definition that you have been
advocating?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Sotomayor, I believe
that that would be excluded from the statute -- should be
excluded from the statute, and indeed even Petitioners
have never suggested --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, but I'm asking you why.
GENERAL KAGAN: Because I think that there
the canon of constitutional avoidance would clearly come
into play. If there is a criminal defendant, even a
civil defendant where there may be Sixth Amendment
issues, where there may be due process issues, it
would --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so can I -- can I
ask you something? I mean, part of the First Amendment
is the right for the -- to petition the government for
redress of grievances. Putting aside all of the other
aid they are claiming, the tsunami aid, the training and
other things, can the statute constitutionally be read
to bar them from petitioning legitimate agencies,
legitimate government agencies, to peacefully, using the
words of the Constitution, to effect legal change?
GENERAL KAGAN: It can --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And that -- that's part of
what they’re claiming their speech involves --
GENERAL KAGAN: The statute --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- training and doing
that.
GENERAL KAGAN: The statute cannot
legitimately be read to -- to include their independent
advocacy. But the statute, in fact, does not cover their
independent advocacy. Judge Fertig and all the rest of
the Petitioners can lobby Congress, can lobby
international organizations --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that doesn't --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- as they see fit.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- answer -- what is the
right of the people peaceably to assemble? Now, mind
you, I understand this is the right of U.S. citizens in
the United States. But what in the First Amendment or
even in this statute could justify Congress from barring
individuals to petition peacefully United -- world
agencies or even U.S. agencies --
GENERAL KAGAN: Again, the statute --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- for the recognition
of a -- of a legitimate goal?
GENERAL KAGAN: Again, the statute does not
prohibit the Petitioners from petitioning peacefully.
What the statute does is to prohibit Petitioners from
giving support to foreign terrorist organizations in
their ability to petition international organizations.
And that's a very different thing. It's a different
thing for several reasons.
First, remember that these are foreign
organizations, and as several of you have suggested, the
ability of Congress and of the Executive Branch to
regulate the relationships between Americans and foreign
governments or foreign organization has long been
acknowledged by this Court. It was acknowledged in
cases like Regan and Zemel and others, not only with
respect to nations with which we are at war, but with
respect to foreign nations and other entities as well --
foreign nationals.
And in fact, the Petitioners' supposed First
Amendment claims really are not speech claims at all.
They are all association claims. Petitioners can do
whatever independent advocacy they wish. What
Petitioners cannot do is to provide support to a foreign
terrorist organization. And there, indeed, the
government's position is that the Association Clause
does not extend that far to give Americans, American
citizens, the ability to deal in whatever way they wish
with foreign nations --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it isn't--
GENERAL KAGAN: -- or foreign organizations.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- whatever way they
wish. They’re making clear that it's only in
connection with lawful activity of the group, and indeed
it's to train them in using lawful means to achieve
their end.
And I thought you went further than saying
there has to be strictly independent advocacy. You
recognized in your brief that they could meet with
members of these terrorist organizations. They could
meet and communicate with them, but they can't
communicate advice on how to pursue their goals through
lawful means?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Ginsburg, you’re
exactly right that, in addition to engaging in
independent advocacy, Petitioners can meet with members
of the foreign terrorist organizations, can join the
foreign terrorist organizations, that membership is not
prohibited by the statute. What the statute does
prohibit is active support of all kinds, both
material --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can they -- can they
advocate to the association? There are many kinds of
advocacy. You can advocate to the world that they are
right. Can you advocate to the association that you
should change your ways, that you should use Lexis to
find international law precedents, et cetera?
GENERAL KAGAN: Absolutely, Justice Kennedy.
If -- if Judge Fertig or the other Petitioners wanted to
say to these organizations, you should change your ways,
nothing in the statute --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And suppose the
organization's board of directors agrees with that and
wants them to address the general membership on that
point, and they are doing it with the blessing of the
organization.
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Kennedy, I want
first -- I’m going to answer your question, and I’m
going to say that that's still not covered, but I want
also to make a general point, which is that this Court
can exhaust all the hypotheticals that it has in this
case, and it will be irrelevant to the case at hand, and
that would be so for two reasons.
First, because with respect to overbreadth,
all of those uncertain or even unconstitutional
applications will be but a thimbleful, compared to the
ocean full of completely legitimate applications of this
statute. And, second, because those hypotheticals have
nothing to do with this case.
Mr. Cole said several times, I heard, this
is an as-applied challenge, this is an as-applied
challenge. And to the extent that the Court thinks that
there are certain categories of activity that the
statute could not prohibit that would raise serious
constitutional concerns -- which I must say I -- I
disagree with, but there may be some. To the extent
that that's true, the Court can -- can put those off to
another day, another --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, wait. They want to
apply. They want to do --
GENERAL KAGAN: I’m sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: They say in this case that
they want to provide training in the issue of
humanitarian international law, and they want to provide
training and expert advice and assistance in respect to
how you petition the UN.
Now focusing on those two things, and going
back to Justice Sotomayor's question, why -- what is the
government's interest in the following? Under O'Brien
or any other test, you look at it and say, does teaching
have a First Amendment interest -- training? Yes. And
what about teaching about advocacy? That's what they
are doing, teaching about a certain kind of advocacy.
Yes. Therefore there is a First Amendment interest
implicated, seriously.
Now, when that is seriously implicated,
there is also a government interest, on the other side,
in not having terrorism. But there is a less
restrictive alternative which they suggest, that in that
situation, what they're entitled to read this statute as
saying is that, if they believe and a person reasonably
would believe that their teaching, assistance,
training, would not significantly aid this organization
in its unlawful ends, then they are not guilty.
Now, what is the government's interest in
not accepting that interpretation? The First Amendment
is hurt; there is an interest; but there is what they
describe as -- and what I have narrowed -- a less
restrictive way of going about it. And they have to be
reasonable in what they think. Now, what's the
objection to that?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Breyer, I think the
objection is exactly what Justice Kennedy suggested with
his hypothetical, because his hypothetical is actually
perfectly aligned with this case. You can't give
tsunami aid, but the question is: Can you instruct
these organizations about how to get tsunami aid?
And then these organizations get tsunami
aid, and they, in fact, use that aid in such a way that
they also have more money to --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm sorry. I’m not
talking about tsunami aid. I am talking about the
instance where the teaching is itself teaching about how
to do something, and that something is the kind of thing
that the First Amendment protects.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, that something, which
is the teaching the foreign terrorist organization how
to petition international bodies in order to get various
kinds of support, financial or otherwise, that will
strengthen those organizations in everything that they
do. What Congress decided --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine, and if a reasonable
person would know that, that it's going to help them,
then it is unlawful, if it's going to help them and a
reasonable person would think it was going to help them
in their unlawful activities. But we're not --
GENERAL KAGAN: Congress was the reasonable
person here. And Congress reasonably decided that when
you help a terrorist -- foreign terrorist organization's
legal activities, you’re also helping the foreign
terrorist organization's illegal activities.
Hezbollah builds bombs. Hezbollah also
builds homes. What Congress decided was when you help
Hezbollah build homes, you are also helping Hezbollah
build bombs. That's the entire theory behind this
statute, and it's a reasonable theory for exactly the
kinds of reasons that Justice Kennedy was suggesting by
that hypothetical.
JUSTICE ALITO: And doesn't that lead to --
kind of logically lead to the conclusion that mere
membership could be prohibited? Could you explain how
someone could be a member of one of these organizations
without providing a service to the organization? Simply
by lending one's name as a member -- that might be
regarded as a service. If you attended a meeting and
you helped to arrange the chairs in advance or clean up
afterwards, you’d be providing a service to the
organization.
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I actually don't
think -- I mean, Congress clearly did not mean to
include that. And I think that the normal words that
Congress used make that pretty clear. When you think
about personnel, when you think about training, when you
think about expert advice and assistance, even when you
think about service, you -- the notion that I am serving
a terrorist organization simply by the act of membership
I think would not be correct. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do you say Congress
clearly did not intend that? You know, I would have
guessed that you are providing a service or personnel
when you make yourself a member of the organization.
Why do you say Congress clearly did not intend it?
GENERAL KAGAN: That is certainly not the
way the government reads the statute, and that's not the
way the government has ever read the statute. And,
indeed, the government, as we discussed in our brief,
believes that there are certain kinds of joint
activities that would be allowed by the statute.
Now, that's not to say that Congress could
not have gone farther. In this specific context, where
one is regulating dealings with a foreign organization,
it's possible that Congress could have gone further.
But we understand the statute and -- and I think there's
a -- I think, quite reasonably, as providing only
material support, a true service, something that will
help the foreign organization in whatever it does.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, but petitioning the
United Nations -- and that's what you are teaching them
-- does not, on its face, seem to me to be something
that reasonably you would think was going to aid them in
their unlawful objectives, but for the realm of ideas.
Now --
GENERAL KAGAN: This would be --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and then Congress put a
thing in here which says: Don't construe this statute
in a way that will abridge First Amendment rights. So
it's aware of the problem of First Amendment rights.
GENERAL KAGAN: And I think you are exactly
right about that.
JUSTICE BREYER: And is there any evidence that
something like that would, in fact, but for the realm of
ideas, help this organization commit its terrorist acts?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Breyer, I believe
that the legislative record is quite clear that Congress
thought that various kinds of aid given to the legal and
legitimate activities of the terrorist organization, in
fact, further the aims of the -- in fact, further the
illegal and illegitimate goals.
Congress made findings about the fungibility
of these resources. Congress said over and over that
these organizations have no firewalls, no organizational
firewalls --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you -- but you --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- no financial firewalls.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You say that the -- not
only the membership, but they can meet and they can
discuss. And I don't understand the line between
meeting with these terrorist organizations, discussing
things with them, and instructing them on how they can
pursue their goals through lawful means.
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Ginsburg, I agree
with you that there may be some hard cases that are at
the borderline between the two, as there are in most
statutes; that there may be hard cases. This is not one
of them.
And I think it would -- it's very
instructive for the Court -- I'm sure you’ve all done
this -- but to actually go back and look at the
Petitioners’ complaints in this case and look at Judge
Fertig's declarations in this case, because what they
show is the extensiveness of the activities that they --
of the services that they wish to offer to these foreign
terrorist organizations and the value that those
services are going to give those foreign terrorist
organizations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: General, you've
talked about -- there has been a lot of discussion about
the legitimate activities allowing -- facilitating
illegitimate activities by freeing up personnel and all
that, and legitimizing the group.
Is that an argument you've made before this
Court or below? I looked at your briefs, and I thought
it's almost all about: This is O'Brien, this is
conduct, this is not speech. I didn't see the argument
that we've spent a lot of time talking about, which is
the legitimate activities allow the illegitimate
activities to take place.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, I believe we -- we have,
Mr. Chief Justice, although if we didn't emphasize it
enough, I -- I will plead error, because I think that it
is an -- a crucial point to this case. But I think in
the part of our brief --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you have -- I
don't mean to -- do you have particular references to
where in your brief you made the argument?
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes. In the part of our
brief where we discuss the application of the O'Brien
standard, and we say what are the governmental interests
there.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, I know. It seems
to me your case is all about O'Brien. I'm not sure you have
an answer to whether or not strict scrutiny is
satisfied. If we disagree with you and think that some
of this activity is speech, I don't see the argument
that you've presented on strict scrutiny.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that that’s right,
Mr. Chief Justice, that we have not specifically
addressed the strict scrutiny argument. I think this
would pass a strict scrutiny standard, but I actually
think that to the extent that the Court thought a strict
scrutiny standard were appropriate, a remand might be in
order, that no Court has ever actually gone off on that
ground, that --
JUSTICE ALITO: Why is O'Brien the correct
standard? How can you argue that training and providing
advice is not speech?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Alito, I think that
the -- the training and advice clauses are, of course,
part of a statute which regulates material support and
resources of all kinds, and to the extent that what
you're saying is, you know, training and advice, those
are always speech restrictions if you find them in a
statute, I think that that's not right.
I mean, if you think about the range of
things that training can involve: Training how to
build a bomb, training how to fly a plane, training how
to use sophisticated communications equipment, and
training how to engage --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How about training to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What's involved
here -- I think they said that they want to train them
how to do lawful things, how to pursue their goals in a
lawful, rather than a terrorist, way. And that is
speech. It is not conduct. They want to engage in
advocacy of peaceful means of achieving the goals of
these groups.
GENERAL KAGAN: Congress, of course, allowed
them to engage in all the advocacy that they wish on
behalf of these groups. Indeed, Congress did not
prohibit --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But they want to
communicate, and you say they can communicate. And I
still am having trouble with the line of what they can
communicate and what they can't.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think if they are
engaged in just discussion of ideas, this statute does
not prohibit that. What the statute prohibits is the
provision of actual support, services to the
organizations that the organization can use in its
activities, both legal and illegal.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you stick with the
argument made below that it's unlawful to file an amicus
brief?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think I'm right in
saying it that that was the argument below.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, I think that would
be a service. In other words, not an amicus brief just
to make sure that we understand each other. The
Petitioners can file amicus briefs in a case that might
involve the PKK or the LTTE for themselves, but to the
extent that a lawyer drafts an amicus brief for the PKK
or for the LTTE, that that's the amicus party, then that
indeed would be prohibited. That's the kind of
service that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then it seems to me that
your opponent's argument here today is prohibited.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, no, no, because
Petitioners here are arguing for themselves. What I'm
suggesting is Petitioners can do all the advocacy they
want, can engage in courts in any way they wish. The
only thing that's prohibited is if the PKK hired a
lawyer to write an amicus brief on its behalf. At that
point --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, I understand,
I could be wrong, that many petitioners or respondents
go out to the industry and say we need some amicus
briefs, and they flood in from all sides. Would that be
illegal? Because the -- the organization --
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, if the PKK --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- came out and said we
need a brief -- amicus briefs from law professors?
From --
GENERAL KAGAN: If -- if the PKK or the LTTE
or Al-Qaeda or any of the other organizations on this
list said we want amicus briefs, and somebody provided
an amicus brief --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Without pay.
GENERAL KAGAN: -- for themselves -- for
themselves, there would be no problem. The only problem
is if somebody drafted an amicus brief --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How can we can ever
separate --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- for the PKK itself.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Under the definition of
this statute, teaching these members to play the
harmonica would be unlawful. You are teaching --
training them in a lawful -- in a specialized activity.
So how do we -- there has to be something more than
merely a congressional finding that any training is bad.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think here we have
the congressional definition of what kind of training
is bad, and that definition focuses on training in
specialized activities. Now, you say, well, maybe
training a -- playing a harmonica is a specialized
activity. I think the first thing I would say is there
are not a whole lot of people going around trying to
teach Al-Qaeda how to play harmonicas.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, Mohammed Atta and his
harmonica quartet might tour the country and make a lot
of money. Right?
GENERAL KAGAN: I'm sorry. I --
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: But I don't mean to make fun
of the hypothetical at all, Justice Sotomayor, because I
think you’re raising an important point, but it's
really a point that goes to how to sensibly read a
statute. What Congress did, when in response to some
lower court decisions, it further clarified and defined
the word “training” and the word “expert advice and
assistance,” I have to say I think that Congress's own
responses here -- I mean, they -- Congress was both
responsive and responsible, that it really took into
account court decisions and tried to go back to the
statute and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, in that -- on the --
just forget the harmonica for a second; I'm more worried
about the lawyer. You’re saying that a -- a group abroad
which may have some American citizens in it -- let's assume
they do -- want to hire a lawyer. And this lawyer is supposed
to file some amicus briefs and do other activities. You’re
saying Congress has forbidden that in this statute,
and that's constitutional?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, first of all,
Justice Breyer, I want to sort of repeat the -- what I
-- what I said about the need to find a substantial amount
of uncertain or unconstitutional applications, or with
respect to any kind of facial challenge or with respect
to this challenge --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I want to know if that's
what you’re saying, what I just said: that an
organization has American citizens, engages in
terrible stuff, but they are not entitled under the
Constitution to have a lawyer in the United States who
does legal work like filing amicus briefs.
GENERAL KAGAN: To the extent that there is
any constitutional claim that they would be entitled to
representation, whether it's a Sixth Amendment claim or
a due process claim that might exist in criminal cases,
that might exist in habeas cases, that might exist in
civil cases, then the government believes that the
statute should be read so as not to include that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do these hypotheticals
make any difference? This is an as-applied challenge.
We should look to the activities that this organization
wants to conduct, unless -- unless you think that there
is an overbreadth problem. And that seems to me -- I'm
not even sure that the Petitioners assert that here.
Clearly, the -- the broad scope of this
statute is -- is constitutional, and whatever aspects of
speech it may run afoul of are -- are minimal. That
being the case, of what relevance are these
hypotheticals? It's a lot of fun, and it's very
interesting, but we can deal with all of that when the
situations arise, can't we?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I -- I do think that
the answer to that is yes, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The answer on the other
side is: All we want to do is speak about lawful
activities. We’re not supplying any guns, any
communication equipment. We just want to speak about
lawful activities.
And I go back to my failure to understand your
line between, yes, you can communicate with these
people, but you can't communicate about going about
their aims through peaceful means.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, I think my line is you
can communicate, but you can't provide material support.
You can't make a donation, whether it's tangible or
intangible.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. You can
communicate on -- I don't mean to interrupt. But you
can communicate on your own, but you can't communicate
with them?
GENERAL KAGAN: No --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, okay.
GENERAL KAGAN: -- you can communicate with --
on your own, for sure. Independent advocacy of all kinds
is not touched by this statute. In addition to that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But Justice Ginsburg's
question is: Can you advocate peaceful means? And let's
assume that if they embrace peaceful means, they get
more interest in their organization, the organization
becomes stronger for all purposes. Can you do that?
That was Justice Ginsburg's question.
GENERAL KAGAN: Can you say to an
organization: Look, you guys really should lay down your
arms. And two things --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And here's how to do it.
And here's how to go to the U.N., and here's how to
apply for aid, and here's how to file an amicus brief.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, now you can't,
because when you tell people here's how to apply for
aid and here's how to represent yourself within
international organizations or within the U.S. Congress,
you've given them an extremely valuable skill that they
can use for all kinds of purposes, legal or illegal.
And it's not sufficient for the Petitioners --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So you can -- you can
communicate, but the communications are censored. That’s
-- you said you can meet with -- you can be a member, you
can attend meetings, you can discuss things, but there
are only -- there’s a certain point at which the discussion
must stop, right?
GENERAL KAGAN: The discussion must stop
when you -- when you go over the line into giving
valuable advice, training, support to these
organizations. At that point --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask a sort of basic
question that I’ve had trouble with throughout the
whole argument? We’re talking about whether this is an
as-applied challenge or on its face. And what the
district judge did was hold part of the statute
unconstitutional as being too vague: the words “training”
and “advice,” et cetera. Why isn't that a facial
decision?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, the -- both the
lower courts -- I think the district court and the
court of appeals, I think, had a kind of confused analysis
here, which is that they said, well, it's vague as applied.
The court of appeals specifically said it's not vague
on its face, and there is no facial vagueness claim here,
and yet they appeared to incorporate aspects of overbreadth
analysis into their as-applied claim. I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Unless you're in an
overbreadth situation, a vagueness challenge can be an
as-applied challenge. A statute can be vague as applied
to certain conduct, although the core conduct that it
covers is clearly covered.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We have cases like that.
GENERAL KAGAN: That's exactly right,
Justice Scalia, and -- and -- and with respect to the
as-applied vagueness claim, the government's position is
there's -- there's -- there -- it's not vague, because
you can go through these declarations, you can go
through these complaints, and you can know exactly what's
included within --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but I have the
same --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- the statute and what's
not.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I had the same question as
Justice Stevens. It's a very odd as-applied challenge
because there hasn't been a prosecution. And vagueness
as applied, I think as Professor Cole can answer, is, it
seems to me, if, you know, that it applies, it isn't vague.
I don’t understand that, but --
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I can't -- I can't
think of a case in which the Court, pre-prosecution in a
declaratory judgment, has said that it's improper as
applied to certain things. Or maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I
am missing some case.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, I -- I -- I don't think
you are wrong, Justice Kennedy, and especially with
respect to a case where all the activity is -- clearly
fits in one box or the other. In other words, you can
go through the complaints, you can go through the
declarations, and know exactly what is covered and what's
not covered. All the independent --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that’s -- I'm
not -- I'm not sure that's right. I mean, expert advice or
assistance -- I don't know sitting down that I could tell,
you know, how to advocate for peaceful, you know,
resolution or whatever. Is that expert advice? Is that
specialized knowledge? And I understand training,
service, personnel, but that one's a little hard to --
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, as I said,
Mr. Chief Justice, there will be some hard cases, there
always are when it comes to applying statutes. The
question is never are there hard cases.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, my -- my point
is that this --
GENERAL KAGAN: The question is the
indeterminacy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes. My point is that
even knowing what they intend to do, it's kind of hard
to decide whether that's based on specialized knowledge
or not.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think it -- it actually is
pretty clear in this case. If you read the declarations,
if you read the complaints, the expertise of these
parties actually shines through. Judge Fertig is proud
of his expertise, justifiably so. He has --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Does this -- what --
what these plaintiffs are seeking to do -- does it have
any resemblance to the 150 prosecutions that you have
brought under this Act? It was my understanding that
those were for supplying weapons, supplying other
equipment. Are there any prosecutions that are -- that
aim at training to pursue the organization's aims
through peaceful means?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Ginsburg, I think
that this is not the typical case. This is, of course,
a case that might never have reached this Court, except
that it was brought as a declaratory judgment action.
For the most part, what the government prosecutes are
cases which involve a wide variety of support to foreign
terrorist organizations.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Specifically, does this
particular man have to be prosecuted?
GENERAL KAGAN: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is this particular
individual in risk of being prosecuted if he makes the
speech to the United Nations?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Stevens, I do
believe that this individual can make whatever speeches
he wants at the United Nations. To the extent that he
is acting as a representative or as an agent of the PKK,
he does fall within the contours of the statute. That's
a different thing.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And is there evidence that
he would be prosecuted if he --
GENERAL KAGAN: Of course, that's a
different thing as to how prosecutorial judgment is used
to decide which are the high-priority cases and which
are the low-priority cases.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But in essence, this is an
action to enjoin a potential prosecution against
somebody for making a potential speech? That's really
what we are fighting about, I think.
GENERAL KAGAN: Again, the government did
not bring this action. Judge Fertig and the Petitioners
brought this action to try to get a declaratory
judgment. As applied to them, the statute indeed
covers their various efforts or proposed activities of
being an agent of, of representing the PKK and the LTTE,
that falls within the statute and I think makes the
as-applied claim here not vague at all.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
Mr. Cole, we’ll give you 5 minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID D. COLE
ON BEHALF OF HUMANITARIAN LAW PROJECT, ET AL.
MR. COLE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I want to start by addressing the question
of strict scrutiny. The -- the -- Justice Kennedy, you
asked, and a number of the Justices asked, doesn't it
make a difference that what they've done is prohibited a
wide range of conduct and just some of that is speech?
Well, that's precisely an accurate
description of the breach of the peace statute in Cohen
v. California. It forbade breaches of peace through
loud noises, through horse racing in the streets,
through any kind of offensive conduct. But when
California applied that statute to the words on Mr.
Cohen's jacket and then argued because we are not
interested in the words on his jacket, we are interested
in preserving the peace, however it’s breached, O'Brien
should apply, the Court said no. We deal here with the
conviction resting solely upon speech, not upon any
separately identifiable conduct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I agree. And that
was as applied to a conviction.
MR. COLE: That's right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I just haven't seen an
as-applied challenge on declaratory relief. The
government doesn't seem to object to that procedure.
MR. COLE: No. Well, the government doesn't
object because there are actually many cases, and FEC v.
Wisconsin Right to Life is only the most recent. But,
again, the notion is somebody who is told you can meet
with a group, you can discuss with a group -- in fact,
the House report says that you are free to speak with
and on behalf of a designated group.
But then you have a statute that says, if
you advocate in any coordinated way, if you tell them
anything that’s derived from specialized knowledge, if
you tell them anything of specific skill, you're --
you're engaged in a crime and you could go to jail for
years.
That's why the Humanitarian Law Project came
to me. They said: We’ve been doing this kind of
lawful activity. We think it's our right, but we’re
not going to risk going to jail for 15 years to do
The government has spent a decade arguing
that our clients cannot advocate for peace, cannot
inform about international human rights.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If O'Brien applies, what
remains of your case?
MR. COLE: If O'Brien applies, then I think
the Court would still be applying the scrutiny that
asks, is there a reasonable fit -- is there a reasonable
fit between the specific speech that's at issue here,
speech on issues of public concern, advocating only
lawful activity, and the -- and that the government
legitimately seeks to further, which is stopping support
for terrorism? Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That analysis of the
activities that you are proposing has not been done by
the lower courts, correct?
MR. COLE: Well, the lower courts struck --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They -- they haven't --
they struck it on vagueness grounds, but none --
MR. COLE: Right. The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- none of the courts
either subjected this to strict scrutiny or the
reasonable fit --
MR. COLE: No, and, in fact, the government
has never even attempted to defend the statute under strict
scrutiny, because I think it clearly could not satisfy
strict scrutiny. And under this -- under Cohen, strict
scrutiny is what must be applied here.
In addition --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why don't -- why
don't we remand it to the lower courts to apply strict
scrutiny if we agree with you that O'Brien doesn't apply
here?
MR. COLE: I think it would be appropriate
to remand for -- for application of strict scrutiny if
you read it that O'Brien doesn't apply.
O'Brien also doesn't apply if the statute is
not content neutral. This is a statute that doesn't bar
all aid; it doesn't even bar all speech. It permits
unlimited provision of religious materials, even if they
advocate jihad, but proscribes any secular material, even
if they are advocating peace.
So -- so there are -- the -- the lower
court, again, found that the statute was vague, that our
clients were reasonably chilled, that they had a right
to engage in this activity. I think you can reach that
result either through vagueness, or you can reach it by
applying strict scrutiny, or I think because the fit is
so poor here, and because -- and the vagueness, in fact,
undermines the fit, because people are chilled from
engaging even in speech that the government doesn't want
to prohibit.
All right, if I am told you -- you -- you’ll
go to jail if you tell them anything that’s derived from
special --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Cole, there were
congressional findings that money is fungible first for
terrorist groups, like -- that if you give them money for
legitimate means, that it's going to be siphoned off and
used for illegitimate means.
MR. COLE: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, why isn't that enough,
either under strict scrutiny or a lesser standard,
reasonable fit standard, to say that you can't teach
these groups how to get money?
MR. COLE: Right. Well, one -- well, we’re not
-- we’re not teaching them how to get money. We’re seeking
to teach them how to advocate for lawful human rights
or --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, one of your -- one
of your stated aims, at least of one of the groups is to
teach them how to get aid for tsunami relief.
MR. COLE: Right. That -- that claim has
been mooted because the LTTE is no longer -- has no role
in Sri Lanka. So what’s left is solely -- has nothing
to do with money.
Secondly, Congress only made a finding about
money. At the same time that it made a finding that
money is fungible, it said this is a statute -- and
this is from the House report -- only affects one’s
contribution of financial and material resources and
does not prohibit speaking in concert with and on behalf
of designated groups.
Well, that suggests that Congress thought
that what our clients want to do is -- should be protected.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. COLE: And we have suggested that you should,
therefore, interpret the statute in -- consistent with
that. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the case in the
