IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
CITIZENS UNITED,
Appellant
: No. 08-205
FEDERAL ELECTION :
COMMISSION. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, September 9, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Appellant.
FLOYD ABRAMS, ESQ., New York, N.Y.; on behalf of Senator
Mitch McConnell, as amicus curiae, in support of the
Appellant.
GEN. ELENA KAGAN, ESQ., Solicitor General, Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of the Appellee.
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
Senators John McCain, et al., as amici curiae, in
support of Appellee.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellant 3
FLOYD ABRAMS, ESQ.
On behalf of Senator Mitch McConnell, as
amicus curiae, in support of the Appellant 27
GEN. ELENA KAGAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellee 35
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of Senators John McCain, et al.,
as amici curiae, in support of the Appellee 68
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellant 77
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:01 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear
reargument this morning in Case 08-205, Citizens United
v. The Federal Election Commission.
Mr. Olson.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
MR. OLSON: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
Robust debate about candidates for elective
office is the most fundamental value protected by the
First Amendment's guarantee of free speech. Yet that is
precisely the dialogue that the government has
prohibited if practiced by unions or corporations, any
union or any corporation.
The government claims it may do so based
upon the Austin decision that corporate speech is by its
nature corrosive and distorting because it might not
reflected actual public support for the views expressed
by the corporation. The government admits that that
radical concept of requiring public support for the
speech before you can speak would even authorize it to
criminalize books and signs.
This Court needs no reminding that the
government when it is acting to prohibit, particularly
when it is acting to criminalize, speech that is at the
very core of the First Amendment has a heavy burden to
prove that there is a compelling governmental interest
that -- that justifies that prohibition and that the
regulation adopted, in this case a criminal statute, is
the most narrowly tailored necessary to accomplish that
compelling governmental interest.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Olson, are you taking
the position that there is no difference in the First
Amendment rights of an individual? A corporation, after
all, is not endowed by its creator with inalienable
rights. So is there any distinction that Congress could
draw between corporations and natural human beings for
purposes of campaign finance?
MR. OLSON: What the Court has said in the
First Amendment context, New York Times v. Sullivan,
Rose Jean v. Associated Press, and over and over again,
is that corporations are persons entitled to protection
under the First Amendment.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would that include --
MR. OLSON: Now, Justice --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would that include
today's mega-corporations, where many of the investors
may be foreign individuals or entities?
MR. OLSON: The Court in the past has made
no distinction based upon the nature of the entity that
might own a share of a corporation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Own many shares?
MR. OLSON: Pardon?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Nowadays there are
foreign interests, even foreign governments, that own
not one share but a goodly number of shares.
MR. OLSON: I submit that the Court's
decisions in connection with the First Amendment and
corporations have in the past made no such distinction.
However --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Could they in your view,
in the view that you are putting forth, that there is no
distinction between an individual and a corporation for
First Amendment purposes, then any mega-corporation,
even -- even if most of the investors are from abroad,
Congress could not limit their spending?
MR. OLSON: I'm not -- I'm not saying that,
Justice Ginsburg. I'm saying that the First Amendment
applies. Then the next step is to determine whether
Congress and the government has established a compelling
governmental interest and a narrowly tailored remedy to
that interest. If the Congress -- and there is no
record of that in this case of which I am aware.
--
Certainly the government has not advanced it in its
briefs: That there is some compelling governmental
interest because of foreign investment in corporations.
If there was, then the Court would look at,
determine how serious is that interest, how destructive
has it been to the process and whether the -- maybe the
limitation would have something to do with the ownership
of shares of a corporation or some --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you think Congress could
prevent foreign individuals from funding speech in
United States elections?
MR. OLSON: The -- the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Private individuals,
foreigners who -- who want to --
MR. OLSON: That's, of course, a different
question. I haven't studied it, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's not different.
I asked it because I thought it was related to the
question you were answering.
MR. OLSON: The fundamental point here is --
and let me start with this, and I think we should -- we
should start with this, and the government hardly
mentions this.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Before you do, Mr. Olson
MR. OLSON: The language of the First
Amendment, "Congress shall make" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Olson -- Mr. Olson,
would you answer Justice Ginsburg's question yes or no?
Can the -- leaving aside foreign investors, can the --
can -- does the First Amendment permit any distinction
between corporate speakers and individual speakers?
MR. OLSON: I am not -- I'm not aware of a
case that just --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I am not asking you that.
I meant in your view does it permit that distinction?
MR. OLSON: My view is based upon the
decisions of this Court and my view would be that unless
there is a compelling governmental interest and a
narrowly --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But if there is a
compelling government -- can there be any case in which
there is a different treatment of corporations and
individuals in your judgment?
MR. OLSON: I would not rule that out,
Justice Stevens. I mean, there may be. I can't imagine
all of the infinite varieties of potential problems that
might exist, but -- but we would eventually come back to
the narrow tailoring problem anyway.
What the government has done here is
prohibit speech. I don't know how many unions there are
in this country, but there are something like 6 million
corporations that filed tax returns in 2006.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, Mr. Olson, do you
think that media corporations that are owned or
principally owned by foreign shareholders have less
First Amendment rights than other media corporations in
the United States?
MR. OLSON: I don't think so, Justice Alito,
and certainly there is no record to suggest that there
is any kind of problem based upon that. And I come back
to the language of the First Amendment: "Congress shall
make no law." Now, what this Court has repeatedly said
is that there may be laws inhibiting speech if there is
a compelling governmental interest and a narrowly
tailored remedy. But there is no justification for
this.
I was going to say that 97 percent of the 6
million corporations that filed tax returns in 2006 had
assets less than $5 million -- assets, not net worth.
So we are talking about a prohibition that covers every
corporation in the United States, including nonprofit
corporations, limited liability corporations, Subchapter
S corporations and every union in the United States.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what are the -- you
have used the word "prohibition," Mr. Olson. One answer
to that is that no entity is being prohibited, that it
is a question of not whether corporations can contribute
but how. They can use PACs and that way we assure that
the people who contribute are really supportive of the
issue, of the candidate.
But so the -- the corporation can give, but
it has to use a PAC.
MR. OLSON: I respectfully disagree. The
corporation may not expend money. It might find people,
stockholders or officers, who wanted to contribute to a
separate fund, who could then speak. That in one -- to
use the words of one Justice, that is
ventriloquist-speak. I would say that it is more like
surrogate speech. If you can find some other people
that will say what you want to say and get them to
contribute money through a process that this just --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Who is the "you"? I mean
do you -- you -- those are the directors, the CEO, not
the shareholders? We don't know what they think.
MR. OLSON: Well, this statute is not
limited to cases where the shareholders agree or don't
agree with what the corporation says. As the Court said
in the Bellotti case, the prohibition would exist
whether or not the shareholders agree. But let me go
back to your question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It -- it covers totally --
totally owned corporations, too, doesn't it?
MR. OLSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, if I owned all the
stock in a corporation, the corporation still can't --
MR. OLSON: Yes. And it includes membership
corporations such as Citizens United that --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the individual
contribution also covers people who would like to give
$2500 instead of $2400, which is the limit. And maybe
there are 100 million or 200 million people in the
United States who, if they gave 2500 rather than 2400,
nobody could say that that was really an effort to buy
the Senator or the Congressman. So is that
unconstitutional, too?
MR. OLSON: No -- well, what this Court has
said is that in connection with contribution limitations
there is a potential compelling governmental interest.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. OLSON: This is what Buckley says.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. OLSON: Then that -- in that -- but
expenditures, which is what we are talking about today,
do not concern the -- the question, the actual threat of
quid pro quo corruption or the appearance of quid pro
quo corruption. And you know, Justice Breyer, what the
Court said in that case is because it's not inhibiting
someone from actually speaking, it's -- it's giving
money to someone --
JUSTICE BREYER: So here the obvious
argument is: Look, they said the compelling interest is
that people think that representatives are being bought,
okay? That's to put it in a caricature, but you
understand what I'm driving at, okay? That's what they
said in Buckley v. Valeo. So Congress now says
precisely that interest leads us to want to limit the
expenditures that corporations can make on
electioneering communication in the last 30 days of a
primary, over-the-air television, but not on radio, not
on books, not on pamphlets, not on anything else. All
right?
So in what respect is there not conceptually
at least a compelling interest and narrow tailoring?
MR. OLSON: Well, in the first place, I
accept what the Court said in Buckley, that expenditures
do not raise that concern at all. Congress has not made
that finding. You are talking -- and you mentioned just
-- just a matter of radio and television, but in Buckley
v. Valeo the Court specifically said that that is the
most important means of communicating concerning
elections --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's important --
MR. OLSON: And the Court used the word
"indispensable." So what -- and -- and what the Court
said in Buckley v. Valeo is it compared a limitation on
expenditures, independent uncoordinated expenditures,
with the prohibition that the Court addressed when it
had a statute before it that said newspapers couldn't
endorse candidates on the day of election, and the
Torneo case, where it required a right of reply to be
given. And the Court said those restrictions, which
were unconstitutional, were considerably less, and that
the restriction in Buckley v. Valeo on expenditures --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I agree -- I agree
that Buckley made the distinction between contributions
and expenditures, and it seems to me that the
government's argument necessarily wants to water down
that distinction. But in response or just in
furtherance of Justice Breyer's point, you have two
cases, one in which an officeholder goes to a
corporation and says: Will you please give me money?
They say: We can't do that.
The other is in which a corporation takes
out an ad for the -- for the candidate, which relieves
that candidate of the responsibility of -- of
substantial television coverage. Isn't that about the
same?
MR. OLSON: Well, in the first place, if
there is any coordination --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I -- and I think
Buckley says no.
MR. OLSON: Buckley says --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But, as a practical
matter, is that always true?
MR. OLSON: Well, it may not always be true.
In the infinite potential applications of something like
that, Justice Kennedy, anything might possibly be true.
And Justice Breyer said, well, what if Congress thought
or what if Congress thought the people might think that
that was kind of somehow suspect? That is not a basis
for prohibiting speech by a whole class of individual --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, of course, it did --
was a basis for prohibiting speech by, in the sense of
giving contributions above $2,400, by 300 million people
in the United States. But the point, which I think is
the one that Justice Kennedy was picking up, is are we
arguing here between you and my questions, is the
argument in this case about the existence of a
compelling interest? Because Congress seemed to think
that there was certainly that; it's this concern about
the perception that people are, say, buying candidates.
Are we arguing about narrow tailoring?
Congress thought it was narrow tailoring. Or are we
arguing about whether we should second-guess Congress on
whether there is enough of a compelling interest and the
tailoring is narrow enough?
MR. OLSON: You must always second-guess
Congress when the First Amendment is in play. And that
we are arguing -- we are not -- we are discussing --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. OLSON: -- both the compelling --
(Laughter.)
MR. OLSON: -- both the compelling
governmental interest and the narrow tailoring, and
what -- what -- there is not a sufficient record. The
reason --the government has shifted position here. They
were, first of all, talking about the so-called
distortion rationale in Austin, the distortion rationale
which they seem to have abandoned in the -- in the
supplemental briefs filed in connection with this
argument, and they resorted to the corruption,
appearance of corruption. There isn't a sufficient
record of this. There isn't --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what about the
district court's finding? Wasn't there a finding before
the three-judge court that Federal officials know of and
feel indebted to corporations or unions who finance ads
urging their election or the defeat of their opponent?
There was a finding of fact to that effect, was there
not?
MR. OLSON: The find -- yes. I -- there is
something to that effect in the district court opinion,
but it doesn't cover all corporations. It didn't focus
in specifically on expenditures.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if -- so if they just
covered large corporations, so you take out the mom and
pop single shareholder --
MR. OLSON: Well, that is 97 percent of the
corporation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not 97 percent of the
contributions. I mean, the contributions that count are
the ones from the corporations that can amass these huge
sums in their treasuries.
MR. OLSON: I think that goes back to
Justice Kennedy's question, and my response, which
distinguishes between contributions and expenditures.
The point that Justice Kennedy was making in his
question is that under -- under some circumstances an
expenditure might coincide or resonate with what the
candidate wishes to do, but the Court looked at that
very carefully in Buckley v. Valeo and said that might
not be the case. It might, in fact, be these
expenditures might be counterproductive when they are
independent, they are not coordinated with the
candidate, they are more directly expression by the
party spending the money, they are not like a
contribution, so they are more of an infringement on the
right to speak.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel --
MR. OLSON: And they are less of a threat of
corruption because there is less -- there is no quid pro
quo there, and if there is it would be punishable as a
crime.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, in your
discussion of Austin, you rely on its inconsistency with
Bellotti. Bellotti, of course, involved a referendum
and Austin expenditures in an individual election. Why
isn't that a significant distinction?
MR. OLSON: Well, it is -- it is -- what the
Bellotti Court said is that we are not deciding that
question.
And -- and Austin did address, you are
correct, expenditures, but it based it on a rationale --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It more than said we are
not deciding. It said they are entirely different
situations. You read that long footnote which has been
cited six or eight times by our later cases.
MR. OLSON: Yes. And I also read the
footnote 14 in the Bellotti case that cited case after
case after case that said corporations had rights,
protected rights under the First Amendment. I am not
disagreeing with what you just said, Justice Stevens.
The Court said it was -- it was dicta, because the Court
did not deal with --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it has been
repeated -- that footnote has been repeatedly cited in
subsequent cases, most of which were unanimous.
MR. OLSON: Well, because it was -- and I
agree the Bellotti Court was not discussing that. But
The Bellotti Court --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It did discuss it
precisely in that footnote and it said it's a different
case.
MR. OLSON: I understand and I don't
disagree with what you have just said, Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It didn't say it would come
out differently. It just said, we're not deciding that
case, right?
MR. OLSON: That -- that is -- that's the
point I'm trying to make.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't mind citing that.
Bellotti didn't decide that.
MR. OLSON: What Bellotti also said is --
and I think this is also in many decisions of this Court
-- the inherent worth of speech in terms of its capacity
for informing the public does not depend upon the
identity of the source, whether corporation,
association, union, or individual.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now that we've
cleared up that Bellotti didn't decide the question,
what is the distinction that -- why don't you think that
distinction makes sense? In other words, a corporate --
you don't have a potential for corruption if a
corporation is simply speaking on a referendum that may
directly affect its interest. If you are dealing with a
candidate, what the Court has said in the past is that
you do have that problem of corruption.
MR. OLSON: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words, why
isn't that distinction a way to reconcile Bellotti and
Austin?
MR. OLSON: There is a distinction, but I
think the distinction goes back to, A, expenditures
versus contributions, number one; and then secondly, it
goes back to what this Court said in conjunction with
the impossibility of finding a distinction between issue
ads and candidate ads. The line dissolves on practical
application. The interest --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where did we say
that?
MR. OLSON: You said that repeatedly,
including most recently in the Wisconsin Right to Life
case. And it first appeared in Buckley itself. The
distinction is very hard to draw between the interest
that the speaker is addressing and whether it's a
candidate or an issue, because issues are wrapped up in
candidates. The corporation interest and the interests
that its fiduciary officers are representing when it
speaks on behalf of the corporation --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I don't think you are
correct to say the Court said there was no distinction.
It said the distinction requires the use of magic words.
And that's what they said in Wisconsin Right to Life,
too. Both of them said there is a distinction.
MR. OLSON: Well, but the words --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It's difficult to draw in
some cases, but nobody said there is no distinction that
I am aware of.
MR. OLSON: Well, what the Court -- to
use -- to use the words of the Court, which occurred
repeatedly, is that the distinction dissolves
impractical application. That, Justice Stevens, I think
addresses the very commonsense point that when you are
addressing an issue, whether you are addressing a
referendum matter, whether it is a proposed legislation
or a candidate that is going to raise taxes on the
corporation, those distinctions dissolve. It's all
First Amendment freedom.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I -- I thought that
Buckley had narrowed the statute precisely to magic
words and still found it unconstitutional as applied to
corporations that made independent expenditures.
MR. OLSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't that what happened in
Buckley?
MR. OLSON: The $1,000 limit in Buckley was,
first of all, limited to the magic words "candidacy
expression"; then secondly, the Court -- and the -- and
the words of the statute were "any person," which
included corporations found, the statute as narrowed
unconstitutional and said --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And some of the plaintiffs
were corporations.
MR. OLSON: Some of the plaintiffs were
corporations.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but that point wasn't
even discussed in the opinion, was it?
MR. OLSON: It was not discussed in the
opinion.
JUSTICE STEVENS: No.
MR. OLSON: But what was discussed in the
opinion was the breadth of the definition of "person,"
which did include corporation. Corporations were
parties in the case. And in that part of the Buckley
case, the Court repeatedly cites cases involving
corporations, including NAACP v. Alabama and New York
Times v. Sullivan, all cases involving corporations.
So while it wasn't specifically discussed,
it was a part of the decision of the Court that a $1,000
limitation was worse, more restrictive than the -- than
the restriction of editorials appearing on election day
or requiring a newspaper to give a right of reply.
The Court in Buckley in fact says, this
is -- with respect to that expenditure limitation, the
words of the Court were this is the most drastic of the
limitations imposed by the Federal Election Campaign
Act. It goes to the core of First Amendment freedom.
JUSTICE BREYER: If that is so -- this is a
point that is concerning me. I don't know the answer
precisely. But suppose you are right. Suppose we
overrule these two cases. Would that leave the country
in a situation where corporations and trade unions can
spend as much as they want in the last 30 days on
television ads, et cetera, of this kind, but political
parties couldn't, because political parties can only
spend hard money on this kind of expenditure? And
therefore, the group that is charged with the
responsibility of building a platform that will appeal
to a majority of Americans is limited, but the groups
that have particular interests, like corporations or
trade unions, can spend as much as they want?
Am I right about the consequence? If I am
right, what do we do about it?
MR. OLSON: I think you are wrong about the
consequence. There are 27 States that have no
limitations on either contributions or expenditures and
that -- the Earth is not --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I'm not -- I'm not -- I
am saying am I right in thinking that if you win, the
political party can't spend this money, it's limited to
hard money contributions, but corporations and trade
unions can spend unlimited funds?
MR. OLSON: Well, if -- if the Court decides
in favor of the arguments that we are making here, I
think what you are suggesting is that because there are
other limitations that someone has not challenged in
this case, that that would be somehow unfair and
unbalanced.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I'm not suggesting
that. I am suggesting we will make a hash of this
statute, and if we are going to make a hash of this
statute, what do we do about it? And that's why I want
you to take a position on another important part of that
statute, and that is the part that says political
parties themselves cannot make these expenditures that
we are talking about except out of hard money.
MR. OLSON: What -- I want to address that
in this way, and I said when we were here before the
most fundamental right that we can exercise in a
democracy under the First Amendment is dialogue and
communication about political candidates. We have
wrapped up that freedom, smothered that freedom, with
the most complicated set of regulations and bureaucratic
controls. Last year the Federal Election Commission
that was supposed to be able to give advisory opinions
didn't even have a quorum for 6 months of the year 2008
when people would have needed some help from the Federal
Election Commission.
What I am saying, in answer to your
question, Justice Breyer, there are, I suspect, all
kinds of problems with Federal election laws where they
apply to parties and where they apply to what candidates
might do and so forth; but that has never been a
justification. We will uphold a prohibition on all
kinds of people speaking because if we allowed them to
speak someone else might complain that they don't get to
speak as much as they would like.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, with reference to
any incongruities that might flow from our adopting your
position, are you aware of any case in this Court which
says that we must refrain from addressing an
unconstitutional aspect of the statute because the
statute is flawed in some other respects as well?
MR. OLSON: No, I'm not, and that's -- I
think that was what I was attempting to say in response
to what Justice Breyer was asking me.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Olson, are you
giving up on your earlier arguments that there are ways
to avoid the constitutional question to resolve this
case? I know that we asked for further briefing on this
particular issue of overturning two of our Court's
precedents. But are you giving up on your earlier
arguments that there are statutory interpretations that
would avoid the constitutional question?
MR. OLSON: No, Justice Sotomayor. What --
what -- there are all kinds of lines that the Court
could draw which would provide a victory to my client.
There are so many reasons why the Federal Government did
not have the right to criminalize this 90-minute
documentary that had to do with elections, but what the
Court addressed specifically in the Washington Right to
Life case is that the lines if they are to be drawn must
not be lines that are ambiguous, that invite litigation,
that hold the threat of prosecution over an individual;
and in practical application that is what the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Olson, my difficulty
is that you make very impassioned arguments about why
this is a bad system that the courts have developed in
its jurisprudence, but we don't have any record
developed below. You make a lot of arguments about how
far and the nature of corporations, single corporations,
single stockholder corporations, et cetera. But there
is no record that I am reviewing that actually goes into
the very question that you're arguing exists, which is a
patchwork of regulatory and jurisprudential guidelines
that are so unclear.
MR. OLSON: I would like to answer that.
There are several answers to it and I would like to
reserve the balance of my time for rebuttal. It is the
government has the burden to prove the record that
justifies telling someone that wants to make a 90-minute
documentary about a candidate for president that they
will go to jail if they broadcast it. The government
has the obligation and the government had a long
legislative record and plenty of opportunity to produce
that record and it's their obligation to do so.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Olson --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But the facial
challenge --
JUSTICE STEVENS: -- may I ask one question
you can answer on rebuttal? No one has commented on the
National Rifle Association's amicus brief. None of the
-- none of the litigants have. That's in response to
Justice Sotomayor's thought that there are narrow ways
of resolving the problem before us. On rebuttal, will
you tell us what your view on their solution to this
problem is?
MR. OLSON: I will, Justice Stevens.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why don't you tell
us now. We will give you time for rebuttal.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't keep us in suspense.
(Laughter.)
MR. OLSON: Every line, including the lines
that would be drawn in several of the amicus briefs, and
they are not the same, could put the entity who wishes
to speak before you again a year from now. Because the
movie might be shorter, it might be video on demand, it
might be a broadcast, it might have a different tone
with respect to a candidate. Every one of those lines
puts the speaker at peril that he will go to jail or be
prosecuted or there will be litigation, all of which
chills speech and inhibits individual --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, but to answer my
question, the line suggested by the NRA is the line
identified by Congress in the Snowe-Jeffords amendment
dealing with individual financing of speech which would
separate all of these problems. What is your comment on
that possible solution to the problem?
MR. OLSON: I would like to take advantage
of Justice Stevens' offer and respond to that during the
rebuttal, Mr. Chief Justice.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Olson.
Mr. Abrams.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF FLOYD ABRAMS
ON BEHALF OF SENATOR MITCH McCONNELL,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF THE APPELLANT
MR. ABRAMS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The first case cited to you by Mr. Olson
happened to be New York Times v. Sullivan, and I would
like to begin by urging two propositions on you from
that case.
In that case the Court was confronted with a
situation where the Times made three arguments to the
Court. They said -- for us to win, they said, you
either have to revise, basically federalize, libel law
to a considerable degree, which they did; or, they said,
we only sold 390 copies in Alabama, so you could rule in
our favor by saying there was no jurisdiction; or, they
said, we didn't even mention Sheriff Sullivan's name, so
you could rule in our favor on the ground that they
haven't proved a libel case.
The Court did the first. It did the first,
which is the broader rather than the narrowest way to
address the question, and I suspect they did it -- don't
know, but I suspect they did it -- because they had come
to the conclusion that the degree of First Amendment
danger by the sort of lawsuits which were occurring in
Alabama and elsewhere was something that had to be faced
up to by the Court now, or --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Abrams, Times v.
Sullivan was not -- did not involve overruling
precedents of this Court that had been followed by this
Court and others. So, I think the situation is quite
different.
MR. ABRAMS: That's true, Your Honor. It
did involve overruling 150 years of American
jurisprudence. I mean, there was no law at that point
that said that actual malice --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was no -- there was
no decision of this Court, I mean --
MR. ABRAMS: That's true, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We do tend to adhere to
our precedents --
MR. ABRAMS: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- especially a case like
Austin which was repeating the business about amassing
large funds in corporate treasuries. It was not a new
idea in Austin, and it was repeated after -- after
Austin. But there was -- so Times v. Sullivan I think
is quite distinct.
The question that was posed here is, is it a
proper way to resolve this case, to overrule one
precedent in full and another in part?
MR. ABRAMS: And what I'm urging on you,
Your Honor, is that by a parity of reasoning, although
not precisely the same situation, that there are cases
in which there is a -- an ongoing threat to freedom of
expression which may lead -- if you were to agree to
that, which may lead the Court to say, rather than
taking a narrower route to the same result, that it is
worth our moving away in this case from looking for the
narrowest way out, and determining it now, rather than
the next as-applied challenge.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There are -- there are two
separate questions that -- that have been raised in
opposition to your position. One is -- one is that we
should not resolve a broad constitutional issue where
there are narrower grounds, and that's the question you
are responding to.
An entirely separate question is the issue
of stare decisis, and you acknowledge that stare decisis
was not involved in New York Times v. Sullivan, but the
first question obviously was.
MR. ABRAMS: And stare decisis of course is
a question much -- much briefed by the parties, and it
is one which involves of course a consideration not only
of the merits of the decision, but certain other
factors, the length of time the decision has been in
effect and the like. The time in this case for the
McConnell case, of course, is only 6 years. The time
for the Austin case is 19 years, which is less than one
ruling of this Court's just last term.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what the Court said
in Austin it also said in the NRWC case, which was I
think 8 years before Austin. So Austin was not a new
invention.
MR. ABRAMS: Well, Austin was the first time
that corporate speech was barred -- corporate
independent expenditures were barred by a ruling of this
Court. That had not happened prior to Austin, and the
Solicitor General's brief acknowledges that. Now --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there have been
limits on corporate spending in aid of a political
campaign since the turn of the 20th century.
MR. ABRAMS: There had been limits on
corporate contributions since the turn of the century.
Corporate independent expenditures came much later and I
think that is something that I think is worth --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Much later than 1947.
MR. ABRAMS: Yes, Your Honor. In 1947,
President Truman vetoed that bill, saying that it was a
dangerous intrusion into free speech. That has always
been an area of enormous controversy, not just in the
public sphere but in the judicial sphere. The early
cases about Taft-Hartley were ones in which what the
Court did was to basically say in one case after another
that the statute did not govern the particular facts of
the case so as to avoid --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But those were union
cases, weren't they, rather than corporate cases?
MR. ABRAMS: Yes, they were three union
cases. And the case after that essentially was Buckley.
And Buckley held unconstitutional the limits posed there
to independent expenditures. All I'm saying is that
this is not a situation as if we have an unbroken amount
of years throughout American history in which it has
been accepted that independent expenditures could be
barred. It has always been a matter of high level of
controversy, with courts at first and understandably
shying away from facing up to the issue directly and
then the first ruling on point.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But have you read Justice
Rehnquist's dissent in the Bellotti case?
MR. ABRAMS: I'm sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Have you read Justice
Rehnquist's dissent in the Bellotti case?
MR. ABRAMS: Yes, I have.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Which is somewhat
inconsistent with what you said.
MR. ABRAMS: Yes, it is.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And also
inconsistent with his later view, correct?
MR. ABRAMS: Yes.
Yes, Justice?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Going back to the
question of stare decisis, the one thing that is very
interesting about this area of law for the last
0 years is the active involvement of both State and
Federal legislatures in trying to find that balance
between the interest of protecting in their views how
the electoral process should proceed and the interests
of the First Amendment.
And so my question to you is, once we say
they can't, except on the basis of a compelling
government interest narrowly tailored, are we cutting
off or would we be cutting off that future democratic
process? Because what you are suggesting is that the
courts who created corporations as persons, gave birth
to corporations as persons, and there could be an
argument made that that was the Court's error to start
with, not Austin or McConnell, but the fact that the
Court imbued a creature of State law with human
characteristics.
But we can go back to the very basics that
way, but wouldn't we be doing some more harm than good
by a broad ruling in a case that doesn't involve more
business corporations and actually doesn't even involve
the traditional nonprofit organization? It involves an
advocacy corporation that has a very particular
interest.
MR. ABRAMS: Your Honor, I don't think you'd
be doing more harm than good in vindicating the First
Amendment rights here, which transcend that of Citizens
United.
I think that, reading my friend's brief here
on the right, they come -- some of them at least come
pretty close to saying that there must be a way for
Citizens United to win this case other than a broad way.
In my view the principles at stake here are the same.
Citizens United happens to be sort of the paradigmatic
example of the sort of group speaking no less about who
to vote for or not who to vote for or what to think
about a potential ongoing candidate for President of the
United States. But in lots of other situations day by
day there is a blotch to public discourse caused as a
result of this Congressional legislation.
And so we think it is not a matter of
cutting off what legislatures can do. They can still
pass legislation doing all sorts of things. They can do
public funding. They can do many other things that
don't violate the First Amendment. If we are right in
saying that independent expenditures, that category of
money leading to speech that we are talking about today,
if we are right that that is the sort of speech which is
at the core of the First Amendment, then you would be
doing only good, only good, by ruling that way today
across the board.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Abrams.
General Kagan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ELENA KAGAN
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLEE
GENERAL KAGAN: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
I have three very quick points to make about the
government position. The first is that this issue has a
long history. For over 100 years Congress has made a
judgment that corporations must be subject to special
rules when they participate in elections and this Court
has never questioned that judgment.
Number two --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait, wait, wait, wait. We
never questioned it, but we never approved it, either.
And we gave some really weird interpretations to the
Taft-Hartley Act in order to avoid confronting the
question.
GENERAL KAGAN: I will repeat what I said,
Justice Scalia: For 100 years this Court, faced with
many opportunities to do so, left standing the
legislation that is at issue in this case -- first the
contribution limits, then the expenditure limits that
came in by way of Taft-Hartley -- and then of course in
Austin specifically approved those limits.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand what you
are saying. I mean, we are not a self -- self-starting
institution here. We only disapprove of something when
somebody asks us to. And if there was no occasion for
us to approve or disapprove, it proves nothing whatever
that we didn't disapprove it.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, you are not a
self-starting institution. But many litigants brought
many cases to you in 1907 and onwards and in each case
this Court turns down, declined the opportunity, to
invalidate or otherwise interfere with this legislation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that judgment was
validated by Buckley's contribution-expenditure line.
And you're correct if you look at contributions, but
this is an expenditure case. And I think that it
doesn't clarify the situation to say that for
0 years -- to suggest that for 100 years we would have
allowed expenditure limitations, which in order to work
at all have to have a speaker-based distinction,
exemption from media, content-based distinction,
time-based distinction. We've never allowed that.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think
Justice Stevens was right in saying that the expenditure
limits that are in play in this case came into effect in
47, so it has been 60 years rather than 100 years.
But in fact, even before that the contribution limits
were thought to include independent expenditures, and as
soon as Congress saw independent expenditures going on
Congress closed what it perceived to be illegal. So in
fact for 100 years corporations have made neither
contributions nor expenditures, save for a brief period
of time in the middle 1940's, which Congress very
swiftly reacted to by passing the Taft-Hartley Act.
Now, the reason that Congress has enacted
these special rules -- and this is the second point that
I wanted to make --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Before you go to your
second point, may I ask you to clarify one part of the
first, namely, your answer to the question I proposed to
Mr. Olson, namely, why isn't the Snowe-Jeffords
Amendment, which was picked on by Congress itself, an --
and which is argued by the NRA, an appropriate answer to
this case?
GENERAL KAGAN: That was my third point,
Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Oh, I'm sorry.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: So we will just skip over
the second.
My third point is that this is an anomalous
case in part because this is an atypical plaintiff. And
the reason this is an atypical plaintiff is because this
plaintiff is an ideological nonprofit and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you are giving up
-- you are giving up the distinction from MCFL that you
defended in your opening brief? There you said this
doesn't qualify as a different kind of corporation
because it takes corporate funds, and now you are
changing that position?
GENERAL KAGAN: No, I --I don't think we are
changing it. MCFL is the law, and the FEA -- FEC has
always tried to implement MCFL faithfully. And that's
what the FEC has tried to do. But if you --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I guess -- do you
think MCFL applies in this case even though the
--
corporation takes corporate funds from for-profit
corporations?
GENERAL KAGAN: I don't think MCFL as
written applies in this case, but I think that the Court
could, as lower courts have done, adjust MCFL
potentially to make it apply in this case, although I
think that would require a remand. What lower courts
have done -- MCFL was set up, it was written in a very
strict kind of way so that the organization had to have
a policy of accepting no corporate funds whatsoever.
Some of the lower courts, including the D.C.
Circuit, which, of course, sees a lot of these cases,
have suggested that MCFL is too strict, that it doesn't
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you -- do you
think it's too strict?
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I -- the FEC has no
objection to MCFL being adjusted in order to -- to give
it some flexibility. What the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you want to give
up this case, change your position, and basically say
you lose solely because of the questioning that we have
directed on reargument?
GENERAL KAGAN: Solely because? I am sorry?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Because of the
question we have posed on reargument.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, I don't think that that
is fair. We think -- we continue to think that the --
the judgment below should be affirmed. If you are
asking me, Mr. Chief Justice, as to whether the
government has a preference as to the way in which it
loses, if it has to lose, the answer is yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What case of ours --
what case of ours suggests that there is a hierarchy of
bases on which we should rule against a party when both
of them involve constitutional questions? Extending --
modifying MCFL would be, I assume, by virtue of the
First Amendment. Overruling Austin would be by virtue
of the First Amendment. So what case says we should
prefer one as opposed to the other?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think the question really
is the Court's standard practice of deciding as-applied
challenges before facial challenges. And this case
certainly raises a number of tricky as-applied
questions. One is the question of how the -- the
statute applies to nonprofit organizations such as this
one. Another is a question of how it applies to VOD
transmissions. Yet another is the question of how it
applies to a 90-minute infomercial as opposed to smaller
advertisements.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But if you -- if you
insist on the as-applied challenge, isn't that
inconsistent with the whole line of cases that began in
Thornhill v. Alabama and Coates v. Cincinnati? What
about the Thornhill doctrine? It is not cited in the
briefs, but that doctrine is that even a litigant
without standing to object to a particular form of
conduct can raise that if the statute covers it in order
that the statute does not have an ongoing chill against
speech. And there is no place where an ongoing chill is
more dangerous than in the elections context.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think even --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you are asking us to
have an ongoing chill where we have as-applied
challenges which are based on, as I indicated before,
speaker, content, time, and this is the kind of chilling
effect that the Thornhill doctrine stands directly
against.
GENERAL KAGAN: You know, I think even in
the First Amendment context, Justice Kennedy, the Court
will not strike down a statute on its face unless it
finds very substantial overbreadth, many applications of
the statute that are unconstitutional, as opposed to
just a few or just some. What I am suggesting here is
that the Court was right in McConnell and then confirmed
in WRTL to find that BCRA, which is of course the only
statute directly involved in this case, did not have
that substantial overdraft.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let me ask you this.
Suppose that we were to rule that nonprofit corporations
could not be covered by the statute. Would that --
would the statute then have substantial overbreadth?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I would urge you not
to do that in that kind of sweeping way, because the
reason for the nonprofit corporations being covered is
to make sure that the nonprofit corporations don't
function as conduits for the for-profit corporations.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But suppose we were to say
that. Would the statute then not be substantially
overbroad?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I don't think that the
statute is substantially overbroad right now. So if you
took out certain applications, I can't think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I am asking you to
assume that we draw the nonprofit/profit distinction.
Then the statute, it seems to me, clearly has to fall
because, number one, we couldn't sever it based on the
language.
GENERAL KAGAN: I see what you are saying.
Well, you could do a couple of things. You could do
what Justice Stevens suggested. Justice Stevens
suggested -- I suggested to Chief Justice Roberts --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I don't think you -- I
don't think you really caught what I suggested because
you treated it as an enlargement of the MCFL example.
GENERAL KAGAN: I was going to go back.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But that is not what the
National Rifle Association argues or what Snowe-Jeffords
covers. It covers ads that are financed exclusively by
individuals even though they are sponsored by a
corporation.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, that's exactly right.
What you are suggesting, Justice Stevens, is essentially
stripping the Wellstone amendment from the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Correct and treating the
Snowe-Jeffords amendment as being the correct test. And
nobody has explained why that wouldn't be a proper
solution, not nearly as drastic as -- as being argued
here.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, and there are some, you
know -- there are -- there are some reasons that that
might -- that might be appropriate. The Wellstone
amendment was a funny kind of thing. It was passed very
narrowly, but beyond that it was passed with a -- a
really substantial support of many people who voted
against the legislation in the end, presumably as a
poison pill.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if we -- if we go --
if we go that route, what we are doing is creating an
accounting industry, aren't we? Corporations give huge
amounts of money to the C-4 organization, and then
somebody, perhaps the FEC, has to decide whether in fact
that is a way of subverting the prohibition against the
direct payment for the communication, right? Okay, so
Congress said, we don't want that. Congress said,
that's going to be a nightmare, and we decide Wellstone,
for whatever reasons.
Now don't we have to focus on whether
Congress can say that or whether it can't?
JUSTICE STEVENS: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: And I don't know why it
cannot say it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Congress also said if you
strike down the Wellstone amendment, we want the Snowe-
Jeffords amendment.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's true.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And why shouldn't we
follow that direction?
GENERAL KAGAN: If you strike down the
Wellstone amendment, what is left is the Snowe-Jeffords
amendment --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
GENERAL KAGAN: -- which allows nonprofit
organizations of the kind here to fund these ads out of
separate bank accounts, not PACs just separate bank
accounts --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Correct.
GENERAL KAGAN: -- which include only
individual expenditures.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then why is that not the
-- the wisest narrow solution of the problem before us?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, it is -- it is
certainly a narrower and I think better solution than a
facial invalidation of the whole statute.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, what do you
-- what do you understand to be the compelling interest
that the Court articulated in Austin?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that what the Court
articulated in Austin -- and, of course, in the
government briefs we have suggested that Austin did not
articulate what we believe to be the strongest
compelling interest, which is the anticorruption
interest. But what the Court articulated in Austin was
essentially a concern about corporations using the
corporate form to appropriate other people's money for
expressive purposes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. So but you
-- you have more or less -- "abandoned" is too strong a
word, but as you say you have relied on a different
interest, the quid pro quo corruption. And you -- you
articulate on page 11 of your brief -- you recognize
that this Court has not accepted that interest as a
compelling interest.
So isn't it the case that as you view Austin
it is kind of up for play in the sense that you would
ground it on an interest that the Court has never
recognized?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, a couple of points.
The first thing is, as you say, we have not abandoned
Austin. We have simply said that in addition --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- to other people's money
interest that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where in your --
where in your supplemental briefing do you say that this
aggregation of wealth interest supports Austin?
GENERAL KAGAN: I would not really call it
an aggregation of wealth interest. I would say that
it's -- it's a concern about corporate use of other
people's money to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Putting it outside,
putting the quid pro quo interest aside, where in your
supplemental briefing do you support the interest that
was articulated by the Court in Austin?
GENERAL KAGAN: Where we talk about
shareholder protection and where we talk about the
distortion of the electoral process that occurs when
corporations use their shareholders' money who may or
may not agree --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I understand that to
be a different interest. That is the shareholder
protection interest as opposed to the fact that
corporations have such wealth and they -- they distort
the marketplace.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I -- I think that they
are connected because both come --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- so am I right
then in saying that in the supplemental briefing you do
not rely at all on the market distortion rationale on
which Austin relied; not the shareholder rationale, not
the quid pro quo rationale, the market distortion issue.
These corporations have a lot of money.
GENERAL KAGAN: We do not rely at all on
Austin to the extent that anybody takes Austin to be
suggesting anything about the equalization of a speech
market. So I know that that's the way that many people
understand the distortion rationale of Austin, and if
that's the way the Court understands i, we do not rely
at all on that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if we have to
preserve -- if we are going to preserve Austin we have
to accept your invitation that the quid pro quo interest
supports the holding there or the shareholder protection
interest.
GENERAL KAGAN: I would say either the quid
pro quo interest, the corruption interest or the
shareholder interest, or what I would say is a -- is
something related to the shareholder interest that is in
truth my view of Austin, which is a view that when
corporations use other people's money to electioneer,
that is a harm not just to the shareholders themselves
but a sort of a broader harm to the public that comes
from distortion of the electioneering that is done by
corporations.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's -- let's talk about
overbreadth. You've -- let's assume that that is a
valid interest. What percentage of the total number of
corporations in the country are not single shareholder
corporations? The local hairdresser, the local auto
repair shop, the local new car dealer -- I don't know
any small business in this country that isn't
incorporated, and the vast majority of them are
sole-shareholder-owned.
Now this statute makes it unlawful for all
of them to do the things that you are worried about, you
know, distorting other -- the interests of other
shareholders. That is vast overbreadth.
GENERAL KAGAN: You know, I think that the
single shareholders can present these corruption
problems. Many, many closed corporations, single
shareholder corporations --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not talking about the
corruption interest. You -- you have your quid pro quo
argument, that's another one. We get to that when we
get there. But as far as the interest you are now
addressing, which is those shareholders who don't agree
with this political position are being somehow cheated,
that doesn't apply probably to the vast majority of
corporations in this country.
GENERAL KAGAN: You are quite right,
Justice Scalia, when -- we say when it comes to single
shareholders, the kind of "other people's money"
interests, the shareholder protection interests do not
apply. There --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So that can't be the
justification --
GENERAL KAGAN: There --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- because if it were, the
statute would be vastly overbroad.
GENERAL KAGAN: There the strongest
justification is the anticorruption interest.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, with respect to that
what is your answer to the argument that more than half
the States, including California and Oregon, Virginia,
Washington State, Delaware, Maryland, a great many
others, permit independent corporate expenditures for
just these purposes? Now have they all been overwhelmed
by corruption? A lot of money is spent on elections in
California; has -- is there a record that the
corporations have corrupted the political process there?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think the experience of
some half the States cannot be more important than the
0-year old judgment of Congress that these
expenditures would corrupt the Federal system, and I
think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Congress has a
self-interest. I mean, we -- we are suspicious of
congressional action in the First Amendment area
precisely because we -- at least I am -- I doubt that
one can expect a body of incumbents to draw election
restrictions that do not favor incumbents. Now is that
excessively cynical of me? I don't think so.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think, Justice Scalia,
it's wrong. In fact, corporate and union money go
overwhelmingly to incumbents. This may be the single
most self-denying thing that Congress has ever done. If
you look -- if you look at the last election cycle and
look at corporate PAC money and ask where it goes, it
goes ten times more to incumbents than to challengers,
and in the prior election cycle even more than that.
And for an obvious reason, because when
corporations play in the political process, they want
winners, they want people who will produce outcomes for
them, and they know that the way to get those outcomes,
the way to get those winners is to invest in incumbents,
and so that's what they do. As I said, in double digits
times more than they invest in challengers. So I think
that that -- that that rationale, which is undoubtedly
true in many contexts, simply is not the case with
respect to this case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But under your position,
if corporations A, B, and C, are called to Washington
every Monday morning by a high-ranking administrative
official or a high-ranking member of the Congress with a
committee chairmanship and told to tow the line and to
tell their directors and shareholders what the policy
ought to be, some other corporation can't object to that
during the election cycle. The government silences a
corporate objector, and those corporations may have the
most knowledge of this on the subject.
Corporations have lots of knowledge about
environment, transportation issues, and you are
silencing them during the election.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: When other corporations,
via -- because of the very fact you just point out, have
already been used and are being used by the government
to express its views; and you say another corporation
can't object to that.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, to the extent,
Justice Kennedy, that you are talking about what goes on
in the halls of Congress, of course corporations can
lobby members of Congress in the same way that they
could before this legislation. What this legislation is
designed to do, because of its anticorruption interest,
is to make sure that that lobbying is just persuasion
and it's not coercion. But in addition to that, of
course corporations have many opportunities to speak
outside the halls of Congress.
JUSTICE STEVENS: One of the amicus briefs
objects to -- responds to Justice Kennedy's problem by
saying that the problem is we have got to contribute to
both parties, and a lot of them do, don't they?
GENERAL KAGAN: A lot of them do, which is a
suggestion about how corporations engage the political
process and how corporations are different from
individuals in this respect. You know, an individual
can be the wealthiest person in the world but few of
us -- maybe some -- but few of us are only our economic
interests. We have beliefs, we have convictions; we
have likes and dislikes. Corporations engage the
political process in an entirely different way and this
is what makes them so much more damaging.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's not --
I'm sorry, but that seems rather odd. A large
corporation just like an individual has many diverse
interests. A corporation may want to support a
particular candidate, but they may be concerned just as
you say about what their shareholders are going to think
about that. They may be concerned that the shareholders
would rather they spend their money doing something
else. The idea that corporations are different than
individuals in that respect, I just don't think holds
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, all I was suggesting,
Mr. Chief Justice, is that corporations have actually a
fiduciary obligation to their shareholders to increase
value. That's their single purpose, their goal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if a candidate --
take a tobacco company, and a candidate is running on
the platform that they ought to make tobacco illegal,
presumably that company would maximize its shareholders'
interests by opposing the election of that individual.
GENERAL KAGAN: But everything is geared
through the corporation's self-interest in order to
maximize profits, in order to maximize revenue, in order
to maximize value. Individuals are more complicated
than that. So that when corporations engage the
political process, they do it with that set of you know,
blinders -- I don't mean it to be pejorative, because
that's what we want corporations to do, is to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I suppose some
do, but let's say if you have ten individuals and they
each contribute $1,000 to a corporation, and they say,
"we want this corporation to convey a particular
message," why can't they do that, when if they did that
as partnership, it would be all right?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, it sounds to me as
though the corporation that you were describing is a
corporation of the kind we have in this case, where one
can assume that the members all sign on to the
corporation's ideological mission, where the corporation
in fact has an ideological mission.
JUSTICE SCALIA: General Kagan, most -- most
corporations are indistinguishable from the individual
who owns them, the local hairdresser, the new auto
dealer -- dealer who has just lost his dealership and --
and who wants to oppose whatever Congressman he thinks
was responsible for this happening or whatever
Congressman won't try to patch it up by -- by getting
the auto company to undo it. There is no distinction
between the individual interest and the corporate
interest. And that is true for the vast majority of
corporations.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yet this law freezes all of
them out.
GENERAL KAGAN: To the extent that we are
only talking about single shareholder corporations, I
guess I would ask why it's any burden on that single
shareholder to make the expenditures to participate in
the political person in the way that person wants to
outside the corporate forum? So single shareholders
aren't suffering any burden here; they can do everything
that they could within the corporate form, outside the
corporate form. They probably don't get the tax breaks
that they would get inside the corporate form, but I'm
not sure anything else is very different.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, he wants to put up a
sign --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Ultra Vires would take
care of about 90 percent of the small corporations that
Justice Scalia is talking about. They can't just --
they can't even give money to charities sometimes
because of Ultra Vires. Giving political contributions
is not typical for corporate activity.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is -- I -- I remember
spending quite a few days one summer reading through
,000 pages of opinion in the D.C. Circuit. And I came
away with the distinct impression that Congress has
built an enormous record of support for this bill in the
evidence.
And my recollection is, but it is now a
couple of years old, that there was a lot of information
in that which suggested that many millions of voters
think, at the least, that large corporate and union
expenditures or contributions in favor of a candidate
lead the benefited political figure to decide quite
specifically in favor of the -- of the contributing or
expending organization, the corporation or the union.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, that's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, it was on the basis of
that, I think, that this Court upheld the law in BCRA.
But we have heard from the other side there isn't much
of a record on this.
So, if you could save me some time here,
perhaps you could point me, if I am right, to those
thousand pages of opinion and tens of thousands of
underlying bits of evidence where there might be support
for that proposition?
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, that's exactly right,
Justice Breyer, that in addition to the 100-year old
judgment that Congress believes this is necessary, that
very recently members of Congress and others created a
gigantic record showing that there was corruption and
that there was the appearance of corruption.
And in that record, many times senators,
former senators talk about the way in which fundraising
is at the front of their mind in everything that they do
the way in which they grant access, the way in which
they grant influence, and the way in which outcomes
likely change as a result of that fundraising.
JUSTICE BREYER: BCRA has changed all that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, could I
ask, it seems -- to your shareholder protection
rationale, isn't it extraordinarily paternalistic for
the government to take the position that shareholders
are too stupid to keep track of what their corporations
are doing and can't sell their shares or object in the
corporate context if they don't like it?
GENERAL KAGAN: I don't think so, Mr. Chief
Justice. I mean, I, for one, can't keep stack of what
my -- where I hold --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have a busy job.
You can't expect everybody to do that.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: It's not that -- it's not
that I have a busy job.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it is
extraordinary -- I mean, the -- the idea and as I
understand the rationale, we -- we the government, big
brother, has to protect shareholders from themselves.
They might give money, they might buy shares in a
corporation and they don't know that the corporation is
taking out radio ads. The government has to keep an eye
on their interests.
GENERAL KAGAN: I appreciate that. It's not
that I have a busy job, it's that I, like most
Americans, own shares through mutual funds. If you
don't know where your mutual funds are investing, so you
don't know where you are --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it is -- I mean,
I understand.  So it is a paternalistic interest, we the
government have to protect you naive shareholders.
GENERAL KAGAN: In a world in which most
people own stock through mutual funds, in a world where
people own stock through retirement plans in which they
have to invest, they have no choice, I think it's very
difficult for individual shareholders to be able to
monitor what each company they own assets in is doing or
even to know the extent of the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In that respect, it's
unlike the union, because the -- the worker who does not
want to affiliate with a union cannot have funds from
his own pocket devoted to political causes. But there
is no comparable check for corporations.
GENERAL KAGAN: That's exactly right,
Justice Ginsburg. In the union context, of course, it's
a constitutional right that the unions give back
essentially the funds that any union member or employee
in the workplace does not want used for electoral
purposes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Does that mean that
unions should be taken out, because there isn't the
same -- the shareholder protection interest doesn't --
there is no parallel for the union?
GENERAL KAGAN: You are right about that.
But I -- the government believes that with respect to
unions, the anticorruption interest is as strong, and
that unions should be kept in.
I think what your point suggests, that
the -- that the union member point suggests why Congress
might have thought that there was a compelling interest
to protect corporate shareholders in the same way that,
let's say, dissenting union members are protected by the
Constitution. There is no State action, of course, so
there is no constitutional right in the corporate
context.
But Congress made a judgment that it was an
important value that shareholders have this choice, have
the ability both to invest in our country's assets and
also to be able to choose our country's leaders.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not investing
in our country's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In the course of this
argument, have you covered point two?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: I very much appreciate --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I would like to know
what it is, so that I -- my notes are complete.
GENERAL KAGAN: I very appreciate that,
Justice Kennedy. I think I did cover point two, which
was an explanation of some of the questions that the
Chief Justice asked me about what interests the
government was suggesting motivated these laws and are
compelling enough such that this Court certainly should
not invalidate these laws.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I take it we have
never accepted your shareholder protection interest.
This is a new argument.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that that's fair.
Certainly Bellotti does not accept it. I would think --
you know, National Right to Work is an interesting
opinion, because National Right to Work accepts for a
unanimous court both the shareholder protection argument
and the anticorruption argument with respect to the
section 441b in particular.
Now, in later cases the Court has suggested
that National Right to Work was only focused on
contributions. If you read National Right to Work, that
distinction really does not -- it's not evident on the
face of the opinion, and I think Chief Justice Rehnquist
at later -- in a later dissent suggested that he had
never understood it that way.
But -- so National Right to Work is a
confusion on this point. It --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I guess other
than that, and I think there may be some ambiguity
there, but I wouldn't say NRWC is a holding on
shareholder protection. So to the extent that you
abandoned the original rationale in Austin, and
articulated different rationales, you have two, the quid
pro quo corruption interest and the shareholder
protection interest --
GENERAL KAGAN: Which we think is not in
Austin.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Austin, I thought,
was based on the aggregation of immense wealth by
corporations.
GENERAL KAGAN: Again, Austin is not the
most lucid opinion. But the way we understand Austin,
what Austin was suggesting was that the corporate form
gave corporations significant assets, other people's
money that when the corporations spent those assets --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can you -- can you
give me the citation to the page in Austin where we
accepted the shareholder protection rationale?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think it comes when the --
when the Court is distinguishing MCFL. And the message
of that distinction of MCFL is the shareholder
protection interest? But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do the words
"shareholder" -- I don't know, do the words "shareholder
protection" appear in the Austin opinion?
GENERAL KAGAN: I honestly don't know,
Mr. Chief Justice. And -- and I don't want to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If they don't --
let's assume they don't, then I get back to my question,
which is, you are asking us to defend the Austin or
support or continue the Austin opinion on the basis of
two rationales that we have never accepted, shareholder
protection and quid pro quo corruption?
GENERAL KAGAN: I would say on the quid pro
quo corruption, of course you have accepted that
rationale --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In the context of
contributions, not expenditures.
GENERAL KAGAN: That's correct. And I think
what has changed since -- since that time is the BCRA
record that Justice Breyer suggested, which was very
strong on the notion that there was no difference when
it came to corporate contributions and expenditures,
that there actually was no difference between the two.
That they --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that a yes? Is
that a yes? In other words, you are asking us to uphold
Austin on the basis of two arguments, two principles,
two compelling interests we have never accepted, in
expenditure context.
GENERAL KAGAN: In this -- in this
particular context, fair enough. But, you know, I
think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And to undercut Buckley in
so doing?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I don't think so,
because I do think Buckley was about individuals rather
than corporations, and Buckley was in 1976, not in 2009,
after the very extensive record that was created in
BCRA.
I see my time is up. I don't --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May I ask you one
question that was highlighted in the prior argument, and
that was if Congress could say no TV and radio ads,
could it also say no newspaper ads, no campaign
biographies? Last time the answer was, yes, Congress
could, but it didn't. Is that -- is that still the
government's answer?
GENERAL KAGAN: The government's answer has
changed, Justice Ginsburg.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: It is still true that BCRA
3, which is the only statute involved in this case,
does not apply to books or anything other than
broadcast; 441b does, on its face, apply to other media.
And we took what the Court -- what the Court's -- the
Court's own reaction to some of those other
hypotheticals very seriously. We went back, we
considered the matter carefully, and the government's
view is that although 441b does cover full-length books,
that there would be quite good as-applied challenge to
any attempt to apply 441b in that context.
And I should say that the FEC has never
applied 441b in that context. So for 60 years a book
has never been at issue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What happened to the
overbreadth doctrine? I mean, I thought our doctrine in
the Fourth Amendment is if you write it too broadly, we
are not going to pare it back to the point where it's
constitutional. If it's overbroad, it's invalid. What
has happened to that.
GENERAL KAGAN: I don't think that it would
be substantially overbroad, Justice Scalia, if I tell
you that the FEC has never applied this statute to a
book. To say that it doesn't apply to books is to take
off, you know, essentially nothing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But we don't put our
-- we don't put our First Amendment rights in the hands
of FEC bureaucrats; and if you say that you are not
going to apply it to a book, what about a pamphlet?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think a -- a pamphlet
would be different. A pamphlet is pretty classic
electioneering, so there is no attempt to say that 441 b
only applies to video and not to print. It does --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what if the
particular -- what if the particular movie involved here
had not been distributed by Video on Demand? Suppose
that people could view it for free on Netflix over the
internet? Suppose that free DVDs were passed out.
Suppose people could attend the movie for free in a
movie theater; suppose the exact text of this was
distributed in a printed form. In light of your
retraction, I have no idea where the government would
draw the line with respect to the medium that could be
prohibited.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, none of those things,
again, are covered.
JUSTICE ALITO: No, but could they? Which
of them could and which could not? I understand you to
say books could not.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, I think what you --
what we're saying is that there has never been an
enforcement action for books. Nobody has ever
suggested -- nobody in Congress, nobody in the
administrative apparatus has ever suggested that books
pose any kind of corruption problem, so I think that
there would be a good as-applied challenge with respect
to that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're -- you are a
lawyer advising somebody who is about to come out with a
book and you say don't worry, the FEC has never tried to
send somebody to prison for this. This statute covers
it, but don't worry, the FEC has never done it. Is that
going to comfort your client? I don't think so.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But this -- this statute
doesn't cover. It doesn't cover books.
GENERAL KAGAN: No, no, that's exactly
right. The only statute that is involved in this case
does not cover books. So 441b which --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does cover books.
GENERAL KAGAN: -- which does cover books,
except that I have just said that there would be a good
as-applied challenge and that there has been no
administrative practice of ever applying it to the
books. And also only applies to express advocacy,
right? 203 has -- is -- is -- has a broader category of
the functional equivalent of express advocacy, but 441b
is only express advocacy, which is a part of the reason
why it has never applied to a book. One cannot imagine
very many books that would meet the definition of
express advocacy as this Court has expressed that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, I'm sorry, we
suggested some in the last argument. You have a history
of union organizing and union involvement in politics,
and the last sentence says in light of all this, vote
for Jones.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that that wouldn't
be covered, Mr. Chief Justice. The FEC is very careful
and says this in all its regulations to view matters as
a whole. And as a whole that book would not count as
express advocacy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
Mr. Waxman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SETH WAXMAN
ON BEHALF OF SENATORS JOHN McCAIN, ET AL.,
AS AMICI CURIAE,
IN SUPPORT OF THE APPELLEE
MR. WAXMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The requirement that corporations fund
electoral advocacy the same way individuals do, that is
with money voluntarily committed by people associated
with the corporation, is grounded in interests that are
so compelling that 52 years ago, before Buckley was
decided, before FECA was enacted, before Buckley-style
quid pro quo corruption was ever addressed, this Court
explained that, quote: "What is involved here is the
integrity of our electoral process and not less the
responsibility of the individual citizen for the
successful functioning of that process."
If the Court now wishes to reconsider the
existence and extent of the interests that underlie that
sentiment expressed for the Court by Justice Frankfurter
in the context of a prosecution of union officials for
running television ads supporting political candidates,
it should do so in a case in which those interests are
forthrightly challenged with a proper and full record
below.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One of the amicus
briefs, I'm not -- maybe it's professor Hayward, if I am
getting that right -- suggested the history of this 1947
provision was such that it really wasn't enforced
because people were concerned about the First Amendment
interests and that the courts to the extent cases were
brought did everything they could to avoid enforcing the
limitations.
MR. WAXMAN: Well, I don't recall who the
professor was either, Mr. Chief Justice, but I do recall
pretty well the history that was recounted -- I would
say the history that was recounted by this Court in the
Auto Workers case, in CIO, in the Pipefitters case,
which is quite inconsistent with that. We've never had
this case -- until this Court's supplemental order, we
never had a case that challenged directly, quote,
"Austin" and Austin-style corruption, which is a term I
think that is quite misleading.
When the sober-minded Elihu Root was moved
to stand up in 1894 and urged the people of the United
States, and urged the Congress of the United States, to
enact legislation that would address, quote, "a
constantly growing evil which has done more to shake the
confidence of plain people of small means of this
country in our political institutions than any practice
which has ever obtained since the founding of our
government," he was not engaging in a high level
discussion about political philosophy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But he was talking about
contributions in that context. That's quite clear.
MR. WAXMAN: He -- with all due respect,
Justice Kennedy, I don't think that there was any
distinction whatsoever in that time between the
distinction that this Court came to understand as a
result of FECA, and its adjudication of FECA and that --
really the prehistory of Taft-Hartley, between
contributions expenditures.
For this reason, Justice Kennedy, was that
what Root said was the idea -- and I am quoting now from
his speech which is also partly reprinted in this
Court's opinion in McConnell -- the idea is to prevent
the great companies, the great aggregations of wealth
from using corporate funds directly or indirectly to
send members of the legislature to these halls in order
to vote for their protection and the advancement of
their interests as against those of the public.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Great aggregations of
wealth. The brief by the Chamber of Commerce, the
amicus brief by the Chamber of Commerce points out that
percent of its members employ less than 100 people.
These are not aggregations of great wealth. You are not
talking about the railroad barons and the rapacious
trusts of the Elihu Root era; you are talking mainly
about small business corporations.
MR. WAXMAN: Justice Scalia, I take your
point and I think you have made this point forceful lily
many times before. A unanimous court in National Right
to Work Committee concluded that Congress was entitled
to make the judgment that it would treat in order to
address this root evil, a problem of such concern that
it goes to the very foundation of the democratic
republican exercise, that is, the notion of integrity in
representative government.
Now this -- this case, of course, is not a
case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand that
answer. I mean, if that's what you were concerned
about, what Elihu Root was concerned about, you could
have said all corporations that have a net worth of more
than, you know, so much or whatever. That is not what
Congress did. It said all corporations.
MR. WAXMAN: Right. And Justice Scalia, if
a small corporation or even any corporation of any sort
wants to bring an as-applied challenge to 441b or a
State law analogue and say, you know, I am not the
problem that Theodore Roosevelt and Elihu Root was
addressed at; there isn't a compelling interest because
I only have three employees and $8,000 in my bank
account, that's fine. But what is extraordinary, truly
extraordinary, given the sentiments that underlay the
Tillman Act and the Taft-Hartley Act is that we would be
having a discussion today about the constitutionality of
a law that has been on the books forever when no party,
no corporation, has ever raised the challenge. I well
recall --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You say it's been on --
it's been on the books forever. But, No. 1, the
phenomenon of -- of television ads where we get
information about scientific discovery and -- and
environment and transportation issues from corporations
who after all have patents because they know something,
that -- that is different. And the -- the history you
applied apply to contributions, not to those kinds of
expenditures.
MR. WAXMAN: Justice Kennedy, first of all,
I -- I think it is actually true that patents are owned
by individuals and not corporations. But be that as it
may, there is no doubt -- I am not here saying that this
Court should reconsider Bellotti on first principles any
more than I am saying that it shouldn't consider Austin
on first principles. Corporations can and do speak
about a wide range of public policy issues, and since
the controlling opinion was issued in Wisconsin Right to
Life, the -- the kind of campaign-related speech that
corporations can't engage in, in the pre-election period
is limited to the functional equivalent of expressed
advocacy and nothing else.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Waxman, all of this talk
about 100 years and 50 years is perplexing. It sounds
like the sort of sound bites that you hear on TV. The
-- the fact of the matter is that the only cases that
are being -- that may possibly be reconsidered are
McConnell and Austin. And they don't go back 50 years,
and they don't go back 100 years.
MR. WAXMAN: My point here is, Justice Alito
-- and I don't mean to be -- to be demeaning this Court
with sound bites. The point is that what -- Austin was,
to be sure, the very first case in which this Court had
to decide -- actually had to decide whether or not the
prohibition on corporate treasury funded campaign speech
could properly be limited and was supporting by a
compelling interest. All I am suggesting -- and I hope
that if you take nothing else from my advocacy today it
will be this -- is that we have here a case in which the
Court has asked a question that essentially goes to the
bona fides, that is, the factual predicates of the
interests that have been viewed as compelling in Austin,
in MCFL, in McConnell itself, whether you call it the
corrosive effect of corporate wealth, whether you call
it, quote, "shareholder protection" --
JUSTICE ALITO: And my point is that there
is nothing unusual whatsoever about a case in which a
party before the Court says, my constitutional rights
were violated, and there is no prior decision of this
Court holding that what was done is constitutional. And
in that situation is it an answer to that argument that
this has never been challenged before? The Court has
never held that it was unconstitutional? It has been
accepted up until this point by the general public that
this is -- that this is constitutional? No, that is not
regarded as an answer to that question.
MR. WAXMAN: Mr. Olson is -- was quite
right -- either Mr. Olson or Mr. Abrams, I find it so
difficult to tell the two apart. One of them was
saying, well, it's, you know -- yes, I think in response
to Justice Sotomayor's question, you know, about there
is no factual record here. There is absolutely nothing
in this case.
And the response was, well, it's the
government's burden. The government has to prove that
any restriction that it imposes passes strict scrutiny.
Fair enough, but the question has to be
raised. The issue has to be raised. If the -- if
Austin, Justice Alito, or the compelling interests that
Austin and McConnell relied on were forthrightly
challenged in a case, the government would have the
option --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, Mr. Waxman,
the government did have that opportunity, and the
government compiled a record. And when the Citizens
United abandoned that position -- you are quite right,
they changed their course -- the government and the
district court complained that it had to go to all this
work to develop this record, and yet we hear nothing
about what the record showed.
MR. WAXMAN: Well, that's because the
ultimate -- I assume I have your permission to answer.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
MR. WAXMAN: The -- the only challenges that
were litigated in the district court -- and they largely
were related to disclosure -- were very direct
as-applied challenges that had -- that did nothing
whatsoever to implicate the foundation of McConnell or
Austin. And all I'm saying is, if you want to re-
examine the predicates, the existence and magnitude of
interests that Congress has, going back a -- whether
it's 60 years or 100 years, and courts, whether it has
been the actual rationale of the decision or a predicate
of the rationale of the decision, you ought to do it in
a case where the -- where the issue is squarely
presented so that the government can do what it did in
McConnell and in another context in Michigan v. Grutter
when it suggested that Aderand had undermined this
Court's controlling opinion in Bakke. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Waxman. Mr. Olson five minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
MR. OLSON: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
The words that I would leave with this Court are the
Solicitor General's. The government's position has
changed. The government's position has changed as to
what media might be covered by congressional power to
censor and -- and ban speech by corporations. Now we
learn, contrary to what we heard in March, that books
couldn't be prohibited but pamphlets could be
prohibited. We also learn --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's not -- the --
the statute that we are involved in, in this case does
not cover those.
MR. OLSON: Unless they are engaged in,
quote, "expressed advocacy." And the other way in which
the government has changed its position, if I listened
carefully, is what type of corporation might be covered.
The government now says that it wouldn't -- the -- the
FEC is now willing to recede from its regulations which
explicitly covered this corporation, and I don't know as
I stand here today what kind of corporations the
government would choose to prosecute.
Remember, the Federal Election Commission,
which didn't even have a quorum and couldn't function at
all for six months during the important election year of
08 --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If the FEC chooses to
prosecute only those who do not -- who do not rely
exclusively on individual contributions.
MR. OLSON: Well, that's your question from
before.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes. I want to see he
gets it.
MR. OLSON: And that -- (a), it wouldn't --
this corporation accepted a small amount, $2,000 out of
-- out of the funding of this, so that wouldn't solve
the problem for my corporation, my client's corporation.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it would solve it for
the advertising, and there are two things. There is the
long Hillary document and the advertisements. It would
cover those.
MR. OLSON: If -- but the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And they are the only --
only ones that clearly violate the statute.
MR. OLSON: My point is that the overbreadth
in this statute -- that solves the problem by saying
that corporations still can't speak, and if you don't
have anything to do with them, you -- you -- they wear a
scarlet letter that says "C." If you accept one dollar
of funding, then you had better make darn sure that when
a check comes in for $100 from the XYZ hardware store in
the neighborhood, that it wasn't a corporation that you
used to -- to make a documentary about a candidate.
The other way in which the government's
position has changed is we do not know --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Does that mean you
disagree with the NRA's submission?
MR. OLSON: I -- I submit that it does not
solve the problem. It would lead exactly --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If it solved the problem
as it would for the advertising, would it be an
appropriate solution?
MR. OLSON: It -- I can't say that it -- if
it solved the problem, because it doesn't solve the
problem of prohibiting all corporate speech. And I
think -- and I am submitting, Justice Stevens, that that
is unconstitutional. I think what you are suggesting is
that some limitation that -- what -- what you were
suggesting is not a whole lot different than PAC. It
would lead, I think Justice Breyer was saying, to an
accounting nightmare. It would be --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it is a nightmare that
Congress endorsed in the Snowe-Jeffords Amendment.
MR. OLSON: Well, but the -- but the
Wellstone Amendment sort of in a sense repealed it.
JUSTICE STEVENS: We have held the Wellstone
Amendment literally cannot be applied.
MR. OLSON: Well --
JUSTICE STEVENS: We unanimously held that.
MR. OLSON: I think what -- what the -- my
response is that that does not solve the problem of
inhibiting --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You do not endorse the
NRA's position?
MR. OLSON: No, we don't Justice Stevens,
and -- and, as I said, it would not exempt my clients.
The other -- the third way in which the government has
changed its position is its rationale for this
prohibition in the first place. Is it corruption? Is
it shareholder protection? Is it equalization?
There was some dispute. I heard the
Solicitor General say that the equalization rationale
was something the government disavowed. It wasn't what
Austin said, the government -- the government said. And
I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Justice Marshall said
that he was not trying to equalize all voices in the
political process. He has a sentence that says, well,
that's not what the rationale of this case is.
MR. OLSON: I don't -- I don't -- with all
due respect Justice Ginsburg, the words that jump out at
me are the words from page 665 that say the desire to
counterbalance those advantages unique to the corporate
forum is the state's compelling interest in this case.
That sounds to me like -- like equalization.
I don't know. I am -- I am representing an
individual who wants to speak about something that's the
most important thing that goes on in our democracy. I'm
told it's a felony. I am not -- and I -- I don't know
what the rational basis is. It's overbroad. Now I hear
about this shareholder -- protecting shareholders.
There is not a word in the congressional record with
respect to the -- which was before the Court in the
McConnell case about protecting shareholders. As the
Bellotti case pointed out, that would be overbroad
anyway because this statute applies to every --
JUSTICE BREYER: Actually I read that
sentence that you just read as meaning the corporation
is an artificial person in respect to which the State
creates many abilities and capacities, and the State is
free also to create some disabilities and capacities.
Not a statement about balancing rich and poor.
MR. OLSON: Well, it -- it -- it strikes me
that it is, because it follows the words that say
corporations are given unique advantages to aggregate
wealth and that we must take away that advantage by
equalizing the process. I think that's the plain
meaning but my point I guess is -- if I may finish this
sentence.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Briefly.
MR. OLSON: My point is that the government
here has an overbroad statute that covers every
corporation irrespective of what its stockholders think,
irrespective of whether it's big, and whether it's
general -- a big railroad baron or anything like that,
and it doesn't know, as it stands here today two years
after this movie was offered for -- to the public for
its view, what media might be covered, what type of
corporation might be covered and what compelling
justification or narrow standard would be applied to
this form of speech.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the case in the
