IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
SAFFORD UNIFIED SCHOOL :
DISTRICT #1, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 08-479
APRIL REDDING. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 21, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:12 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MATTHEW W. WRIGHT, ESQ., Phoenix, Ariz.; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
DAVID O'NEIL, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
reversal.
ADAM B. WOLF, ESQ., Santa Cruz, Cal.; on behalf of the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MATTHEW W. WRIGHT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
DAVID O'NEIL, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting reversal 24
ADAM B. WOLF, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 36
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MATTHEW W. WRIGHT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 62
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:12 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-479, Safford
Unifed School District v. Redding.
Mr. Wright.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MATTHEW W. WRIGHT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. WRIGHT: Mr. Chief Justice, may it
please the Court:
The search of Savana Redding in this case
was constitutional because Mr. Wilson had reason to
suspect that she possessed contraband which posed a
health and safety risk. Therefore, searching any place
where she might be reasonably hiding that contraband was
constitutionally permissible.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Any place, even
though he had perhaps no reasonable suspicion to suspect
that she was hiding the contraband in her underwear?
MR. WRIGHT: Your Honor, Mr. Chief Justice,
as long as he had reason to suspect, which we believe
the evidence does show, he was entitled to search any
place where the contraband might be reasonably hidden.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Any place? I mean,
prison inmates, for example, are subject to much more
intrusive searches. Are you suggesting that would have
been justified in this case?
MR. WRIGHT: No, Your Honor. I'm -- I'm
suggesting that where it might be reasonably hidden is
based on an administrator's experience and certainly is
proven out by the reported cases that we've cite in the
reply on pages 8 and 9, which are that students often
will secrete items in and under their clothing. That is
not an uncommon thing to happen, although these kind of
intrusive searches are rare.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But I -- I think you're
really caught in -- in a dilemma here. Your answer
suggests that you would not have allowed a cavity search
in this case.
MR. WRIGHT: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But people have been known
to secrete contraband in -- in bodily cavities. What is
the -- what is the principle under which you would allow
a strip search but disallow a cavity search?
MR. WRIGHT: The principle is, Your Honor,
is that the common experience with schoolchildren, as --
as school officials have a relation to schoolchildren,
is such that they might hide things, and they do hide
things, in and under their clothing.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was there --
MR. WRIGHT: But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was there prior
experience in this particular school? Were there prior
occasions on which students had been strip-searched and
contraband found?
MR. WRIGHT: Your Honor, I don't know, and
that's not in the record, but I can tell that you that
that would not be the threshold requirement under this
Court's prior rulings to justify the search.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you -- I thought your
answer to Justice Scalia was that in the -- in the
school's experience, children do hide contraband in
their underwear but not in their body cavities.
MR. WRIGHT: Yes, Your Honor. To be more
specific, in the nationwide school experience, based on
the reported cases that we see, which are contained in
the reply at pages 8 and 9, we find that they hide them
in and under clothing, but I don't know of any case of
which I'm aware where there would be items secreted in
body cavities.
And I -- and I feel, Your Honor, that that
is a bright-line area because that -- that is -- that is
something that the Court can clearly say is off limits.
And --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Let me ask you about
another bright-line rule that I think you're assuming.
You -- you said in the course of describing the
justification for this search that one -- one of the
points of justification was that there was a health and
safety risk. And I assume from the way you put it that
you are grouping every drug, prescription or over the
counter, as posing a health and safety risk; is that
correct?
MR. WRIGHT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why -- why should we accept
that -- that blanket assumption? I mean, at some point
it gets silly. Having -- having an aspirin tablet does
not present a health and safety risk, and yet that's an
over-the-counter drug, and presumably you would have
gone through the same search for -- for an aspirin that
was conducted here.
MR. WRIGHT: For the very same reasons this
Court noted in T.L.O. 25 years ago, Your Honor, and that
is that the school officials have deemed, in their
judgment, that this is an important rule with regard to
health and safety. So --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, and I agree with you,
and I -- I don't have any question with this kind of a,
let's say, a -- a broad swath of judicial hands-off in
determining what is a risk and what isn't. But at some
point it becomes sufficiently questionable that I do
think we have to raise it. And if your rule would
criminalize -- I shouldn't say "criminalize" -- would
put aspirin in the contraband category and justify the
kind of search that went on here, I think we've reached
the questionable point. And I -- my question to you now
is, why haven't we?
MR. WRIGHT: Well, Your Honor, if -- if an
administrator in their judgment, in their reasonable
judgment, believes that any -- any drug poses a
potential health and safety risk, because they have the
custodial and tutelary responsibilities for those kids
-- and it's not like a criminal issue where they're
trying to prosecute; this is a case where they're trying
to protect -- because they have those kinds of
obligations to provide for the safety of children, to
provide an orderly educational environment, it is best
for this Court to defer to their judgment when they
believe that certain rules are important and not
second-guess those rules.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Had it been --
MR. WRIGHT: So long --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Had it been the case that,
as I recall, someone had -- well, students were popping
ibuprofen, weren't they?
MR. WRIGHT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess they might pop
aspirin as well. I'm not aware that one gets a high on
either one of those. Somebody in -- in the school had
gotten almost fatally ill about a year before this
incident; isn't that right?
MR. WRIGHT: Precisely, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: On over-the-counter drugs.
MR. WRIGHT: On a prescription medication
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A prescription, not over-
the-counter.
MR. WRIGHT: -- that a student brought to
school and that a student ingested, another student
ingested, and then was airlifted out in an ICU in a
near-fatal experience.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What was --
MR. WRIGHT: But just 7 days --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What was -- what was the
drug involved in that case?
MR. WRIGHT: I don't know, Your Honor, and
it's not in the record.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it certainly was not
ibuprofen?
MR. WRIGHT: Again, I don't know, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You said it was a
prescription drug.
MR. WRIGHT: It was a prescription drug.
And -- and 7 days before this event, Your Honor, just 7
days before, the student informant Romero had taken a
prescription drug. Again, I don't know what the type of
drug was, but he became violently ill, which caused he
and his mother to come talk to the administrator. So we
had those two recent events.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but he -- he was not
the one who identified Redding. It was her classmate.
MR. WRIGHT: Her friend Marissa Glines, yes,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And on that classmate's
say-so -- was the classmate ever asked, well, when did
you get this pill? Where did she give it to you?
MR. WRIGHT: Where -- the question, where
did this pill come from, was asked by the administrator.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean, what place. I
mean, the child is caught with the pills. She blames it
on her classmate. She says: She gave them to me. Did
the school ever bother to ask when in time she gave
them, where in location she gave them?
MR. WRIGHT: No, but that's clear from the
--
record, Your Honor. The reason for that is Jordan
Romero said to Mr. Wilson that morning: I just received
this pill from Marissa Glines. The plan is that a group
of these kids are going to take these pills at noon. So
it's contemporaneous.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it's contemporaneous
with the -- with the student who blamed the other child.
I'm asking if there's any link other than one child
caught with the pills blurts out that it was someone
else? The tip from the young man had nothing to do with
Redding; it had to do with Glines.
MR. WRIGHT: But the tip from the young man
goes to Glines, and the young man's tip becomes reliable
when Glines produces the fistful of pills that he said
she would have, plus other pills.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Maybe it becomes reliable
as to her, but it has nothing to do with Redding.
MR. WRIGHT: But, Your Honor, then it ties
in with the -- with the contraband -- excuse me -- the
planner that was laid open before Mr. Wilson when he
subsequently searches Savana Redding, and she admits to
him that that was her planner, but she denies any
knowledge of the contents. So did Marissa Glines. So
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did the school know what --
--
what particular pills it was searching for?
MR. WRIGHT: Not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did it know that -- what --
what the threat was was ibuprofen or aspirin or -- or
some prescription drug?
MR. WRIGHT: Not comprehensively, Your
Honor. What they knew was there was IBU 400s in an OTC
pill that was later identified. But he also knew there
was a variety of pills. What Mr. Wilson did not know --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How did he know it was an
OTC pill?
MR. WRIGHT: Because he --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Just by looking at it?
MR. WRIGHT: -- called poison control.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. WRIGHT: And -- and once that was
assessed --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was in it? Did he say
MR. WRIGHT: It was Naprosyn 200 milligrams.
And -- and, Your Honor, what -- that's a
good point because what Mr. Wilson doesn't know is what
other pills might be out there. He knows there's a
variety of pills, but he doesn't know of what type. He
doesn't know what amount.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Have you ever made -- has
your side of the case ever made the argument that it
needs this sort of blanket classification rule, any drug
over the counter or prescription, because when a, a pill
is found, they're not pharmacists, they don't know what
it is, and therefore they've got to have a blanket rule
or they simply cannot act effectively? I did not see
that argument in the briefs. Has that argument been
raised at any point?
MR. WRIGHT: Precisely, Your Honor. We have
argued that our administrators are not pharmacologically
trained?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Where did you argue it? I
mean, I want to know whether that argument is in the
case.
MR. WRIGHT: It's in the briefs.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is it? I don't remember
it. Do you remember a page? Do you have a page
reference offhand?
MR. WRIGHT: I don't have one offhand, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you say it's in your
brief?
MR. WRIGHT: I'm fairly -- fairly certain
it's in the brief.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay, I'll go back.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In the case, this case,
the school nurse -- the pills were given to the school
nurse and she identified what they were.
MR. WRIGHT: Precisely. And she called
poison control to figure that out, though, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Mr. Wright, could I ask
you this question. There may be an issue as to what the
assistant principal could reasonably infer from the
facts that were known by him, whether he could
reasonably infer facts that would create a reasonable
suspicion that there were drugs hidden in the
plaintiff's undergarments. Is that a question for --
for the finder of fact in a case like this, so that it
can't be -- there can't be summary judgment for either
side unless no reasonable factfinder could find to the
contrary?
MR. WRIGHT: The problem with that is, Your
Honor, it wouldn't comport with the notion that we need
to shield administrators from lawsuits and legal
liability.
JUSTICE ALITO: No, not on the question of
qualified immunity. On the issue of whether there is a
Fourth Amendment violation.
MR. WRIGHT: Whether or not that would be a
factual determination, as to whether he could reasonably
suspect that the pills would be there?
JUSTICE ALITO: Right.
MR. WRIGHT: I think -- I think it could
lend itself to that, Your Honor, but I would prefer that
the Court -- we would ask the Court and it's our
position that the Court would lay down a bright line
rule such that it wouldn't end up in a factual dispute,
and that bright line rule is this. Once you had reason
to suspect a student is possessing any contraband that
poses a health and safety risk, then searching any place
where that contraband may reasonably be found is
constitutional, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Any contraband, like the
black marker pencil that -- that astounded me. That was
contraband in that school, wasn't it, a black marker
pencil?
MR. WRIGHT: Well, for sniffing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, is that what they do?
MR. WRIGHT: It's a permanent marker.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They sniff them?
MR. WRIGHT: Well, that's the -- I mean, I'm
a school lawyer. That's what kids do, Your Honor,
unfortunately, Your Honor. But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Really?
MR. WRIGHT: But the point was is that the
rule -- the rule, Your Honor, is -- is grounded in the
notion that when there's a health and safety risk
because these people are charged and tasked with the
responsibility to keep these kids safe, they have to
have the opportunity to act flexibly, immediately, and
effectively when they're dealing with these risks.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there has to be -- I
mean, some -- the stark difference between this case and
T.L.O., in addition to the intrusiveness of the search,
was there was a teacher said: I caught those girls;
they were smoking in the bathroom. Here we have nothing
but this Glines identifying her classmate. And nothing
is done to check her veracity, nothing is done to follow
up on it at all. And the search is quite different from
the search of a purse that doesn't touch the child's
person.
MR. WRIGHT: Your Honor seems to be
concerned about the reliability of the tip in this case.
Your Honor, I would submit to you to that student tips
are the very thing that officials rely on probably the
most.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But an official could
follow up to see whether this child -- whether there is
a basis for what she said. But there were no questions
asked at all.
MR. WRIGHT: There was additional
corroborating evidence, Your Honor. There was -- there
was suspicion by direct implication and there was
suspicion by circumstantial corroboration. These two
kids could, in Mr. Wilson's mind -- he believed that
they were working together to conceal other types of
contraband.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, the school could keep
records on its students, like the police keep records on
confidential informants. So if -- unless this student
had a proven record of having accurately ratted out a
certain number of classmates in the past, she couldn't
be believed.
MR. WRIGHT: Except that, Your Honor,
there's a different incentive here. Students can be
disciplined if they -- if they tell tales. And so if
she tells a lie she faces the risk of discipline. In
addition to that, there was evidence that these kids
were friends, and he had reason to rely on that. He had
reason based on their association at the opening dance.
He had reason to believe that because --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What discipline did the
tipster receive? What discipline was the erroneous
tipster given?
MR. WRIGHT: Oh, there was no discipline
that I know of in the record, Your Honor. It's not in
the record and I do not know.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Was she subject to a civil
suit by the plaintiff in this case?
MR. WRIGHT: Was the person Marissa Glines,
the person who gave the tip?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
MR. WRIGHT: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could I come back to your
distinguishing a strip search from a cavity search.
What would you require before you would allow a cavity
search?
MR. WRIGHT: Nothing at all. A bright line
rule. I would not allow it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No cavity search in school,
no matter what?
MR. WRIGHT: We're not even clinically
trained to do that, Your Honor. I would submit that if
a child has something stuffed up one of their cavities
-- and I assume we mean private parts, the very private
parts -- that the first thing to do would be to send
them to the hospital. I mean, we just don't have that
clinical training.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Your basis -- your basis
for saying that, I guess, is just sort of the practical
one, we don't know how to do that type of thing. So far
as the legal principle on the basis of which you
justified this search, you could justify that search,
too, couldn't you?
MR. WRIGHT: On the legal basis I could see
that, Your Honor. I could see that result. But
practically --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But if -- if we hold in
your favor in this case and the next school district
says, all right, we're going to have classes in body
cavity searches, then there would be no legal basis, if
we accept your principle, for saying that's out of
bounds as a matter of the Fourth Amendment; isn't that
correct?
MR. WRIGHT: I see your concern. That's to
be left up to the local governments, Your Honor. As you
have mentioned, this Court has mentioned, in Ingraham
and Wright --
JUSTICE SOUTER: So it would not -- it would
not be out of bounds under the Fourth Amendment?
MR. WRIGHT: Technically, but it will be
controlled by the community. It would be controlled by
the local board. The community would never --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you know whether or not
in the Ninth Circuit in border search cases a body
cavity search can be conducted without a warrant? I
thought a warrant was required under the Ninth Circuit
rule. I could ask the government.
MR. WRIGHT: I just know that there has been
concern expressed over body cavity searches, even in the
prisoner environment and even in the border environment.
I can say to this Court you will not restrict or in any
way inhibit the discretion of an administrator by saying
you can't go there on a body cavity search, nor would
they want to, nor are they clinically trained to.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can I ask just a
follow-up on your answer to Justice Kennedy's earlier
question about whether the informant was subject to
civil suit. When you said no, did you mean she hadn't
been sued or that she could not be sued?
MR. WRIGHT: I'm sorry, Your Honor. That
she had not been sued.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There's one aspect of
this considering the reasonableness of the school
administrator's behavior. In addition to not following
up with Glines, after Redding was searched and nothing
was found, she was put in a chair outside the vice
principal's office for over 2 hours and her mother
wasn't called. What was the reason for that
humiliating, putting her in that humiliating situation?
MR. WRIGHT: Your Honor, that is not a
matter of the record, but the inference is that the --
that the investigation was still ongoing because there
was a group of kids, and at that time the administrator
was making efforts to try to make sure that he had
gathered all the drugs that might be on campus. And in
any event that wouldn't --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But how were they
investigating her when they did nothing but put her in a
chair outside the vice principal's office?
MR. WRIGHT: Well, Your Honor, I can see
where it might have been more reasonable in that sense
to have let her go back to class, but it certainly is
not a standard that would affect the constitutionality .
JUSTICE SCALIA: I assume a school can
assign a student to study hall. That's not considered a
government seizure. Isn't that an obvious part of the
parental supervision that a school exercises, sit here
and stay there.
MR. WRIGHT: That's exactly right, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Schools do that all the
time, don't they?
MR. WRIGHT: Yes. In fact, there was a
Ninth Circuit on the docket at the time, the Smith
versus McLaughlin case, where the plaintiff argued the
very thing, that she was detained for hours. And the
court recognized there -- I believe there was a
concurrence by Judge Kozinski -- that that's entirely
appropriate, that's where they are.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When was the -- when
was she detained there in relation to the lunchtime
period, which was when the other student had said that
all the kids were going to take these pills?
MR. WRIGHT: I believe it went through the
lunchtime period, Your Honor, the detainment.
In addition, Your Honor, I would like to
point out also that trying to restrict any more the rule
that I've laid out, as the United States Government has
suggested, respectfully, would cause more problems.
JUSTICE BREYER: But aren't there things
here that are a little extreme? I mean, if she's to be
believed, then she was really naked, and the two
administrators deny that, but you have to take her side
of the facts. So taking her side of the facts, why
couldn't the school administrators just do what they
said they did? That is, you leave her in her underwear,
tell her: Go shake her underwear. No reason to do any
more than that. Or if she is really embarrassed about
that, say: Go put on a swimming suit, you know. Shake
the swimming suit, no problem. People see you at the
beach all the time. Or call your mother.
I mean, you know, we can think of another --
a number of things that seem a lot less restrictive than
her version of what went on here.
MR. WRIGHT: May I offer two principles?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. WRIGHT: First, this Court has
recognized that the least intrusive means is not a
threshold prerequisite to a constitutional --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, but I mean, here
she is embarrassed if -- if what she says happened
happened. There seems no reason for that, and it seems
so easy. Put on your gym clothes, okay? I mean, she
does that every day. It is just such obvious
alternatives to having her be really naked.
MR. WRIGHT: Very true.
JUSTICE BREYER:
So that's what I -- I don't see any basis
for saying to the school administrator, you know, you
can do that. You can just turn her naked. I mean, it
just embarrasses her. What's the need for it?
MR. WRIGHT: In the record, Your Honor, she
did -- she did have her underpants on and her brassiere
still on.
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, but she says in the
record that they went further and required her to be
partly naked beyond just her underwear. They say --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I suppose you could
say that about any strip search, couldn't you: That
there is never a need for a strip search? You could
always give the -- you know, the suspected felon, you
know: Here, change into this suit. And -- and we
haven't adopted some such rule, have we?
MR. WRIGHT: No, Your Honor. You have
specifically said the fact that other reasonable
alternatives are available doesn't mean that the
alternative that was used or the actual search that was
done was unreasonable.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So that was my
question. My question was: Why wasn't it? I wasn't
asking about the law. I was asking: Why didn't they
choose one of these alternatives?
MR. WRIGHT: I'm sorry, Your Honor. I don't
-- I can't answer that question for Mr. Wilson, but I'm
sure that in the heat of the moment that that issue
wasn't thought through. And, of course, he wasn't
involved in the search because he's a male. Only the
females were involved in the search.
May I reserve the balance of my time, Your
Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Wright.
Mr. O'Neil.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID O'NEIL
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE, SUPPORTING REVERSAL
MR. O'NEIL: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Intrusive body searches in the school
context implicate fundamentally different expectations
of privacy than other -- other kinds of searches. For
that reason, they require greater justification under
the Fourth Amendment.
In the government's view, the best way to
give effect to that greater showing is to adhere to the
basic reasonable suspicion standard of T.L.O., but to
elaborate on that standard in two ways. First --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Before you get
started, do we have to reach the underlying merits or
can we just decide the qualified immunity issue?
MR. O'NEIL: The government agrees with the
parties and all amici in this case that this Court
should address the substantive Fourth Amendment issue.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Should -- should,
but must?
MR. O'NEIL: This Court could decide the
case on qualified immunity grounds alone.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, one of the defendants
doesn't have qualified immunity.
MR. O'NEIL: That's exactly right, Justice
Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So don't we have to, for
that defendant at least, decide the constitutional
question?
MR. O'NEIL: Well, this Court could remand
on Monell grounds for a hearing on that, which was not
addressed in --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would be, Mr.
O'Neil, the basis for the Monell claim? That would be
against the school district?
MR. O'NEIL: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What would the plaintiff
have to show to establish a claim under Monell?
MR. O'NEIL: The plaintiff would have to
show that this search was conducted pursuant to a -- an
official policy or that the vice principal was a person
who was acting with that authority. There are a number
of grounds that -- that the plaintiff could establish
the Monell claim on the basis of, but in this case the
Ninth Circuit did not address that. And, therefore, we
believe that this Court should not review in the first
instance, but if the Court were inclined to remand on
that ground to allow the Ninth Circuit to address it
before this Court reaches that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You -- you criticized the
Ninth Circuit in your brief for having a sliding scale
standard, which is a bad thing in your view. But it
seems to me that your standard comes close to that. You
call yours a differential level standard or something
like that?
MR. O'NEIL: No, Justice Kennedy. Our
standard is one of greater specificity in the
information, not a standard that rises and falls
depending on the level of intrusiveness.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you have to, under
your standard, have reason -- a reasonable suspicion
specifically that -- that the student is hiding the
contraband in the student's underwear?
MR. O'NEIL: That's correct, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now, if -- if you have a
reasonable suspicion that the student has drugs and you
search every other place, you search in the student's
--
pack, you search the student's outer garments, and you
have a reasonable suspicion that the student has drugs,
don't you have, after conducting all these other
searches, a reasonable suspicion that she has drugs in
her underpants?
MR. O'NEIL: No, Justice Scalia, we believe
that you don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: All right.
MR. O'NEIL: -- without -- without --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Your logic fails me.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you reasonably
suspect the student has drugs. You've searched
everywhere else. By God, the drugs must be in her
underpants.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, Justice Scalia, you
posited that the teacher began the search with
reasonable suspicion. And in that case, if you searched
the obvious places like a wallet, a pocket, a desk, a
locker, and you didn't find it in those places, the
logical conclusion would not be that it must be in the
student's underwear, but perhaps that the information
that you had --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That sounds like you
JUSTICE BREYER: -- putting things in their
underwear.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That sounds to me
like the sliding scale that you reject from the Ninth
Circuit.
MR. O'NEIL: No, because we believe that
where you have reasonable suspicion that there is
contraband in the underwear, then you could go directly
to that location, and you wouldn't have to work from the
outside in. But, Justice Scalia, it takes --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, surely not. You
are saying if you have reasonable suspicion that it's in
the underwear, you shouldn't even bother searching the
pack or the pockets. You should go straight to the
underwear. That can't be right.
MR. O'NEIL: Well, to take T.L.O. as an
example, Justice Scalia, in that case the Court believed
that there was reasonable suspicion that the student had
cigarettes in her purse because that was the obvious
place to find them. Now, if the -- if the school
principal in that case had searched the purse, searched
the student's pocket, searched the locker, searched the
desk, I don't think this Court would have said that
there was reasonable suspicion to believe that the
cigarettes were in --
--
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, what specifically do
you think is missing here? They need -- the school
needed to have a direct statement from Marissa Glines
that -- that Redding had the -- had the pills in her
undergarments; is that correct.
MR. O'NEIL: The particularized suspicion
could come from information from students that reliably
adverted to the location of the contraband. That's the
JUSTICE ALITO: But you have to have direct
evidence that the -- the -- it can't be based on
inferences?
MR. O'NEIL: No --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that the distinction you
are drawing? The location has to be supported by direct
evidence. Somebody has to say that that's where it is.
MR. O'NEIL: No, Justice Alito. We believe
that if teachers were aware of the general practice and
it was common knowledge that students did hide
contraband in this way and -- that would be relevant to
the totality of the circumstances in determining whether
this student was following that practice.
But we don't believe that the examples that
were provided in Petitioners' reply brief establish
anything like that practice. Petitioners cite 8 cases
over the course of approximately 30 years in which
contraband was found in those locations.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But you are -- you are
saying basically there is -- there is no general
understanding that people carry ibuprofen in -- in their
undergarments.
MR. O'NEIL: That is -- that is true. There
was no experience at this school. There was no
reasonable -- no reason to suspect that based on
experience in the world. And, in fact, by the time the
officials had conducted their -- this search, they had
searched Marissa, who was Respondent's friend. And they
had conducted a search of her pockets and her wallet and
they had found pills in her pockets and her wallet. But
they had not found pills in her underwear.
So even if that had been a suspicion that
one might have had even before beginning the search,
they certainly wouldn't have had that suspicion by the
time --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But if your --
accepting your argument that there may be no reasonable
suspicion based on Marissa saying this is the person who
gave me the drugs, does the fact that she said kids are
going to -- the kids are going to take these drugs at
lunchtime, a specific time, does that present a
difference in the level of concern that the school
should have?
MR. O'NEIL: We believe that the schools may
take seriously any information they receive and must
take seriously any information they receive about the
presence of prescription pills on campus. And the fact
that the teacher believed that these pills were going to
be consumed at lunch as part of an event that obviously
wasn't simply intended to get rid of the students'
headaches, we believe that that would give rise to
reasonable suspicion to initiate some search.
But we believe that without some
particularized suspicion or some specific indication
that this, the location, was a likely one to contain the
drugs, that this search was excessively intrusive. And
this is not a new standard. This is essentially the
same standard this Court adopted in the Montoya De
Hernandez case for intrusive body searches in other
contexts. It has proved workable in that context and we
believe that it would prove workable here.
We believe that it is also better than the
alternatives of a higher level of suspicion, which does
not bear any necessary logical correlation to the
likelihood that the --
JUSTICE ALITO: If Marissa Glines had said
specifically that Savana Redding has pills someplace on
her person and she's going to distribute them at lunch
in the cafeteria, would this be a different case?
MR. O'NEIL: It may well, Justice Alito. In
that circumstance it would likely be the reasonable
thing for the teacher --
JUSTICE ALITO: What is the difference
between that situation and this situation? The
differences are slight. Wouldn't that at least be a
question that has to be decided by the trier of fact?
MR. O'NEIL: That may present a triable
issue. Here --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. That
wouldn't -- that wouldn't satisfy the test you've just
given us. I thought you said there had to be specific
indication that she was carrying it in her
undergarments. And what Justice Alito posed was not
that, just specific indication that she had it on her
person. Is that enough? Do you want to revise your
test so it's not just specific indication that it's in
her undergarments, but specific indication that it's on
her person? That's enough?
MR. O'NEIL: No, Justice Scalia. We believe
that there must be information beyond that. And I may
have misspoke, and I think the answer to that question
is that in that circumstance, a teacher would almost
certainly ask, well, where on her person is it? And if
the student doesn't know, then, yes, Justice Scalia,
that would not satisfy the standard that we would urge
this Court to adopt.
JUSTICE ALITO: I mean, the student says,
she has -- she has crack someplace on her person, and
she's going to distribute it to kids during the lunch
hour, and so they search her -- her garments, and they
don't find it. And you're saying that they cannot then
go ahead and search her undergarments --
MR. O'NEIL: The nature of the contraband --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- because --
MR. O'NEIL: The nature of the contraband
could be relevant in the totality of the circumstances
to the suspicion that the student has -- is hiding it in
some illicit place as -- Justice Souter, as you noted,
certainly there is no practice anywhere, that I'm aware
of, of hiding ibuprofen in underwear.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So there is a sliding scale
for the dangerousness of what you're looking for?
MR. O'NEIL: No. It simply means that it's
relevant to whether in the totality of the circumstances
that school official could have reasonably suspected
that the student was hiding it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How is a school
administrator supposed to know? Marissa says: She gave
me these pills. What are they? I don't know. And so
how is the -- if it depends whether it's a dangerous
drug like crack or a relatively -- not harmless, but a
different one like ibuprofen, the search depends on
that, how is the school administrator supposed to know?
MR. O'NEIL: My point was simply with a drug
like crack there is a more common understanding that a
drug like that can be hidden in a student's -- in
underwear.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So what is the
school administrator supposed to know when he sees a
white pill and doesn't know if it's something terribly
harmful, even deadly, or if it's prescription strength
ibuprofen? You say in the former case he can search
undergarments, in the latter case he can't. So how is
the administrator supposed to know what he's dealing
with?
MR. O'NEIL: Well, we believe that, as I
said, school administrators have to take seriously all
medication like this on campus. My point was simply
that where a particular type of contraband is known to
be carried in a certain way, that can be relevant to the
totality --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry, your
answer to me was they have to take it seriously. My
question to you is, what is the administrator supposed
to do? He sees a white pill; nobody can tell him what
it is. Is he allowed at that point to search the
undergarments or not?
MR. O'NEIL: No.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He's not?
MR. O'NEIL: He is not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if it turns out
to be -- you know, I don't know, some very deadly drug?
MR. O'NEIL: Mr. Chief Justice, we do not
believe that this Court should get in the business of
deciding that searches are okay for, for example,
heroin, but not okay for cocaine.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's what you just
told us we should do, in answer to Justice Alito's
question.
MR. O'NEIL: No, I simply -- the point was
simply that if there is some common understanding that a
type of contraband is generally secreted in a certain
way, and the example is crack, and there is a known
understanding that crack can be hidden in that way, that
that would be relevant to the totality of the
circumstances.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And I don't see why your
answer might not be different if, under the Chief
Justice's question, he didn't know it was ibuprofen.
All he knew was that it was a white pill. He's not a
pharmacologist, he doesn't know what's in it. Wouldn't
the reasonableness of the -- wouldn't the scope of
reasonable search at least potentially be greater for
the undifferentiated white pill than for the known
ibuprofen?
MR. O'NEIL: It may, Justice Souter, but I
think that the question would be whether the school
official has some reason to believe, based on a
practice, that -- that pills, for example, are hidden in
a student's -- can be hidden in a student's underwear.
Again, the example was crack, and that is a situation
where there is an understanding that that is -- can be a
place in which suspects will hide that type of item.
But, again, there was no indication in this
case whatsoever and no basis for the school official to
suspect that that was a likely location.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. O'NEIL: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Wolf.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ADAM B. WOLF
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. WOLF: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
We agree with the Federal Government that
before conducting an intrusive strip search a school
needs to have location-specific information. And while
this case can begin and end with that well-accepted
proposition, it's also important to recognize that a
school needs greater -- a greater degree of suspicion to
conduct a strip search than to conduct an ordinary
backpack search.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't think the
case can begin and end with that because we have the
separate issue of qualified immunity. Can we take that
off the table?
I mean, we have got six to five in the Ninth
Circuit, disagreement throughout in this case, and yet
you say the rule is so clearly established that you can
make these school officials personally liable.
MR. WOLF: Your Honor, I don't think a head
count of the judges is the standard by which this Court
measures qualified immunity. That's what this Court,
you know, held, for instance, in Groh v. Ramirez. But I
do understand that it sort of gives one pause.
It says: Well, what did they miss here?
And what they missed here is that this search violated
the clearly established point that in order to conduct
an intrusive search of one's body, the searching
official needs to at least reasonably believe that the
object is located underneath the undergarments. The
Fourth Amendment does not account -- it does not
countenance the rummaging on or around a 13-year-old
girl's naked body --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if --
MR. WOLF: -- without any suspicion.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if what Marissa
has is heroin? The school administrator recognizes
heroin. She says: This is what the student gave me?
Search the undergarments or not?
MR. WOLF: The nature of the infraction --
no. The nature of the infraction, as T.L.O. would put
it, is a nonstarter in this case, because we don't even
have the suspicion to get underneath Savana's
undergarments, even if you had -- regardless of the
substance.
Now, in T.L.O., the question was whether
there were drugs to be found. There was marijuana in
that case. And this Court set a relatively low
standard, that you need more than a hunch, and you need
particularized suspicion. Now, that's where the Court
set the balance for ordinary searches for drugs.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm not quite sure where
we are in your answer to the question of the Chief
Justice's question. He asked you a hypothetical case.
And you said that's a nonstarter because in this case.
And the hypothetical is that there is a very
dangerous drug, meth, that's going to be distributed and
consumed that afternoon.
Does that make a difference in the
permissibility of the search and the reasonableness of
the search and the scope of the search?
MR. WOLF: No, it does not. It does not in
this case, because without a suspicion that you're going
to find the object --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you don't mind our
judging this case as if they were searching for meth?
MR. WOLF: Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's the way -- we
should -- we should judge this case as though they were
searching -- the fact that it was -- is it ibuprofen,
have I got that? The fact that it was ibuprofen is
irrelevant; we can consider this case as if it were
meth?
MR. WOLF: I think we all understand that
this -- that this case, you know, involves ibuprofen.
But our argument --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't think I understand
that based on your answer. I'm -- I'm asking you -- you
said that the nature of the drug makes no difference,
It's a nonstarter.
MR. WOLF: Not in in this case, correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Insofar as the rule that
we -- that's because in this case you don't think
there's a reasonable suspicion to begin with. But that
doesn't answer the hypothetical. We're trying to
announce a rule. And your rule, your submission, as I
understand you and as I understood the government, is
that the nature of the substance they're searching for
is irrelevant.
MR. WOLF: I think it's irrelevant when
you're making distinctions between drugs. If -- if the
question is whether you can strip search a child for
gum, for instance, because that might prohibit school
policy, I would --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So that goes back to my
earlier proposition that you don't mind our deciding the
case as if this were a search for meth that was going to
be consumed at noon?
MR. WOLF: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Thank you.
MR. WOLF: Why? Because in this case there
was no suspicion -- and I think Justice Alito was
perhaps getting to this -- there was no suspicion that
these objects were going to be found inside Savana's
undergarments. And without that suspicion you cannot
conduct such an intrusive search.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, to play the devil's
advocate on that, why couldn't the assistant principal
reason as follows: that he has information from -- from
Ms. Glines that Ms. Redding has drugs. He has
information from another student that drugs are going to
be consumed during the lunch hour. Putting those two
together, he reaches the -- he suspects that the person
who has the drugs has the drugs on his or her person so
that they can be distributed at lunch. And then having
searched every other part of -- having searched Ms.
Redding's outer garments, what's left are her
undergarments. So therefore there's a reasonable
suspicion that the drugs are -- are located there.
MR. WOLF: Justice Alito --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's wrong with that?
MR. WOLF: Justice Alito, I don't think that
accurately describes the record. Even if it did, it
wouldn't satisfy this Court's standard. Two things
about the record: one, I think the hypothetical
supposed that she had drugs, and in fact what the record
reveals is that it was allegedly Savana provided these
drugs at some point. It's not that she currently had
them on her.
Second, that they searched every other part,
and it's an important -- it's an important point in this
case. Where did Marissa have her planner? It was in
the desk. Did they search the desk here? No. We know
that. It's not in the record, as Mr. Wright said, but
they have lockers in the school. Did they search any
locker? No.
Can students keep drugs anywhere else on
school grounds? Perhaps, probably so. Did they search
everywhere? They absolutely did not. But I want to get
back to the legal answer, too, which is that this Court
said in T.L.O., and it's on page 342 of T.L.O., that a
search is reasonable only when there are reasonable
grounds for believing that it will turn up evidence.
There were no reasonable grounds for believing that this
search would turn up evidence, none at all.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're saying the whole
search, not just the search of the undergarments.
You're saying they couldn't even have searched her
backpack, right?
MR. WOLF: I think they could have searched
her backpack. And what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why?
MR. WOLF: What that speaks to is the low
degree of the suspicion and the nonspecific suspicion
that's needed to conduct an ordinary search.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you want a sliding
scale?
MR. WOLF: It's not a sliding scale, Your
Honor. This is a two-step framework, and that is it.
We have ordinary searches, backpacks, pencil cases, book
bags, that kind of thing; and then you have a search
where you require a 13-year-old girl to take off her --
take off her pants, take off her shirt, move around her
bra so she reveals her breasts, and the same thing with
her underpants to reveal her pelvic area.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, I think there's a
dispute in the record about that. So -- so we have, I
mean you would have the right to prove your version,
obviously. But suppose you fail to prove that and that
the jury or judge, or whoever is deciding this fact,
concludes the school board's right on that; all they did
was ask her to strip to her underwear, period. Nobody
saw anything else.
Now, what's your view of that one? I mean,
let's also imagine that this is sufficient to prove --
to -- what happened was Marissa opens a planner, and in
the planner there's some small knives, a cigarette
lighter, and a cigarette. And who gave you the planner?
Well, Savana gave it to me. And they find some pills.
Let's imagine those pills are cocaine or something like
meth or something. And she says well, where did you get
those? Savana gave them to me.
Okay. That seems to be possibly reasonable
suspicion to think Savana has some of these pills. And
they're going to distribute them at lunchtime. At that
point they go look, whatever they did here. But then
they bring Savana in to the nurse and the nurse and the
female official say: All right, Savana, strip to your
underclothes and shake your underclothes. That's what
happens, period.
Now, is that latter part a violation of the
Fourth Amendment?
MR. WOLF: It is, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Because?
MR. WOLF: It is because that is an
intrusive, traumatic search.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. But it would be
okay to say, change into a swimming suit or your gym
clothes? Hey, your gym clothes are in the locker,
they're about the same size, shape; go do that.
MR. WOLF: It -- it might be different if
they asked Savana to go into the other room and to
change where you're not revealing your body to
any government official.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, they didn't -- she
didn't reveal her body beyond her underclothes. She --
that's the hypothetical that I'm trying to work out
here, because I'm not certain.
MR. WOLF: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm trying to work out why
is this a major thing to say strip down to your
underclothes, which children do when they change for
gym, they do fairly frequently, not to -- you know, and
there are only two women there. Is -- how bad is this,
underclothes? That's what I'm trying to get at. I'm
asking because I don't know.
MR. WOLF: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Wolf, one thing
should be clarified. I don't think there's any dispute
what was done in the case of both of these girls. It
wasn't just that they were stripped to their underwear.
They were asked to shake their bra out, to -- to shake,
stretch the top of their pants and shake that out.
There's no dispute, factual dispute about that, is
there?
MR. WOLF: There is none at all.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I thought there was,
because I thought on page 135 of the record the official
said they didn't see her naked, and so I thought that
there was --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was no dispute that
they asked her to shake her pants and her bra. Nobody
said that they touched -- the school officials didn't
touch her, that's a given. But they did ask her to
shake out her underwear.
MR. WOLF: That's right, Justice Ginsburg.
Everybody --
JUSTICE BREYER: My question -- my question
has to do with accepting --
MR. WOLF: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: What they said on page 135
of the record, and this is a genuine problem I'm having.
I'm trying to figure out, if that's so, and to repeat it
-- you heard what I said, there's no reason to repeat
MR. WOLF: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. I want to know why
that search, if that's what happened, would violate the
Fourth Amendment, assuming reasonable suspicion to think
she possessed meth or cocaine at that time.
MR. WOLF: Yes. And it still would violate
the Fourth Amendment, and the question is why. Because
even that slightly less invasive search still implicates
legitimate and serious implications of privacy. The
National Association of Social Workers, for instance,
filed an amicus brief in this case, and what they showed
is that -- or they cited studies showing that when a
child undergoes a strip search -- and Justice Breyer,
your -- your hypothetical involves a strip search --
that that produces long-lasting and traumatic
consequences for a 13-year-old child.
Now, why does that matter? Because the
Fourth Amendment requires a balancing. On one side you
have legitimate expectations of privacy, and on the
other side you have the governmental need to conduct
that search. So --
JUSTICE BREYER: Maybe the psychologists --
"strip search" has a lot of meanings. And do the
psychologists focus on the situation with the child
involved, you know, this is an -- my hypothetical, is
that what they're talking about?
MR. WOLF: I believe it is, Your -- Justice
Breyer. And I believe that we cite such a study in --
in our brief, the red brief, where we say that it
doesn't require a student to take off his or her
undergarments so long as the shirt and the pants are
taken off, that that produces trauma.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Let me -- let me just, not
so much change the facts, but -- but emphasize a couple
of different aspects of the facts.
Assuming Justice Breyer's hypothetical of a
moment ago and assuming the following thought process on
the part of the principal -- I -- strike that.
I will vary the facts in one way. Let's
assume, following your categorical rule that the -- the
principal doesn't know whether it's ibuprofen or not.
He just knows that there's a pill and one of the other
kids said this person has got pills on -- on her person.
The principal says, I know as a matter of reliable fact
that one student got sick, violently sick, within the
past week or so on some pill; we don't know exactly what
it was. We also know within a reasonable period of time
from where we are now that there have been kids who died
from ingesting dangerous drugs. I've got suspicion that
some drug is on this kid's person. My thought process
is I would rather have the kid embarrassed by a strip
search, if we can't find anything short of that, than to
have some other kids dead because the stuff is
distributed at lunchtime and things go awry.
Is that the basis? Is that thought process,
that reasoning, the basis for a -- a reasonable strip
search?
MR. WOLF: And to make sure I understand,
it's that there's reasonable belief -- there's a
reasonable belief that a student has drugs on his or her
person?
JUSTICE SOUTER: That's right.
MR. WOLF: And by his or her person,
presumably it could be the pockets or it could be in the
backpack that he or she is holding?
JUSTICE SOUTER: Somewhere between the
surface of the clothes and -- and the body.
MR. WOLF: Right. And in that instance it
still would not be appropriate. There needs to be
suspicion that the object is located underneath the
clothing. And if that isn't there, then you can't
search there. Now that should be --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You -- you say that the --
the point of my question, this is what I'd like you to
focus on -- you're entirely right, I would accept that
argument and I think that argument is entirely right, if
the stakes are lower. If the risk of a mistake is going
to be less traumatic. In the hypo that I gave, the risk
of the mistake may well be violent sickness or death.
And the thought process in the principal's mind is, the
reasonableness analysis in the principal's mind is
better embarrassment than violent sickness or death.
What's wrong with that reasoning under the Fourth
Amendment?
MR. WOLF: Well, I mean, to start, that's
not what T.L.O. said. T.L.O. said that there needs to
be a reasonable --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I'm -- I'm saying it.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOUTER: We -- We've got a new case.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOUTER: And I'm saying to you, why
isn't that a -- a reasonable thought process within the
concept of Fourth Amendment reasonableness?
MR. WOLF: Because in order to conduct that
intrusive search, it seems like it that case you would
have to be doing guesswork, if you will, about where
those pills are located.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You've got reasonable
suspicion that they are somewhere on the person.
MR. WOLF: That's right. And presumably, if
they're -- if it doesn't show up in a pocket search,
then you can do a strip search; and if you don't find it
in the strip search, you could do a body cavity search;
and if it's not in the body cavity search --
JUSTICE SOUTER: And with those stakes in
mind, why isn't it reasonable? In other words, there --
there is a sliding scale of risk which is inherent in my
hypo, and why isn't that a sound basis for a -- a Fourth
Amendment analysis?
MR. WOLF: Because -- it all comes back to
the balancing of the Fourth Amendment. And here, where
you're conducting a traumatic search without a belief
that you're going to find it underneath the
undergarments, it --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't have a belief; I
simply have a reasonable suspicion. That's what I've
got all along the way. And it seems to me, when -- when
you take the position that you -- you were taking, you
are saying, better to have the risk of violent sickness
or death than the risk of embarrassment. Isn't that
what you're saying?
MR. WOLF: No, it's not what I'm saying,
Your Honor. There are many things that -- that this
principal could -- or the assistant principal could have
done here that would have mitigated any risk, and at the
same time not caused the trauma of -- the trauma
associated with a strip search. Sit the child down --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Some search is -- is
reasonable, I take it?
MR. WOLF: But -- absolutely.
JUSTICE SOUTER: All right. Now the -- we
get to the point as in prior hypos, in which it does --
they find nothing in the pockets. They find nothing in
the pocket book or other garments. The only thing
that's left is a strip search, and that's where you draw
the line. Why do you draw the line there, on the risk
analysis?
MR. WOLF: Well, the hypothetical supposes
they have searched everywhere. And I suppose if you
have -- if you are certain that somebody possesses a
drug and you have searched everywhere, perhaps you have
generated location-specific information. I would
readily agree to that.
But in this case, they certainly did not
search everywhere.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you agree with Mr.
O'Neil when he said if the drug had been cocaine, and
it's well known that cocaine is carried in underwear,
that then this would not run afoul of the Fourth
Amendment? He gave an example of a drug where there was
a custom of carrying it in a certain way.
MR. WOLF: Right. I think if it were
readily known that this student had previously been
suspected of -- to use the term that's used in the court
of appeal cases -- "crotching" that drug, well, then,
perhaps that would have been appropriate.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It has to be that
student. It can't be that it's customary among
students?
MR. WOLF: And it may be that if this
becomes so customary, that that somehow differently
calibrates the equation here, but it -- it's sort of
strange credulity to think that you would have loose
pills concealed against a student's genitalia. That's
what you'd have to think was the custom here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: As -- as I understand your
- your presentation, you qualify as a strip search any
search that requires the outer garments to be taken off.
So it didn't really matter whether they required her to
shake out her bra or stretch the elastic of her
underwear?
MR. WOLF: It certainly added to the trauma
-- trauma, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But is a strip search and
-- impermissible along the lines you say, to require the
student to even take off the outer garments?
MR. WOLF: That's -- that's right. That's
what the studies say, and that seems like a reasonable
calibration to me. You know, anything --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just to combine it
with -- with your answers to Justice Kennedy, you are
saying it's unreasonable to take off the outer garments
even if your suspicion, reasonable suspicion for
justifying the preliminary search is that the student
has heroin?
MR. WOLF: Without any location-specific
information, that's correct, and anything else would
send a shudder down the spines of little boys and girls
around this country.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, let me ask you this
about spine shuddering.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let's go back to Justice
Souter's question. We assume that there's meth,
something very dangerous, going to be smoked at noon,
there's very strong suspicion of this student. The
assistant principal says I'm going to give you a choice:
we're going to engage in an intrusive search, same sex
people, like what went on here; or we're going to call
the local police department, we'll have probable cause
to book you and they will search you at the jail house.
Which do you choose?
Would the school administrators be violating
their duty if they did that?
MR. WOLF: If -- if they called in the
police officers?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: They give the student the
choice. They say we'll do it here with a nurse right
here, where you know everybody, and there's nothing
wrong' or we'll call the police, and they'll do it down
at the police station.
MR. WOLF: I don't think that would violate
the Fourth Amendment, Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Which -- which would be
the less traumatic of the two choices for the student?
MR. WOLF: Well I'm not sure that there's a
lesser or more traumatic. Both -- both are fairly
traumatic.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But wouldn't the
police --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You think it's less
traumatic, or it might be less traumatic to have
uniformed police officers take the person to the police
station and conduct the search there?
MR. WOLF: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You want us to decide the
case on the fact that that's probably less traumatic for
the student?
MR. WOLF: I'm saying both are remarkably
traumatic.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The police would require --
MR. WOLF: I'm not putting them one above
the other.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The police would require
probable cause, wouldn't they, not just suspicion?
MR. WOLF: They would require probable
cause.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In the hypothetical wasn't
there a probable cause?
MR. WOLF: Well if there's probable cause
and they want to call the police officers in, then they
can do that. But that's not what happened here. What
this school official did was act on nothing more than a
hunch, if that, that Savana was currently concealing
Ibuprofen pills underneath her underpants for other's
oral consumption. I mean there's a certain ick factor
to this.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you've made
that point several times. In fact the issue here covers
the brassier as well, which doesn't seem as outlandish
as the underpants, right?
MR. WOLF: Did you say the prisoner?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. WOLF: Mr. Chief Justice? Well, yes, in
the prison context, the rules are different. They are
different, because this Court has --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe I'm -- maybe
I'm not articulating this. You keep focusing on the
fact that it's unlikely that the pills would be
concealed in her underpants. That doesn't go to the
brassiere at all.
MR. WOLF: Well it -- the brassiere I think
as well. I mean there -- there was nothing in this
record that even the principal or assistant principal
said I suspect that it was there.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's not like you have any
studies on this. But I mean, I hate to tell you, but it
seems to me like a logical thing when an adolescent
child has some pills or something, they know people are
looking for them, they will stick them in their
underwear. I'm not saying everyone would, but I mean,
somebody who thinks that that's a fairly normal idea for
some adolescent with some illegal drugs to think of, I
don't think he's totally out to lunch, is he?
MR. WOLF: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you have any studies on
this? I doubt it.
MR. WOLF: No, but neither -- neither do
they.
JUSTICE BREYER: So what am I supposed to
do? In my experience when I was 8 or 10 or 12 years
old, you know, we did take our clothes off once a day,
we changed for gym, okay? And in my experience, too,
people did sometimes stick things in my underwear --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Or not my underwear.
Whatever. Whatever. I was the one who did it? I don't
know. I mean, I don't think it's beyond human
experience, not beyond human experience.
MR. WOLF: Yes, but the "not beyond human
experience" --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what are they
supposed to do?
MR. WOLF: But the "not beyond human
experience" standard is not the standard that governs
whether the Fourth Amendment is violated.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, but it's supposed
to be what's reasonable.
MR. WOLF: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And a teacher is there
thinking what's reasonable? And I've already got the
thing sort of away from -- I see your point. I'm not
quite talking about that. I'm worried about what to
write in this as a general standard. And so am I
supposed to say, look, school -- school officials who
think that children could hide things in their underwear
when they know they're not supposed to have them, is
that school official really unreasonable except in a
special case? That's what's bothering me.
MR. WRIGHT: Well, it -- it is unreasonable,
and at the end of the day, it has to be unreasonable.
To think that -- for school officials to think that this
student was hiding -- this honor student was hiding
pills underneath her undergarments based on nothing in
the record that supports that, not a single thing. What
does the school official know? That there was an
accusation that Savana had provided pills at an unknown
time and at an unknown location, that Savana's backpack
search yielded nothing, not only pills, but no suspicion
that she possessed pills underneath her undergarments.
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that a question of law or
is that a question that goes to the trier of fact,
whether you could infer reasonable suspicion about the
presence of the pills in those locations?
MR. WOLF: That seems like a factual
question to me, Justice Alito. I mean, there's nothing
in the record to -- to indicate otherwise. And we
haven't moved for summary judgment here, but all
inferences are resolved in our favor when Petitioners
have moved for summary judgment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is probable cause a jury
question too?
MR. WOLF: Whether something rises to the
level of probable cause?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, probable cause in the
ordinary criminal investigation cases. Is that a jury
question?
MR. WOLF: It strikes me as a factual
question, Your Honor, that may or may not -- I -- I
don't know the answer to that --
JUSTICE ALITO: In a 1983 action, wouldn't
it be a jury question?
MR. WOLF: I think in this case it certainly
is a jury question, without anything else in the record
that that -- that that is a reasonable inference, and
without it being self-evident -- and I would actually
argue that it was self-evident that those pills were not
located there and that that's not a reasonable
inference.
But if there is some doubt about that -- and
I was hearing some doubt from Justice Breyer and perhaps
other members of this Court -- well, that strikes me as
a factual question. And if that's a factual question to
be resolved by a jury, there must be a principle behind
that, which is that if it is not a reasonable inference
that those objects were located there, then it would be
an unreasonable search. And if that's true, then
qualified immunity, at least at this stage, was properly
denied.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think it's a
question. You can -- even -- even in a 1983 action, I
don't think the courts allow a jury to decide whether
there was probable cause for an officer's search or
seizure. That's new to me.
MR. WOLF: Well, whether something was a
reasonable inference or not, it might strike one as a
reasonable inference --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did the Ninth Circuit --
MR. WOLF: -- and another as not a
reasonable inference.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did the Ninth Circuit
treat this as a jury question? I'm looking at page 38a.
They were quite definite that that was a Fourth
Amendment violation.
MR. WOLF: Right, because for the Ninth
Circuit, this -- it was self-evident to the Ninth
Circuit that the -- that there was not a reasonable
inference. And without that reasonable inference, there
was no reason to treat it as a jury question, but if
there were a reasonable inference, then it strikes me as
something that might be -- that might be better suited
for determination by the jury.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Wolf.
Mr. Wright, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MATTHEW W. WRIGHT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. WRIGHT: Thank you, Your Honor.
The reality is that we've gotten past the
reasonable at its inception prong, and we're now on the
scope. And I think everyone concedes that. And, as to
the scope, I can tell you that if they found uncut
heroin or small-caliber bullets in this case, they would
have to reach the same results. And that is
unacceptable in the school setting. There's too much at
risk here when you're talking about the custodial and
tutelary responsibilities this Court has time and again
recognized as the most important elements in upholding
the three search cases, student search cases, that this
Court has upheld.
The other thing about the government's
proposal is -- is really troubling. It's because they
do not justify why they would pass a rule that would so
much stunt the administrator's discretion to respond,
even in the most serious situations that confront the
health and safety of kids. These -- these principles
are principles that have been restated by this Court.
You need the flexibility to act immediately and
effectively to keep kids safe.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Unless the people feel
differently.
MR. WRIGHT: That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Some school districts have
rules against --
MR. WRIGHT: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- simply forbidding strip
searches on any -- right?
MR. WRIGHT: There is an amicus brief that
cites 189 school districts which have substantially
limited strip searches, which proves the Ingraham v.
Wright theory, which is that it will be taken care of at
the local level.
But administrators, for now, need a
bright-line rule. And as to the scope, that bright-line
rule is if you have reason to suspect that a student is
processing contraband that poses a health and safety
risk, then searching any place where that contraband may
be reasonably hidden is constitutionally permissible.
And in any event, Mr. Wilson in this case certainly
could have believed that the Constitution permitted it,
Mr. Chief Justice, and so immunity is a foregone
conclusion in my opinion.
But I would ask the Court to rule on the
constitutional question in the affirmative because it
would further the interests of judicial economy. There
would not be any more Federal action in this case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, there would.
There's a Monell claim against the school district
because there is no qualified immunity.
MR. WRIGHT: That's correct, Your Honor, but
if you ruled in the affirmative on the constitutional
question --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. WRIGHT: -- the case is over.
The additional issue, Justice Alito, on the
factual question is I understand you're not talking
about immunity, but the reality is we've got to be able
to make decisions, and if we get sued on factual
questions because somebody questions whether or not it's
reasonable for us to search where contraband may be
reasonably located, then we're going to end up in court
anyway on those factual questions, which is going to --
you know, deter officials from acting immediately and
effectively in those situations. So, I do not think it
is a factual question. And the District Court and the
first three-panel-judge court did hold as a matter of
law that this search was constitutional.
Thank you, Your Honors.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the case in the
