IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ANDREW M. CUOMO, :
ATTORNEY GENERAL OF NEW :
YORK, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-453
THE CLEARING HOUSE :
ASSOCIATION, L.L.C., ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 28, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:17 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
BARBARA D. UNDERWOOD, ESQ., Solicitor General, New York,
N.Y.; on behalf of the Petitioner.
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondent Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency.
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondent The Clearing House Association, L.L.C.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
BARBARA D. UNDERWOOD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency 23
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent The Clearing
House Association, L.L.C. 37
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
BARBARA D. UNDERWOOD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 49
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:17 a.m.)
CHIEF JUDGE ROBERTS: We will hear argument
next in Case 08-453, Cuomo v. The Clearing House
Association.
Ms. Underwood.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BARBARA D. UNDERWOOD
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. UNDERWOOD: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
Under the OCC regulation at issue here,
State antidiscrimination and consumer protection laws
can be enforced against national banks by the Federal
OCC and by private parties, but not by State attorneys
general. This unusual enforcement pre-emption, which
detaches the State's power to make laws from its power
to enforce them, was not written into the National Bank
Act by Congress in 1864, and it's implausible that
Congress implicitly delegated to OCC the power to read
it in now.
We know the NBA did not in 1864 enact
enforcement pre-emption against the States for three
reasons: First, the words of the statute; second, a
long line of cases from this Court, especially St.
Louis, upholding the power of the State to enforce laws
against a national bank or rejecting it on the ground
that the law was substantively pre-empted, but not
questioning the power of the State to enforce a valid
law; and, finally, the wholly anomalous character,
foreign really to our structure of government, of
separating the power to make law from the power to
enforce it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But to some extent, would
you concede that interpretation; that is, not only the
attorney general under New York's law, but the
superintendent of banks as well, has authority over
mortgage lending? Would -- would you agree that the
part about the bank superintendent's enforcement could
not be enforced against national banks?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, first of all, the bank
superintendent in New York doesn't have authority over
national banks. It has authority only over State banks,
as we pointed out in our reply brief. So we don't
assert that authority.
I would say that the -- and the injunction
doesn't run -- that's at issue in this case, doesn't run
against the superintendent. It runs against the
attorney general. But I would say --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there is -- the
provision that you are talking about, 296(a), concerns
the authority of the bank superintendent as well as the
authority of the attorney general; isn't that so?
MS. UNDERWOOD: I believe that the banking
superintendent does not assert authority to enforce in a
regulatory fashion against national banks. If they did,
if -- if -- if the bank superintendent asserted a
chartering or licensing supervisory regime, that would
be a different issue from the question --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Just with respect to the
same issue on mortgage lending where there's a concern
about racial discrimination?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, the -- the bank -- the
banking superintendent of New York does not enforce
against national banks.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Anything? And you agree
to that?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Yes, that is right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Even if the New York
statute --
MS. UNDERWOOD: Read differently or
interpreted or applied differently.
What's at issue here is a distinction
between a supervisory regime -- "visitation" is a regime
characterized by routine examinations, no cause needed,
by a chartering or a licensing authority for the purpose
of enforcing limitations on --
JUSTICE BREYER: How is it supposed to work?
This is what is bothering me at the heart of this case.
I imagine that banks, particularly right in these last
few months, are in situations where there are three
categories of -- of borrowers. One might be a category
of people whom you are reasonably confident in, and the
second is a category of people who are borderline or
less so, and there are also minorities.
Now, where you make the decision as a bank
to deny them the loan, it sometimes is difficult to say
whether that decision was made for a discriminatory
reason, namely race, or for a legitimate reason, namely
because this was a person unlikely to pay the money
back.
Now, how is a bank to function if 50
different attorneys general plus the Federal agencies
all look at the books of the bank to look at the
individual loan and to make that kind of determination
about which quite honestly reasonable people will often
differ?
And how -- how is that really a problem, or
am I just creating that? And if it's really a problem,
how in your opinion does the Federal law deal with that
problem, if not in the way that your opponent suggests?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, an -- there is a
single standard of discrimination. It is the case that
the -- that the Federal standards applied by the OCC and
the State law all look to Title VII law about a prima
facie case being --
JUSTICE BREYER: If I may say so, that
response overlooks the question. I don't doubt the
single standard. What I do doubt is in the -- in the
category of uncertain cases, that 51 different
individuals, 50 State attorneys general plus one Federal
individual, will reach the same result.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: These are hard and,
therefore, they will reach a lot of different results
under the same standard.
MS. UNDERWOOD: There has been no such
multiplicity of -- of enforcement. In fact, there is so
much antidiscrimination work to go around that having
multiple enforcers is a device for --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So you deny the
hypothetical. You are saying that my analysis of the
problem is wrong; there simply is no such problem, and
since there is no such problem, it doesn't matter if
everyone enforces it.
MS. UNDERWOOD: It is already the case that
under the Fair Housing Act, HUD is required to refer --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is your answer yes or no to
what I just said, that you deny that the statement of
the problem is realistic and therefore there is no
problem in your view about having 51 different people
enforce the same standard.
MS. UNDERWOOD: There is no record of any
such problem. And should such a -- yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And should such a problem
arise, what?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Should such a problem arise,
that would be an occasion for considering a kind of
burden pre-emption that would be similar -- on evidence
of such a problem, that might be a basis for OCC to make
a record and enact a regulation to deal with that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But if OCC thought there
might be such a problem, couldn't it act in advance to
avoid the risk that Justice Breyer's question explains?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, its regulation doesn't
say that. The injunction that was issued in this case
doesn't say that. What the regulation, the rulemaking,
and the injunction all rest on is a legal analysis, not
an empirical one.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: May we clarify one thing
about the 50 jurisdictions? The attorney general from
New York is not asserting authority over bank lending in
Hawaii. So for each institution, I assume it's going to
be two sovereigns, the OCC and the State attorney
general, not 50 descending on the single -- single bank
with respect to particular loans?
MS. UNDERWOOD: That's correct. And the
OCC --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's correct
with respect to a particular loan. It's not respect --
with respect to Federal policy about national banks
around the country. It's conceivable and I suppose
likely that the Federal regulator would want the same
rule to apply to banks in Michigan as to banks in
Hawaii.
MS. UNDERWOOD: It is. But if the question
was would the -- would the actual act of responding to a
complaint or to discovery burden particular people
because there would be 50 people asking for the same
information, that's not the case, because the loans made
in New York would be analyzed by a New York enforcer.
JUSTICE BREYER: I want to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. The same rule
would not apply in Michigan and Hawaii, anyway, even
under the Federal Government. The Federal Government
acknowledges that Michigan can have its own law --
MS. UNDERWOOD: The Federal Government --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- and Hawaii can have a
different law. All the Federal Government is arguing
is: We want to be the ones to enforce the separate
Michigan law and the separate Hawaii law, right?
MS. UNDERWOOD: That appears to be the case.
In fact, they have acknowledged that the State law
actually applies. It's undisputed. OCC said so in its
complaint. Congress has several times said so, which is
presumably why the OCC says so -- said so in the Fair
Housing Act savings clause, in the -- in the Equal
Credit Opportunity Act savings clause, and in
Riegle-Neal, which specifically applies only to national
bank branches, but expressly preserves the application
of State fair lending and consumer protection laws.
JUSTICE BREYER: You are just at the point
of getting to what I -- the blank in my mind. And the
blank in my mind is when you said, but if there were
such a problem, as I had described, but if there were,
then they could -- and now that's the blank. Then they
could what?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, there are many things
that they might do.
JUSTICE BREYER: For example, just give me
two, a couple.
MS. UNDERWOOD: For example, make some
provision for -- in fact, I believe there are some
regulations that call for conferencing and collaboration
and consultation among the State enforcers and between
the State and Federal regulators to avoid duplicative
regulation. There is already the potential with respect
to State banks that are supervised both by State
regulators and by the FDIC. There are alternate audits
in alternate years. I mean, there -- there is plenty of
precedent in bank regulation for mechanisms for
consultation and collaboration so that people don't step
on each other's toes.
And in Federal criminal enforcement, for
example, there are -- there are many -- many occasions
where there is both Federal and State authority to
enforce. And the result of that tends to be to get more
extensive, fuller enforcement. People don't tend to
both bring the same case. If somebody is enforcing
something, somebody -- a different enforcer will attack
a different problem.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But the -- in the -- in the
general -- in the field of criminal enforcement
generally there isn't any provision comparable to what
is now 36(f)(1)(B), at least to my knowledge, and it's
set out on pages 46 and 47, the text is in the
government's brief: "The provisions of any State law to
which a branch of a national bank is subject under this
paragraph shall be enforced with respect to such branch
by the OCC."
And that mandate, it "shall be enforced with
respect to such branch" sounds pretty exclusive to me.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well --
JUSTICE SOUTER: You can't tell for sure.
But why would -- why would Congress, number one, if
it -- if Congress simply assumed that there would be
a -- a dual system of enforcement, that OCC could --
could say to the bank, you follow State law, and if you
don't, we are going to go after you administratively,
and leaving it to the State to go after, in any other
fashion, what State law provided. If that was
Congress's assumption, why would it have -- have passed
this seeming mandate, "shall be enforced with respect to
such branch" by the -- by the OCC?
MS. UNDERWOOD: There are two reasons for
that provision. The purpose of that provision was to
confirm that OCC didn't lose its pre-existing
enforcement power when Riegle-Neal stated -- that's (1)
(B) -- in (1)(A) that national branches would be treated
more or less like State branches for purposes of
consumer protection and fair lending.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But that -- that's, in
effect, saving clause kind of function could have been
performed simply by a statute that says OCC may. And
this says it shall be enforced by OCC.
MS. UNDERWOOD: There is another reason in
the legislative history, which makes it clear that it
was a directive to OCC to mount an enforcement program
which Congress thought it had not been doing. We know
that because in the conference report and other
legislative history Congress says it's trying to expand,
not contract, the enforcement of fair lending and
consumer protection laws, and that the law isn't taking
any authority away from the States and that they are
distressed at the inadequate failure of OCC to exercise
its enforcement authority.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't deny, do you,
that the Federal Government can, if it wishes, enforce
the State laws?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So this provision isn't
really contrary to what you are saying. You are just
saying the State can do it as well?
MS. UNDERWOOD: That's correct. It isn't
talking -- it doesn't say anything about exclusive
authority, and it isn't talking about judicial
enforcement, which OCC doesn't do. It is talking about
it's -- it has a savings clause kind of function and
it -- it's hortatory, it's directing OCC to exercise the
authority that it has.
It seems to be common ground that it didn't
give OCC any new power, because it would be odd to give
OCC different power over the branches -- this only
applies to the branches -- different power to the
branches than over the branches than over the banks,
different, more extensive power over consumer protection
and fair lending than other kinds of bank enforcement.
This was a provision dealing with branches and consumer
protection and fair lending that said to OCC: You still
have that authority and you should exercise it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we come to the New
York Attorney General. I see your argument that there's
a certain incongruity between saying private attorneys
general okay, but no public attorney general. But on
the other hand, the attorney general starts out by
asking for bank books and records. And high on the list
of visitorial powers is the authority to demand the
bank's books and records.
So why isn't that -- his preliminary
investigation at least, why doesn't that fit within the
visitorial power bundle?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, because you can look
at books and records under various authorities. Books
and -- you can look at books and records under your
visitorial authority, if you are the supervisor and have
the relationship to the bank that a licensing or
chartering authority has and you are looking at them for
no particular cause. Or you can look at books and
records if you have a civil suit against the bank and
you are engaging in discovery that is -- or for that
matter a criminal prosecution against the bank, and
ancillary to that discovery is required; or in Guthrie,
the inquiry -- the looking at books and records was
pursuant to a statutory authority for shareholders to
look at books and records.
So the simple fact of a physical act of
looking -- or a legal act of looking at books and
records doesn't tell you whether visitorial authority is
being exercised. Visitorial authority has long been
understood as a whole regime of oversight. Watters
involved a visitorial regime that was ancillary to
licensing. The earlier visitorial regimes that were
referenced in the old treatise tended to involve
visitorial regimes that were established ancillary to
chartering, back when corporate charters had limited
purposes, the way banks do still, but most corporate
charters, most corporate certificates of incorporation
don't anymore.
So the fact that books and records are being
examined is neither here nor there on the question
whether the visitorial power that is referenced in 484
is -- is being exercised.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: There is an historic
reason for thinking that Congress would be more
concerned about States exercising visitorial powers than
they would be about private attorneys general or private
lawyers. This goes back to McCulloch v. Maryland.
National banks were always targeted by the States. They
weren't typically targeted by private attorneys. So
that incongruity doesn't strike me as terribly
significant.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, the suggestion is made
that 484, and there is some historical basis for it, was
-- was meant to protect national banks against --
against, hostile States, which I guess is what you are
suggesting, rather than hostile private people. But
actually what it was meant to do was assign
responsibility for the supervision of these new
entities -- there hadn't been banks like this, private
banks which were nevertheless federally chartered.
Before that there was the National Bank that was at
issue in McCulloch v Maryland, and to exclude the States
from asserting the authority to do audits, to do regular
banking examinations, which actually one senator had
proposed the States be permitted to do and that was
rejected.
I would say the concern about State
hostility was apparently much reduced by 1869, not much
after this statute was passed, when this Court in
National Bank v. Kentucky upheld the power of the States
not just to tax shareholders on their shares, but to
require the national banks to help, to require the
national banks to pay the tax that was due from those
shareholders in order to assist in collection. And the
Court -- McCulloch was cited to the Court and the Court
said it saw no possibility here, unlike in McCulloch,
that the State would somehow use its authority in this
way to incapacitate the banks or impair them by
eliciting their help to collect a valid tax.
There actually had been some thought when
the national banks were first created that they would,
in the marketplace, drive State banks out of existence,
but they didn't. And the story has been one
legislatively of maintaining competitive equality
between them, not of hostility. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you want to talk
a little bit about Chevron?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Whatever the
arguments may be on the merits, it's not clear to me
that visitorial powers has an unambiguous meaning that
would pre-empt the authority of the OCC to explain it to
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, I'd say two thing
about that. 484 may have some ambiguity about it. I
think it is not ambiguous as to the matters covered by
this regulation. Visitorials have -- visitorial powers
have never been understood to include discrete acts of
law enforcement by a jurisdiction that neither has nor
asserts supervisory relationship, the kind of
supervisory relationship that the chartering or
licensing sovereign has. So I think --
JUSTICE SOUTER: What do you say about the
quotations in the -- the brief that Mr. Waxman filed, as
I recall; it may have been the government's brief --
MS. UNDERWOOD: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- which -- which do have
references to visitorial powers as including general
conformance to the law. Those are not universal
provisions, but they -- they were certainly understood
in some cases.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, the strongest
quotations that his brief mentioned several times come
from Blackstone. He talks about inquiring into all
misbehaviors of the supervised visited corporation.
Those comments are made in a time and place when there
was only one sovereign, not the distinctive federalism
we have today, and so there was no need to distinguish
between the visitorial, the distinctly visitorial powers
of the sovereign, and the coexisting police powers of
another sovereign. There was no --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No, but there was -- there
was a point in -- in distinguishing the visitorial
powers that Blackstone, in the cases Blackstone was
referring to, and those for example that would apply
solely to -- to religious or originally religious
foundations like Oxford and Cambridge colleges and so
on. So there -- there seems to have been a reason to
understand the distinction.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, I think that the point
about Blackstone's comment to distinguish -- the point
about the distinction between the charitable
corporations and the public non-charitable corporations
is that it may well be that the sovereign was enforcing
not just the charter, but the laws of the sovereign with
respect to that State. It simply --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But he didn't need
visitorial powers to do that. I mean, the sovereign had
that by virtue of the general law.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Yes, but the sovereign might
do it in many different -- a supervisor might do it in
many different ways, just as OCC here claims to enforce
law not by going into court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought that was your
position, that the -- that the visitation authority
includes the power to enforce general laws.
MS. UNDERWOOD: The general laws of the
visitor, of the sovereign.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of the sovereign. But that
a separate action to enforce the laws of the sovereign
does not necessarily mean that visitorial powers are
being exercised.
MS. UNDERWOOD: That is correct. That is
correct. That is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So there would be no
inconsistency, if you believe that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: One thing --
MS. UNDERWOOD: That's --
JUSTICE STEVENS: One thing puzzled me about
this. They are not pre-empting any New York laws; is
that correct?
MS. UNDERWOOD: They're pre-empting --
that's correct. They are preempting our ability to
enforce any laws.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Did we ever -- do we have
any precedents dealing with the question whether
preemption of the right to enforce a valid law is
appropriate?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, this Court in, for
example, St. Louis said that when the Federal and the
State prohibition were the same, that is, a bank
couldn't branch at that time or couldn't interstate
branch, the -- and the -- and State tried to enforce
both provisions -- they were the same, but the State
tried to enforce both the Federal charter limitation and
the State law, this Court said the State could not
enforce the Federal charter, because that was the
prerogative of the chartering visitor, but that it could
enforce the State prohibition. And it said that
separating -- if the law is valid and can be validly
applied, then it's virtually unthinkable to separate the
authority to enforce it from the application of the law.
This Court said that in -- in St. Louis; it
-- actually it said it in -- in Easton, which went the
other way. That is to say, Easton was a criminal
prosecution of a bank officer for taking deposits
knowing the bank was insolvent. Prosecution under State
law. And this Court said that the law itself had to be
preempted. Wasn't clear exactly what Federal law on the
subject was. The Court said there must be some Federal
law in this area, but we can't afford to have
conflicting laws, so it's substantively pre-empted. But
the Court also said, if it were valid, it would be
unthinkable to bar the State from enforcing it. And
that is the correct way, we think, to approach this
problem.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it -- could they --
could the Federal authorities pre-empt the State law, in
your opinion?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, no, because Congress
has said to the contrary. Congress has said, that's why
they didn't -- presumably why they didn't do it that
way. Congress has said State law shall apply. So I
think this is an area where Congress clearly had in mind
that there would be, not broad pre-emption of this kind,
but the laws would apply. But that it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but -- I'm
sorry, but it certainly is pre-empted with respect to
visitorial powers.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Yes. That is correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: This kind of gets us
back to where we started.
MS. UNDERWOOD: It does. But think that --
I would like to -- I'd like to reserve some time for
rebuttal, if I may.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Stewart.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MALCOLM L. STEWART
FOR THE RESPONDENT OFFICE OF
THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY
MR. STEWART: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
To explain the threat that the OCC believes
the State's enforcement regime poses to the national
banking system and OCC's administration of that system,
I would like to begin by going back to a colloquy
between Ms. Underwood and Justice Breyer near the
beginning of the argument.
And Justice Breyer raised the possibility
that a myriad of State attorneys general would file --
would pursue similar antidiscrimination claims, and Ms.
Underwood's response was there really would be no
problem because they are all applying the same
substantive standard. And I think at a very high level
of generality that is so; that is, the Federal statute
and the State statute both say no discrimination on the
basis of race in extensions of credit. But I think when
you get to the way in which the statutes are
administered, there is at least the potential for
significant differences, because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, wait a minute. I --
this is state law. And if the State supreme court has
said that the statute means a certain thing and that
certain thing is a little bit different from what the
Federal antidiscrimination law is, I assume that the
Federal Government in applying State law has to -- has
to take that difference into account, doesn't it?
MR. STEWART: We would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Federal Government
doesn't -- doesn't have the right to alter State law.
MR. STEWART: The Federal Government
wouldn't have the right to alter State law. The Federal
Government would have the authority to make its own
assessment of whether the State law was pre-empted based
upon those distinctions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought it is a
given in this case -- and tell me if I am wrong on this
-- that the State substantive law is not pre-empted.
You refer, I think, to enforcement pre-emption; that is,
the State law is governing law. But the only enforcer
is Federal authority; and if that's so, is there any
other -- in all of Federal-State relations, any other
law where the State as sovereign can prescribe but
cannot enforce?
MR. STEWART: I give two examples from the
national banking system, itself. The first is the
Riegle-Neal amendments, which Justice Souter was
alluding to. And the amendments don't simply say that
OCC shall enforce non-pre-empted State laws. It says
that those laws shall be enforced by the Comptroller of
the Currency.
JUSTICE SOUTER: But do you -- do you agree
that -- that it is possible to read the "shall" both as
-- as an unequivocal grant of power to OCC, but not
necessarily as an exclusive ground?
MR. STEWART: I don't think so with the
"shall" in combination with the passive voice. That is,
if you had a statute that said a certain category of
suits shall be adjudicated by the Court of Federal
Claims, I think that would mean not simply that the
Court of Federal Claims would be required to adjudicate
them if a case was brought before it, but I think that
would unmistakably identify the Court of Federal Claims
as the exclusive tribunal --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but if you have a
situation in which the OCC, say, has very limited
personnel -- they only have ten people in their
enforcement division, for example -- and Congress
thought they have to get more, wouldn't it be
appropriate in that background to say, you shall start
enforcing? And that wouldn't necessarily mean you are
excluding States from also enforcing.
MR. STEWART: I agree that if the statute
simply -- if the statute used the active voice and said
the OCC shall enforce these laws, there would be a
better argument that the OCC's authority was not
exclusive. But when the statute said -- says these laws
shall be enforced by the Comptroller of the Currency, I
think the clear implication is this is the exclusive
mechanism by which the laws --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't see any difference
whatever in that regard between using the active and
passive.
MR. STEWART: Well, let me give you another
example from the national banking system, and that is 12
U.S.C. 85.
JUSTICE SOUTER: I want you to come back. I
-- I won't stop -- I don't want to stop you from doing
that, but I want to come back to this. Do you -- do you
want to go on to your second example, or do you want to
--
MR. STEWART: Let me just give you a second
example very quickly. 12 U.S.C. section 85, which was
an issue in Smiley, deals with the maximum rate of
interest that national banks may charge, and it says
that they may charge as much as the law of the State in
which they are located allows and no more. And that is
a similar system in that to determine the maximum rate
of interest that the bank may charge, you look to State
law. You defer to the choice of the State legislature,
but the enforcement regime with respect to
administrative enforcement is exclusively Federal. It's
only the Federal authorities that can go after --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's because --
because it's picking a rate. It's not saying there is
the Federal law and it has this rate, and the State law
that has that rate. Here, the Equal Credit Opportunity
Act, a Federal Act, undoubtedly applies. And that is
proper Federal -- Federal law enforced by the Federal
authorities.
The State law, as this picture is drawn for
us, is applicable. It's substantive law applicable to
these banks, but only the Federal authority can enforce
it. That seems passing strange. And do you have an
example outside the -- the two you gave us in the
National Bank Act where the State prescribes but the
Federal authorities enforce?
MR. STEWART: Well, another example would be
the Similar Crimes Act, which provides for the
incorporation of State law with respect to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's not State law
applying of its own force, just as your second example
was not State law applying of its own force. It was
State law that had been converted into Federal law by
the Federal Government's adoption of it.
MR. STEWART: Those provisions --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a different
situation.
MR. STEWART: Those provisions do accomplish
incorporation of State law as Federal law. But this
Court has repeatedly said, most recently in Watters,
that State law applies to national banks only insofar as
Congress shall see fit to permit it. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is your concern that
-- not with the substantive State law, but that leaving
enforcement to the States would cause particular
problems? I mean there may be a State law provision
that says you shall do this, and the way the attorney
general elects to enforce it is by shutting the bank
down, jailing the bank officers, doing all sorts of
things that -- that the -- the Federal Government may
not consider appropriate.
MR. STEWART: That is certainly true, that
the -- the State's exercise of remedial discretion may
be different from the Federal Government's. But even
before that stage, if you look at the letters in the
Joint Appendix that the New York Attorney General's
Office sent to the national banks in question, basically
the thrust of the letters was: We have identified what
we believe to be troubling statistical disparities in
terms of the terms on which the credit was offered to
applicants of different races. If those disparities are
not satisfactorily explained, that it -- you may be in
violation of State fair lending laws. Therefore, give
us a wide variety of information that would allow us to
determine whether you have a satisfactory explanation.
And I think it's clear that had this process
been allowed to run its course, what the New York
Attorney General's Office was going to do was assess the
bank's own criteria for making lending decisions to
decide whether those criteria were suitable and decide,
therefore, whether they provided a satisfactory
explanation for the statistical disparities that had
been observed.
And once the New York A.G. is in the
business of passing upon the adequacy of the bank's
lending criteria, he is right on the -- the OCC's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You are arguing for
conflict pre-emption. I mean that's a -- that's a
different issue than, say, that the -- the State law
shouldn't apply. But don't tell me the State law
applies, but only the Federal Government is -- what
incentive does the Federal Government have to enforce
State law?
MR. STEWART: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It -- it has so much spare
time after enforcing Federal law that it's -- it's going
to be worrying about State law?
MR. STEWART: Well, the point that has been
made at various times in the argument that the State law
basically tracks Federal law, I think, is an answer to
that question; that is, whatever incentive the Federal
Government might have to enforce idiosyncratic features
of State law that didn't have a Federal analogue. Here
the State law in question prohibits discriminatory
practices that are already prohibited by Federal law.
So whether OCC and HUD set out to enforce State law, if
they are vigorously enforcing Federal law, they will in
the course of doing that vindicate the State's
prerogatives.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is there any -- is there
any legislative history whatever to the effect that at
the time 36(f)(1)(B) was adopted -- to the effect that
its effect was to pre-empt State enforcement for --
MR. STEWART: They -- they don't say it in
-- with quite that degree of clarity, but there is a
colloquy quoted in the -- the brief for the Clearing
House between -- I believe it's Senator D'Amato and --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Senator D'Amato and --
MR. STEWART: And it is -- it is to the
effect that Senator D'Amato expresses the concern that
this may subject the -- the national banks in their
branch activities to State supervision. And the
response is that's not the case. That will happen with
branches of State banks, but with respect to branches of
national banks the supervision will be by the OCC.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Yes, but the -- the problem
I have with that is, as a -- as a kind of clear
statement of -- of something which is -- is -- would be
extraordinary -- is that it talks in terms of
supervision. It doesn't use the -- my recollection is
it doesn't use the magic word "enforcement."
And I would have thought that if in the
course of that colloquy the -- the statement had been
made: The States will not have the authority to enforce
this, that there would have been rather a dust-up. And
there wasn't. It's kind of a "dog that didn't bark"
argument. And, therefore, if -- if there is uncertainty
as to how to construe 36(f)(1)(B), I'm not sure that I
-- I don't think the legislative history supports your
exclusivity view.
MR. STEWART: Well, section 36(f)(1)(A)
refers to a very limited category of State laws that
include State fair lending laws and said these laws will
not be pre-empted unless they would be pre-empted with
respect to national banks generally. And then
(f)(1)(B) says the laws in that preceding paragraph
shall be enforced by the comptroller of the Currency.
And so even if the colloquy used the term "supervision,"
the focus of the statutory language was -- was on a
pretty narrow category of laws.
I would like also to refer the Court to 12
U.S.C. 484(b), which I think is relevant here, and it is
on page 1a of the appendix to the government's brief.
And it is an express exception to the general rule
against the exercise of visitorial powers.
And it says, "Notwithstanding subsection (a)
of this section, lawfully authorized State auditors and
examiners may at reasonable times and upon reasonable
notice to a bank review its records solely to ensure
compliance with applicable State unclaimed property or
escheat laws."
Now, the basic thrust of --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Does that mean -- when they
say "review records," does that mean that the State
auditors in effect can walk into the bank, as
distinguished from what we have here, in which the bank
is being requested to produce excerpts from records?
MR. STEWART: I think that would be the
implication of the provision, but the significant point
for our purposes is that it refers solely to ensure
compliance with applicable State unclaimed property
ordinances and laws.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you this
question? Naturally, if it's State laws, clearly they
can look at, but what if New York was trying to enforce
its discrimination laws in an employment context or in
context where they said you are charging minority
depositors -- giving them lower rates of interest than
you give Caucasian depositors? Would they have -- would
the discrimination and the rates of interests paid on
deposits -- assume that was the question. Would you
make the same argument, if that was what New York had
alleged?
MR. STEWART: Yes, we would because that
would be going to the banks' federally authorized
banking --
JUSTICE STEVENS: All you would have to just
look at the records. You can tell from the records
whether people of different classes are paying different
-- are getting different rates on their deposits.
MR. STEWART: I mean, it might be that in
that instance the discrimination would be unlikely to
persist, but the basic --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It would be unlikely to
persist. Maybe it's an unlikely example. But you are
suggesting that that would also interfere with the
Comptroller's ability to regulate the banks?
MR. STEWART: Yes, the way the regulation is
written, it speaks to State efforts to enforce laws that
are directed at the bank's federally authorized banking
activities.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So do you think the same
answer whether -- Justice Stevens mentioned employment
discrimination. The State has reason to believe the
bank is discriminating in its employment policies, and
it wants to examine certain employment records in that
connection. Would you say also that, although New York
can prescribe its antidiscrimination in employment law,
it can't enforce it?
MR. STEWART: No, the regulation does sweep
more categorically with respect to inspection of bank
records. New York would not be forbidden to file
lawsuits to enforce its employment discrimination laws.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does any of this bring us
back to the colloquy you began -- began with -- between
Justice Breyer and Ms. Underwood with reference to many
States?
MR. STEWART: Yes, a certain --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You -- you began on that,
and I never did hear --
MR. STEWART: The part of the point I was
trying to make was, even if the substantive State law on
its face is not pre-empted because it is identical to
the Federal law, once we get to the enforcement stage
where the relevant enforcement agency is saying your
statistical disparity constitutes a violation because it
is not justified by sound banking practices, inevitably
that judgment is going to put the State regulator in the
business of doing what OCC does. And if 50 different
State attorneys general have slightly different ideas of
what constitutes an adequate banking justification for
lending criteria that produces statistical disparity,
then the problem is multiplied. Then --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's conflict
pre-emption, and that goes to the -- to the law. You
shouldn't have a separate State law that -- that
provides a separate standard that conflicts with the
Federal standard. So you pre-empt the law. You don't
say the law is in effect, but the State can't enforce
it. That's a weird way to solve that problem.
MR. STEWART: Well, the other point I would
make about this is that it is accurate to say that under
the Federal regime the State is entirely disabled from
enforcing its own fair lending law. As Ms. Underwood
alluded to in the opening part of the argument and as
the Petitioner's reply brief explains at pages 25 and
, the Fair Housing Act does contain a mechanism by
which a State agency -- in the case of New York, it's
the Division of Human Resources --- can be certified by
HUD to enforce the State fair lending laws.
But that certification entails two different
steps: First, HUD has to determine that the substantive
State law is -- I believe it's substantially equivalent
to the comparable Federal law. And, second, HUD
monitors the performance of the enforcing agency, the
particular agency under State law that carries out that
responsibility, and HUD can thereby make sure that
enforcement as well as the substance of the law are
consistent with Federal law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Waxman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SETH P. WAXMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
THE CLEARING HOUSE ASSOCIATION, L.L.C.
MR. WAXMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Section 484 plainly has pre-emptive effect,
and what it pre-empts, quoting this Court's decision in
Watters, is, quote, "the State's investigative and
enforcement machinery," close quote.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Waxman, your mention
of Watters, which has been mentioned in the briefs, I
think is an inaccurate description of what that opinion
held. Watters dealt with a regime that was indisputably
visitorial. It was a registration regime, where annual
fees were paid, annual reports were filed with the State
financial agency, and the State monitor could go into a
lending organization any time for any reason without any
suspicion of wrongdoing. The only -- so everyone agreed
that was a visitorial regime.
The sole question was whether the banks --
the national bank's operating subsidiary was to be
equated with a division of the national bank. That was
the only question provided the Court.
MR. WAXMAN: Oh, I -- I quite agree, and I
did not mean to suggest that this Court's decision in
Watters, you know, the holding in Watters concludes the
outcome of this case. But this Court, in section II A
of Watters -- and we did have a State statutory regime
that dealt, yes, with licensure but also with
examination, supervision, and enforcement, including
judicial enforcement -- this Court repeatedly described
that what was pre-empted is -- and this goes to, I
think, a point that Justice Scalia was making -- was not
substantive pre-emption. There are substantive
pre-emption provisions that are addressed in other
sections of the Act, including the one that was at issue
in Smiley. What is exempted, this Court said again and
again, is the State's enforcement and investment and --
investigative and enforcement machinery, or its
examination and enforcement authority, and that those --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that was in the
context of a State law that says, mortgage lending
institution, you may not lend unless you register and do
all the rest. That was the context of Watters. And I
do not think that excerpts from that opinion should be
taken out of that context, which was: You can't be in
this business unless you register with us.
MR. WAXMAN: The question in the case is
whether or not what the Attorney General here sought to
do is the exercise of a visitorial power.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can I -- can I take what
Justice Ginsburg just said, and give you a thought that
I am interested in your response to?
I haven't seen the letter from the Attorney
General. Is the whole thing in the record?
MR. WAXMAN: There -- the letters are in the
record in the Joint Appendix.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, reading Judge
Parker's description of it, it seemed to me that what he
had said was that there are statistical disparities
between interest rates and race. Well, as long as, most
unfortunately, income is correlated with race, with
minorities being towards the bottom, of course such
statistical disparities will exist, some legitimate,
some not. So if the only basis for getting this
information is that allegation, it's hard to see how
this differs from the case that Justice Ginsburg put.
MR. WAXMAN: Yes, that --
JUSTICE BREYER: But it might be quite a
different case, if they had gone into court and found
individuals who were really getting different interest
rates and who really seemed very, very similar, but for
race. But at that point, they'd have to go get this
same information, because that's where they would find
whether that prima facie case was right or wrong.
MR. WAXMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you see what I'm doing?
MR. WAXMAN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm dividing the matter
vertically, instead of, say, horizontally --
MR. WAXMAN: I'd like to --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and I want to know if
that's possible.
MR. WAXMAN: I'd like to address both the
vertical and horizontal axes of what I perceive to be
your question. One is the distinction that this Court
drew in Guthrie, where it said there is a -- there's a
huge distinction in determining what's a visitorial
power between a private individual seeking to vindicate
a deprivation of his or her traditional property right,
which is what was at issue there, and what the Court --
what this Court said was the public right of visitation,
which it also explained was the State's, quote,
"enforcing observance of its laws and regulations."
There is a public and private distinction, and
visitation deals with the former.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Sure, there is.
MR. WAXMAN: It deals with the sovereign.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would -- would you
acknowledge, counsel, that there is a difference between
enforcing State laws through visitation and enforcing
State laws apart from visitation? And what Waters
involved was enforcing State laws through visitation.
Of course, you can do that through -- through visitation
powers, but you can also do apart from that by bringing
a lawsuit or whatever.
MR. WAXMAN: Justice Breyer, I'll get to the
horizontal axis in a moment. I'm afraid I'm going to
forget --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sorry, did I skip over
an axis here.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: I didn't mean to.
MR. WAXMAN: Let me go -- let me go to your
axis first, which is to say that anything that is a
visitorial power can also be interpreted as a police or
enforcement power, and what Congress had in mind -- this
is legislation that was born in the crucible of the
Civil War, and what Congress sought to pre-empt was
State executive action, State examination and
enforcement action with respect to these newly created,
very important Federal instrumentalities. That was
historically done, this Court explained in Guthrie, and
Chancellor Kent and Blackstone and many other
authorities agree was historically done through access
to the courts; and in fact what Dean Pound in his
oft-cited article about visitorial powers said, was --
he said, and this is discussed at pages 16 through 18 of
the amicus brief of the Financial Services Roundtable --
what he called, quote, "the leading case for visitorial
powers in equity" was a case called the Attorney General
v Chicago and Northwest Railroad decided in 1874, in
which the Attorney General of Wisconsin was seeking to
require this railroad to comply with the State's
mandated rate schedule. That was a visitorial power,
even though you could also call it a law enforcement
power.
Now, Justice Breyer, on the horizontality of
your question: This is not a suit in which the New York
Attorney General is trying to enforce its employment
discrimination laws or its health laws or its zoning
laws. The attorney general wants the loan records of
national banks, and he wants them so that he can
evaluate for himself whether the banks are making proper
judgments about how to market and how to price their
loans.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Waxman, assume --
assume for a minute, this -- what if before writing the
--
letter, the Attorney General of New York said, "We have
conducted 500 interviews with people who have borrowed
money from you, and on the basis of all these interviews
we have drawn these tentative conclusions that there is
discrimination. We would like to give you an
opportunity to explain all of this by showing us your
records." And they say no, we won't do it. Would they
then be pre-empted from bringing their lawsuit?
MR. WAXMAN: Yes, they would. And in fact
JUSTICE STEVENS: Even though they didn't
have to look at any bank record to make their prima
facie case?
MR. WAXMAN: Well, their -- the OCC in the
preamble to its regulations does draw a distinction
between State enforcement actions and a pure State
declaratory judgment, quote, "as to the meaning of the
applicable law." This is a case that -- in which --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I am asking about a
hypothetical. I understand your argument here. But I
just don't understand how your argument would apply to
my hypothetical. But I think the regulation would apply
to the hypothetical.
MR. WAXMAN: Well, this is -- this case is
certainly in the core, but a -- a State authority,
whether it's the State banking commission or the State
human rights commission or the State attorney general,
or for that matter another Federal Government authority,
that seeks to call a national bank to account for the
manner in which it is conducting an expressly
designated, allocated banking power is an exercise of
visitorial power.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it isn't -- it isn't
if --
JUSTICE STEVENS: He doesn't even want to
look at your books; he just wants to prove it by people
who have been borrowing money and compare them with --
among them they can orally.
MR. WAXMAN: I don't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I don't understand why
that would be visitorial power.
MR. WAXMAN: The -- the State's enforcement
of any law that is directed at a national bank's
authorized banking powers is a visitorial power. And
the fact that it may also be characterized as a police
power or a lawsuit is -- is interesting, but not what's
at stake.
What Congress aimed at -- Congress in 1864
knew -- the Supreme Court said, Blackstone and Kent had
said -- that visitorial powers on civil corporations are
exercised A, by the sovereign, not by a private
individual, and B, are almost always exercised through
access to the courts. Whether they are invoking the
courts' authority to seek records or not, that was the
historical core of what visitorial powers --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So one could say, yes,
the Federal authorities have visitorial powers, and they
can go to court. But we have here that the State can
prescribe, not a supervisory regime, but -- fair
lending. And the State wants to go into court and say
the bank is violating the State substantive law, which
is applicable.
MR. WAXMAN: That's correct. And a
sovereign taking a national bank into court with respect
to not any old general law, but with respect to the
conduct of its specifically authorized national banking
powers, is the exercise of visitorial powers.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, is it --
MR. WAXMAN: That was the reason for the
courts of justice exception.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is it the exercise of
visitorial powers, or is it an action which covers the
same subject that an exercise of visitorial powers would
do? Let me -- let me propose a distinction, and I don't
know whether this is sound. You know -- I mean, you
tell me.
I would suppose that if someone with
visitorial powers dealing with discrimination in lending
brought an action against the bank or tried to enforce
it against the bank and couldn't do so in any other way
then by going to court, it would go to court, and it
would say court, tell this institution that I have some
responsibility for, to obey the law.
But I also assume that if the Attorney
General of New York, which is not a visitor, enforces
the law, it would go into court and say tell them to
obey the law and to pay damages or recompense of some
sort to these people whom they have wronged.
The subject matter of each suit is the same,
but the relief that is being requested and the judicial
power that is being exercised is different in these two
cases. Is that a fair distinction?
MR. WAXMAN: I don't think -- I think that
if I understood your question, and I may not have -- if
a suit by a private individual or a group of private
individuals seeking to indicate the deprivation of a
private traditional right is not visitorial; but if the
State, either directly in the enforcement of its general
laws or seeking to protect the people of its State, goes
into court or asks for records or anything else, it is
exercising a traditional visitorial power.
May -- while I have your attention, may I
also go back to your question about 36(f) and
Riegle-Neal, because there is yet -- there are other
additional indicators that when the Congress said in
(f) that these State laws shall be enforced by the
OCC, it was mandatory and exclusive.
First of all, the colloquy that was
discussed and is reported in our brief, I think at page
, does use the word "enforce" as well as "supervise,"
but more to the point --
JUSTICE SOUTER: That is the one with
Senator D'Amato?
MR. WAXMAN: Yes. Riegle-Neal -- here's the
most important point. That provision that we've been
were looking at had a cognate, had an analogue that was
also enforced. Riegle-Neal basically said out-of-state
banks can now branch bank. When they do so, they are
subject to these four categories of State laws. The
provision we have been looking, which was section 102,
said with respect to enforcement of those laws, the OCC
shall enforce it. But section 105 said where the
out-of-state bank is a State-chartered bank -- and this
is reported, I think it's at section 1820(h) of title
, when it's a State-chartered bank, the State
authorities of the host State shall enforce the laws.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Uh-huh.
MR. WAXMAN: So it enacted a dual regime
that demonstrates exactly what Congress had in mind,
which is that there would be one regulator making the
kind of judgments about, okay, there is a disparity, but
let's look at credit history, let's look at the loan to
equity value, let's look at income versus debt incurred,
and all these factors that the OCC and the Fed have
explained have to go into making a judgment about
whether or not a particular condition of a particular
loan violates Federal law, whether it the Fair Housing
Act or the Equal Credit Opportunity Act or the Fed's
regulation B.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Waxman, you are
talking about lending. And like depositing, those are
core banking activities, but today national banks have a
lot of incidental -- they have authority to do things
incidental to banking. Does your restriction of State
enforcement extend to those matters incidental to
banking?
MR. WAXMAN: May I answer? I believe that
it would if those incidental authorities are in fact
authorized, approved and regulated by the OCC, but this
case doesn't require you to address it, because this is
an express power under section 371(a).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Five minutes, Ms. Underwood.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF BARBARA D. UNDERWOOD
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. UNDERWOOD: A couple of -- four points
or so. To the extent the subpoena is perceived -- or
this discovery request -- it didn't even proceed to this
subpoena stage -- is perceived to be burdensome, State
laws allows a motion to quash a subpoena for inadequate
basis or for harassment. So there is control in the
State courts over anything that is perceived to be
excessive.
Two, States have been enforcing consumer
protection and fair lending laws since the mid '70s when
they were enacted. The Center for Responsive Lending
amicus brief has a discussion of that history of
enforcement. The Conway affidavit at the Joint Appendix
at 152 has a description of New York's enforcement
activities between 1975 and 2004. And the Lawyers'
Committee for Civil Rights also goes over that history.
And they have been enforcing other laws
against national banks for even longer, antitrust laws,
branching laws, idiosyncratic laws of various sorts with
no evidence that this has impaired the functions of the
banks.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ms. Underwood, I -- I
forgot the response you made in your brief. I know you
did make some response to subsection (b) of section 484.
How do you -- how do you explain that?
MS. UNDERWOOD: In the exceptions?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. Why -- why do they
list those exceptions, unless one would think that
everything is covered?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Virtually every exception
was enacted to resolve a controversy over whether
something was visitorial or not. In fact, just as in
Guthrie, where this Court said the shareholders' suit
for bank records was not visitorial, or alternatively,
if it is, it is covered by the courts of justice
exception. So too, each of those exceptions involved a
situation where there was a claim, an incorrect claim,
but a claim that the action would be banned as
visitorial, so Congress --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, why isn't
it a complete answer to what I agree is a somewhat
unusual situation of pre-empting enforcement but not the
substance of law that its enforcement that raises the
concerns? That the Federal Government thinks the State
law is fine, but when you get attorneys general
enforcing it in a particular way, that's what causes the
problem. And I mean, the problem arises in a lot of
areas. Even within the Federal Government, the FBI and
DEA have different ways of enforcing that might conflict
with each other. Why doesn't that make perfect sense?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well, even without
enforcement of State law, OCC would not have exclusive
control of enforcement of discrimination laws against
national banks. So the idea that State enforcement
poses some special problem to interfere with that
exclusive control is just a mistake. That's not the way
Congress set it up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, why -- why is it
a mistake? Why can't Congress or the OCC think that
that's where the difficulties are going to arise? In
other words, it's kind of a less intrusive approach, and
saying, well, you can have your State law but we are
concerned about enforcement, so we are going to be the
ones that enforce it.
MS. UNDERWOOD: I didn't mean it's a mistake
of policy. I meant it's a mistake in description of the
regime Congress created.
HUD has administrative enforcement. DOJ has
litigation enforcement. This is a Federal law. Private
parties can enforce Federal fair housing law. States
can probably enforce Federal fair housing laws, too, as
-- patriotic for the victim. The Second Circuit set
aside that part of the injunction, the part that barred
New York from enforcing Federal law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your answer is
because they have different entities that can enforce
it, they are sort of in for a penny, in for a pound? If
you let anybody else enforce it, you have got to let
everybody else enforce it?
MS. UNDERWOOD: No, I don't say that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Including the
entities that have historically have targeted national
banks?
MS. UNDERWOOD: I don't make that argument.
What I say is that is strong evidence that Congress
didn't intend to give OCC exclusive control here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I suppose if -- if
enforcement pre-emption is the lesser step, we probably
ought to revise our jurisprudence so as not to tread any
more heavily than we have to upon the States so that
where there is conflict pre-emption, all we should say
is the State law is not invalidated, it is simply not
enforceable?
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean that would --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I suppose the
question would not be what we think is a good idea but
what Congress has done. And here the OCC has
interpreted what Congress has done is to make exclusive
the OCC regulation only with respect to enforcement.
MS. UNDERWOOD: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I would suppose you
would thank them for that rather than criticize them for
MS. UNDERWOOD: I think that in many ways
leaving the law intact and denying the States the
ability to enforce it is more intrusive then simply
finding pre-emption. In any event, Congress made it
quite clear that it didn't want pre-emption.
I think my time is up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Ms. Underwood. The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:18 p.m., the case in the
