IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
CHRISTOPHER MICHAEL :
DEAN, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-5274
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 4, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:10 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
SCOTT J. FORSTER, ESQ., Calhoun, Ga.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
SCOTT J. FORSTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
DEANNE E. MAYNARD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 25
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
SCOTT J. FORSTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 53
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:10 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 08-5274, Dean v. United States.
Mr. Forster.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SCOTT J. FORSTER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FORSTER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the
Court:
The issue before the Court in this case is
whether the discharge provision of 924(c) carries with
it some requirement of intent. We believe that the
answer to this question is yes. And to that end we
would cite to the leg -- to the text of the statute
itself as well as the history involved, the presumption
of mens rea that is inherent in all statutes such as
this Court's case law has been clear on as well as the
principle of the rule of lenity, if we get to that
point, and if the Court deems that there is some type of
ambiguity.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Forster, there are
three levels under this: Possession, brandishing, and
if the gun is discharged. You don't quarrel with the
notion that Dean at least brandished this gun?
MR. FORSTER: We -- we do not dispute that,
Your Honor. No, he clearly intentionally brandished the
weapon.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So we're talking about a
three-year difference between brandishing and if the gun
is discharged?
MR. FORSTER: Yes, Your Honor, that's
exactly right. And the statute in 924 requires that the
use of the firearm be during and in relation to the
underlying crime of violence, which in this case is a
bank robbery. And we believe that the proper reading of
the statute would require that the discharge also be
done during and in relation to the underlying crime of
violence. Otherwise, the statute simply would not make
any sense.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think one of the
stronger arguments against you is the use of the passive
voice. It doesn't say anybody who discharges a firearm.
It says a firearm is discharged. And that seems to me
to take it away from the element of intent that you're
trying to focus on.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I think that it's
a transitive verb the way it's used. By definition it
would have some object. Someone would have had to have
discharged the weapon. And so I think that the Court's
cases on mens rea and so forth would continue to apply,
even given the way that it's phrased in the statute. I
don't think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think it's
different -- I don't remember the grammar too well. You
think "if firearm is discharged" is different than
"firearm discharges;" is that your point?
MR. FORSTER: I'm not sure it would make a
difference in this case, Your Honor, because I don't
think there's any -- I think that by definition the
Court would have to ask itself who discharged the
weapon. I don't think you can just use the word
"discharge" in a vacuum. It has to be during --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I'm not sure
that's right. I mean, if in fact the bank robber tries
to flee and the security guard is forced to use his
firearm, increasing the danger to everybody else in the
bank, I'm not sure this statute wouldn't cover that as
well.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I don't believe
the statute would, because the individual who would be
charged with it would not himself have "during" or "and
in relation to" the underlying crime of violence.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it doesn't say -- it
says, "if the gun is discharged." And I think on the
government's reading it would cover the police officer
who is trying to apprehend a robber and fires a gun.
MR. FORSTER: Yes, Your Honor, I think under
the government's theory that would be true. But I think
that would open up --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. What -- what --
I guess I'm not following this.  You say it would be
true that if the blank -- if the bank guard fires his
own gun when -- when the bank robber is fleeing, that
would come within this?
MR. FORSTER: No, Justice Scalia, not under
our reading. I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You say under the
government's it would? I don't think it would under the
government's either. Do you?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You have to use or carry
the firearm before -- before section 2 even applies.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it's the police
officer who snatches the gun.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ah, that's different, yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's different.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So it's using the
robber's gun, but by the police officer who is
apprehending him. In other words, as I understand the
government's view, it doesn't matter whether it's the
police officer. It has to be the gun of the robber, but
it doesn't matter whether it's the robber or the police
officer who discharges it.
MR. FORSTER: That's true, ma'am.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess it's also the
government's view -- this is even weirder -- that it
doesn't matter who brandishes the gun. The -- the bank
guard grabs the gun and brandishes the gun, and that
also gets additional time served for the bank robber.
It doesn't seem fair.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I don't believe
that the -- that the hypothetical of the guard waving
the gun around, I don't think that would meet the
definition of "brandish" the way 924 defines it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It has very specific --
what are the words that define what is brandishing?
MR. FORSTER: Justice Ginsburg, "brandish"
is defined under the statute a couple of different ways.
The -- the dictionary definition of "brandish," which is
to grab something and wave it around, is certainly
contained in that.
But the definition goes further. The
definition also says that if I, for example, make known
that I have a gun, if I pass a note saying I have a gun,
that would also be brandishing under the statute.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I -- I didn't think the
government or anybody was reading the definition of
brandishing to include a police officer.
MR. FORSTER: The way the government's brief
-- well, with regards to brandish, Your Honor, I don't
know that the government goes that far.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it runs into the
problem, which is also a different problem for you, and
that is the brandishing must be for the purposes -- for
the purpose of intimidating.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Right.
JUSTICE SOUTER: So that's probably going to
eliminate the case in which the officer grabs the
felon's gun. So the problem that it seems to me that it
creates for you is that "brandish" is specifically
defined to have that particular intentional element.
There is, however, no definition of -- of the -- of the
term in question here, which suggests that they did not
have any discharge -- that they did not have any --
any -- any intent to impose an intent requirement. When
they do it, they know how to do it. In this case they
didn't do it.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I would disagree
with that simply for this reason. This Court's case law
is clear that if Congress wants to do away with the mens
rea element, they must affirmatively do so. And I don't
think that it's proper to say that because there's a
specific definition of "brandish," therefore they meant
discharge to be basically strict liability.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why is it improper? I
mean, it may not be conclusive, but it seems to me
evidence that points in that direction.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I think that that
would be disregarding the presumption of mens rea that
exists pursuant to this Court's case law as well as the
requirement --
JUSTICE SOUTER: We have -- we have lots of
cases in which it makes sense to disregard that
presumption, and -- and nobody thinks twice about it, I
mean, accomplice liability being an example.
There are -- there are -- there are lots of
State crimes in which it is dispensed with, reckless
driving, death resulting. And in all of those cases
what in effect the rationale is that the -- that the
individual who is being charged has created a risk, no
one can control that risk, including himself. But he
bears the responsibility for, if you will, bad luck if
the risk is realized. And that is the rationale for --
for holding him liable for discharge here without any
particular knowing or -- or intentional act in making
the discharge.
So why doesn't that make sense and why is
that not an answer to the usual presumption that there
will be a specific state of mind required?
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I don't think this
statute is driven by consequence. And as I understand
Your Honor's hypothetical --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why? Why?
MR. FORSTER: Because the words that the
statute uses are directly focused to the -- to the
conduct of the defendant: "Possess, use, brandish,
discharge," as opposed to, for example, carjacking.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, this is conduct. I
mean, it isn't just bad luck. This is -- what we have
here is a negligent bank robber. I mean, he has left
the safety off, okay, and -- and trips the gun. I mean,
bank robbing is bad enough, but negligent bank robbing
is something --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- is something that should
be punished more severely.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, certainly under
the statute the Court has far more authority than the
ten years it imposed, and I think Congress is clear that
they -- they allowed for substantially larger sentences
in such a case. This case obviously just discusses the
application of the mandatory minimum.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your -- your
argument would give rise to very serious problems of
proof. Every time a gun goes off, the bank robber would
be able to say it was an accident. I mean, we had a
particularly klutzy robber here that everybody agrees it
was an accident, but, you know, in many cases it won't
be clear.
Yes, I was pointing the gun at the person,
but I didn't mean to fire it. It just went off. And
he's sad about it just as everyone else is. And that
would get to the jury in every case.
Just because it was easy here doesn't mean
it's going to be easy every time to draw a line. And it
gets back to Justice Souter's point. If you pose the
risk that the gun is going to go off, that's
additionally punishable conduct.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, obviously -- I
mean, the risk certainly does go up. But as I -- as I
think the statute is written, it's not driven by what
the risk is. As I say, as opposed to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's not my
question, really. The question is the problem of proof.
Yours is an easy case. Most cases it's not going to be.
Most cases when the gun goes off, the robber will be
able to say, I didn't intend that it discharged. It
was -- it was an accident.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I don't believe a
jury would be -- would make that decision, because under
this Court's authority in Harris, that would be for the
judge; and -- and obviously criminals would make these
claims, and it would be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me? That would be
for the judge?
MR. FORSTER: Under this Court's authority
in Harris, Your Honor, brandish and discharge are not
elements of the offense that must be indicted and proved
to a jury. They are sentencing elements or enhancement,
if you will, that -- that would be up to the judge, and
that's this Court's Harris ruling.
JUSTICE ALITO: Doesn't that undermine your
argument that there's a presumption that a mens rea has
to apply, because this is just a sentencing element?
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I don't believe
so. This Court has never said that merely because it is
a sentencing enhancement rather than an element of the
offense that somehow the statutory rules of construction
cease to apply.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Isn't it part of the
background here that it was proposed at the time these
enhancements came into the law, it was proposed that
there be a specific state of mind requirement for the
discharge of the gun, and that was not enacted?
MR. FORSTER: I didn't hear the -- I'm
sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that part of
the legislative history was that there were proposals --
I mean, there is a rather sharp difference between
"possess" -- yes, you have to have a knowledge, intent
element -- "brandishing," very clear, for purposes of
intimidation -- then "discharge" has no -- it's just
that the gun is discharged.
Weren't there proposals to include something
like what was included for the other two, that is, that
there be an intent requirement?
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, there were various
drafts in the House and the Senate that -- that
specifically provided the intent requirement. The
compromise that came out was basically a disagreement
over the penalty, and the language that the Congress
used, "during and in relation to," necessarily implies
some type of an intent element. I think the circuits
are clear on that; it has to be knowing, otherwise it's
not during and in relation to.
And so I believe that the choice of language
that Congress uses -- there has to be the connection, we
believe, between the use -- during in relation to and
the discharge. Otherwise the statute makes no sense,
because it wouldn't be triggered by anything.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? I can't get anywhere
with the language, to tell you the truth. I could read
it either way. It -- the House language is the same.
The person "discharges," yeah, but what if he discharges
it accidentally? Is the accidental case or unintended
case meant to be covered or not meant to be covered?
MR. FORSTER: We don't --
JUSTICE BREYER: And you don't get anywhere
-- I just can't get anywhere with the language. The
reason they put the "is discharged" is probably for
parallelism. It was a drafting section in the Senate,
and they do their job in a stylistic way. I found
nothing that suggests anything other than that.
So -- so where am I? Sometimes a person who
discharges the weapon accidentally is really much worse
than the one who does it purposely. Purposely, he
shoots at the ceiling; accidentally, he kills a person
dead; okay? So I mean, I can't get too far with that.
So where -- so there we are. Is there
anything else -- there is the post problem that the
Chief Justice mentioned. Is there anything else you can
say to me, who really doesn't see it one way or the
other way in this statute?
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: Would you say, look, this
is why you win?
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, in the committee
reports and so forth I think it's pretty clear that they
did not intend an unintentional or an accidental
discharge to be covered.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why -- why do you think
that? I mean, it is absolutely true that a person who
is a bank robber and has a gun and has already shown it,
and it goes off accidentally is, is -- has caused a
tremendous harm in certain cases, which traditionally
has been thought meriting a higher sentence.
And it is also true that he doesn't have the
same state of mind as the one who does it purposely.
That is true, too. Both are true. And so now what
should I do? I know what you want me to do, but why?
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, the requirement --
we think that the discharge again must be during and in
relation to. There has to be that connection. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which -- it's during the
bank robbery.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's in relation to the --
I mean, you know, in a sense it is, in a sense it isn't;
same problem.
MR. FORSTER: I don't think this case --
this Court's case law would support a finding that an
accidental use would have been in relation to. That's
this Court's ruling in Smith.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, there's accidents
and accidents. And couldn't one say, looking at this
that, well, we will -- the State will find that the
culpability that we will attribute to this statute is
reckless? If recklessness were the requirement
certainly the facts in this case would fit, would they
not?
MR. FORSTER: I think that the evidence
would suggest that he was reckless --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You accept that --
MR. FORSTER: -- but I don't believe that it
was knowing. And then I think that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You say reckless is not
enough, it has to be knowing. This is not a mere
accident. It's -- this -- the gun was loaded, it wasn't
locked, and he's raking in money with one hand, holding
the gun with the other. The teller is crouching down.
I mean, there was -- there was a pretty substantial risk
of something going wrong, right?
MR. FORSTER: Absolutely, there was. But I
think this Court's authority in Smith talks about the --
the intent element that is inherent in this. It has to
be purposeful, it has -- it cannot be by accident, and
that's what this Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why? You place a lot of
reliance on this: During and in relation to any crime
of violence or drug trafficking crime. But that --
that's in the prologue, and it applies only to the
matter covered in the prologue -- to wit, "During and in
relation to any crime of violence or drug trafficking
crime, for which the person may be prosecuted in a court
of the United States, uses or carries a firearm or in
furtherance of any such crime possesses a firearm."
That -- that's what all that language
"during and relation to" applies to. And then it
continues: "Shall," if that "in relation to" exists,
"in addition to the punishment provided for such crime:"
One, be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not less
than five"; two; and number three, what we're dealing
with here, "if the firearm is discharged, be sentenced
to a term of imprisonment of not less than ten years."
I don't see how that language during and in
relation to any crime of violence applies to anything,
except the use or carrying of a firearm.
MR. FORSTER: Justice Scalia, sir, we
believe that the proper -- that the better reading would
be some connection between those two, between the
discharge and the underlying, the during and relation
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that? How could you
-- how could you make the lack of connection any clearer
than by ending the first, the introduction with a dash,
and then putting 1, 2, and 3? I mean, it seems to me
that it applies to the portion before the dash.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, if that were the
-- if that were the interpretation, then it would lead
to what we consider to be some of the absurdities as far
as the results go. If there is no connection between
"during and in relation to" -- I will refer to it as the
connection. In absence of that connection, any number
of different things could occur, and that connection is
what makes this statute make sense.
And I believe that the government basically
acknowledges that in their brief, that there has to be
-- if there's not some connection -- I think it's page
of the government's brief. When we discussed the
absurd results that might flow from a statute where
there is no such connection, what the government says --
I believe it's on page 29 -- is that to avoid these
absurd results, this connection does exist. But then
the next sentence they say: But it doesn't mean there
is a mens rea.
And it seems to me that what the government
wants in that case is the "during and relation to "has
to apply to discharge to avoid the absurd results, but
yet they don't want Smith to go along with it. And
Smith said that during and relation to is purposeful,
has to have an effect, and it can't be done by accident.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How would -- how would a
discharge not be during and in relation to? Give me an
example of -- of what you're worried about.
MR. FORSTER: Any discharge any other time.
JUSTICE BREYER: He sees a duck fly by the
window and he's a hunter.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that -- excuse me.
That's not -- that's not covered. Number 3 only applies
to someone who has already been guilty of what's set
forth in the prologue.
MR. FORSTER: That's the connection that we
believe is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's the only
connection that's necessary. You have to have done what
was set forth in the prologue, and it has -- has to be
in the course of doing that. But "the course of doing
that" means just in the course of using a firearm in
connection with the bank robbery.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I don't think
that's the -- the best way to read it. I think it has
to be during and in relation to the bank robbery.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the "use or carry"
certainly has to be in relation -- during and in
relation to, but that's step one. So he already is
using and carrying or carrying in relation to the bank
robbery. And then -- so that's the starting premise.
That excludes all your things about years before or
years after he carried -- he carried a gun. You -- step
one narrows it to the person who uses or carries a gun
in connection with a bank robbery.
MR. FORSTER: And -- and I would agree with
that, and then when you take this Court's authority in
Smith to say that that type use during and in relation
to cannot be accidental. And so I go back to the
original question Your Honor asked me, did he
intentionally brandish it? Clearly. And so we believe
that if -- if this case we are here about is fit into
Smith, he's on the hook for the seven years under
brandish, but because the discharge was accidental, it
cannot constitute use under this Court's authority in
Smith.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me ask you a question
about that. I thought that "or possesses" was separate
from the "uses or carries." Is possession an example of
using or carrying or is it as it says -- "or who in
furtherance of such crime possesses"? Is that a
separate -- separate enhancement?
MR. FORSTER: I don't know that I would use
the word "enhancement," Your Honor. The principal body
of 924 --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. FORSTER: -- "carries" with "uses" as in
this case as well as later on in the statute
"possesses." So it says both.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But merely possessing is
enough to get the first enhancement of five years.
MR. FORSTER: If it is in furtherance --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Or relation to.
MR. FORSTER: If it --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The "uses or carries"
doesn't -- doesn't necessarily apply to the possession.
MR. FORSTER: The -- I believe, under the
reading of the statute, Your Honor, they're separate.
He could have been charged arguably with possession --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. FORSTER: -- in furtherance of, but he
wasn't. He was charged with using during and in
relation to the underlying crime of violence.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do we have to find that
the phrase "if a firearm is brandished" and the later
phrase "if a firearm is discharged" require intentional
brandishing and intentional discharging? Why can't we
limit it by saying, oh, of course it means if the
firearm is brandished by the bank robber or by the felon
or if it's discharged by the felon, but leaving it quite
undetermined whether it has to be intentionally
discharged, or even intentionally brandished for that
matter.
MR. FORSTER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The definition of
brandishing, I guess, requires some intent to put
another person in fear.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, I think that you
would then have to turn to this Court's -- well, first
of all, I think it's the best reading of the statute.
It doesn't make sense any other way to say that you can
have the gun discharged but not be during and in
relation to the underlying crime of violence. It
doesn't make sense.
Second, I believe that this Court's
statutory rules of construction would say that if
Congress wanted to do away with the mens rea element in
this case, they would have had to have done so
expressly. And we don't believe that they did.
Now, every circuit that has discussed the
requirement "during and in relation to" has found a
knowledge requirement that you can't not know the gun is
there, for example. There has to be the knowledge
requirement. And this Court's authority in Smith
suggests or says clearly that it cannot be used
accidentally.
So now the question becomes this: If the
Court decides that during -- that the discharge must be
during and in relation to, and when the Court does that
it takes its own authority in Smith to say that it has
to be purposeful, it has to have the effect of the
commission of the crime, now is -- would the use in this
case be subject to Smith? And Smith is clear that
accidental discharge simply -- or accidental use, rather
-- it didn't talk about discharge exactly -- but that
accidental use would never be because it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why -- you say that this
background -- that there has to be a state of mind
element. And we can accept that that's a general
principle, but here we have a provision that does
require a state of mind -- specifically requires a state
of mind for the possession, for the brandishing, intent
to intimidate, but here is this other one that suddenly
doesn't. So wouldn't the text of this statute say --
the third one, discharging a gun, they didn't mean to
have any element because -- any element of mens rea --
because they had it in number 1 and 2, and 3 leaves it
out.
MR. FORSTER: Your Honor, if -- I believe
such an interpretation would basically mean that that
silence would be interpreted as a strict liability, that
silence with regards to the specific intent requirement
would mean the Congress meant that no intent was
necessary. And that's simply never what these cases
from this Court have held. There's the presumption that
Congress operates against, and if they wish to eliminate
the mens rea element, they must do so expressly. And we
simply do not believe that it -- that it happened in
this case.
One last point is, we believe there's
nothing else that Congress would have had to have done
to establish a general intent, and if that's true, then
I think the very least that could be said about our
interpretation is that it would be a reasonable one, in
which case lenity principles would then come into play.
Mr. Chief Justice, if there's no other
questions I would like to reserve the remainder of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. FORSTER: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Maynard.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DEANNE E. MAYNARD
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. MAYNARD: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
By its terms, the sentencing factor in
section 924(c)(1)(A)(iii) contains no mens rea
requirement. Rather, it requires a certain fact to be
present in the course of the section 924(c) offense,
namely that the firearm is discharged.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does it require that the
discharge be during and in relation to the crime? I
mean, suppose the bank robber, you know, he sees -- son
of a gun, he sees among the customers a man that ran off
with his wife a year ago, and he is just overcome with
anger, and he -- you know, he takes a shot at this guy.
It's not in relation to the bank robbery. Would --
would that discharge be covered?
MS. MAYNARD: As long as the discharge
occurs while the 924(c) offense is going on --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MS. MAYNARD: -- yes, Justice Scalia, it
would -- it would apply. The "during and in relation
to" language from the principal paragraph is part of the
offense, but it does not carry down to the separate
sentencing factors.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about the
police come in and say, "Drop it"; he says, "Oh, my
robbery's over"; he drops it, and it goes off?
MS. MAYNARD: That case might present a
question about whether or not, once he drops it in
compliance with a lawful order to do so, he is still
committing the section 924(c) offense. If the section
4(c) offense is deemed to be over at that point, then,
no, the firearm would not -- the fact would not have
been present while the course of the section 924(c) --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So that's the line
between is it going on. But assuming the offense is --
the bank robbery is still going on, like he's got
confederates gathering up the money or something, does
that fall under your theory that the gun is discharged?
MS. MAYNARD: In our -- under our theory,
the -- there must be a temporal connection between the
offense for which the defendant is being sentenced,
which is a section 924(c) offense, the using or carrying
the firearm during and in relation to the bank robbery
in your hypothetical or possessing it in furtherance of
the bank robbery in your hypothetical.
If one concluded that because the bank
robbery continued, even though he was no longer using or
carrying the firearm or no longer possessing it, that
the 924(c) offense also continued, and the firearm
discharges when he drops it, then, yes, the firearm is
discharged while the section 924(c) offense is ongoing,
and, yes, the mandatory minimum would apply.
But -- but that hypothetical presents
questions about the beginning and end of the section
4(c) itself, not questions about whether or not the
discharge was intentional or accidental.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you think that --
regardless of whether it's intentional or accidental, do
you think he has to discharge it or that he has to
brandish it? It is the passive voice. Does it mean if
anybody discharges it or brandishes it?
MS. MAYNARD: Two -- at least two points
about that, Your Honor. The passive voice makes clear
that Congress cared about the fact of the discharge,
that Congress was indifferent as to who discharged the
weapon. Because the "is brandished" is also stated in
the passive voice, we think Congress was also
indifferent as to who brandished the firearm, although
there is a separate provision giving content to what it
means to brandish, and brandish must be done in order to
intimidate. So -- but if a confederate, for example --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Grabs it out of his hand
and brandishes it.
MS. MAYNARD: -- and brandishes in order to
intimidate the victims in the bank, then yes, both of
them would be subject to the brand -- to the brandishing
enhancement. And even if one thought that the language
in the -- in the sentencing factor, "if the firearm is
discharged," applied only to the defendant's conduct,
which -- that's not our position, and we think that
clearly -- it clearly encompasses others -- ordinary
liability rules under Pinkerton and aiding and abetting
principles would hold a confederate liable for discharge
by another.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So even if the
police officer -- the police officer disarms the robber
and ten minutes later mishandles the gun and it goes
off.
MS. MAYNARD: Again, I think that would
present questions about whether or not the section
4(c) offense was still continuing, if the law
enforcement officer has the weapon.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, assuming it
is. I mean, he has got the one guy neutralized but the
others are still, you know, under the teller's window,
and that isn't over. So then the guy who is captured
already gets an extra three years because the officer
mishandled the gun?
MS. MAYNARD: If the section 924(c) offense
is -- is -- is ongoing and if the firearm is discharged,
the mandatory minimum sentence applies. One might
conclude that if third parties take the weapon and
discharge it -- and, by the way, I do believe these are
purely hypotheticals. They point to no case where
that's actually been the case -- but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, there probably
aren't a lot of cases where the bank robbers are such
klutzes that they're fumbling with the gun and it goes
off, either.
MS. MAYNARD: That's true, there may not be
very many accidental discharges. But there's no reason
to believe Congress wanted courts to engage in the
inquiry about whether or not the defendant accidentally
discharged the weapon. If this Court were to her -- to
hold that accident -- accidental discharges are not
covered by the sentencing factor, I think that we would
see more claims of accidental discharge.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I interrupted your
answer.
MS. MAYNARD: About the third -- if one is
concerned about the actions of third parties who are not
confederates in any way taking the weapon -- and we do
believe it does under the statute's language need to be
the firearm that is the basis of the section 924(c)
offense, and not someone else's firearm. But if -- if
-- in other words, not the security guard's firearm. If
the firearm is discharged by third party causes you
concern, one could conclude that that is not the manner
in which the defendant committed the offense; and that
this Court's decision in Harris described this type of
sentencing factor, these very sentencing factors, as the
kind of factor that one looks at: Is a fact present in
the manner in which the defendant committed the offense?
And so one might conclude that if the law
enforcement officer disarms the robber and then later
discharges the weapon, that that fact of a discharge is
not part of the manner in which the defendant committed
the offense. We don't think that's compelled, by the
way.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It would be the same --
you would give the same answer if the teller grabbed the
gun from the robber and it went off?
MS. MAYNARD: If the teller grabs the gun
from the robber and it discharges, as long as the
section 924(c) offense is continuing, then the firearm
is discharged.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But your alternate
position would apply to the teller as well as the police
officer?
MS. MAYNARD: One could reasonably conclude
that if the teller discharges it, it is in fact the
manner in which the defendant committed the offense.
But I do think there's reason to believe Congress may
have been concerned about the fact of the discharge by
anyone. I mean, what you're talking about is someone
who's engaging in inherently dangerous activity. They
brought an armed weapon to commit a crime of violence or
a drug trafficking crime, and they've handled it in such
a way that either it is discharged --
JUSTICE BREYER: There is another --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't really have to
decide all this stuff, do we? We just have to decide
whether if he discharges it the discharge has to be
intentional.
MS. MAYNARD: There is no question here,
Your Honor, but that it was the robber that discharged
the weapon. And in fact the Petitioner testified that:
"I pulled the trigger when I was switching the gun from
one hand to the other."
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it's also uncontested
it was accidental, I think.
MS. MAYNARD: We have not challenged that it
was accidental. But I think that it --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What do you say to your
opponent's argument -- I don't know if it's right or not
-- but that there's sort of a background rule that
generally we assume when Congress prohibits conduct, it
means intentional conduct; and normally if they don't
mean that, they make it rather clear in the statute.
Is that a correct -- is his background
principle correct?
MS. MAYNARD: I don't think so, Justice
Stevens, with respect to sentencing factors. I think
there's no case in which this Court has indicated -- and
no common law principles --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What's the difference
between a sentencing factor that adds five years to a
sentence and an element of the crime? There are a lot
of us that think that -- you've read Harris and
Apprendi. You know there is some debate about whether
that really makes all that much difference.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, in Harris, which was --
in which this Court was interpreting these very
sentencing factors here, the Court note -- noted that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Let me -- let me rephrase
the question.
MS. MAYNARD: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: If it were an element of
the crime, would you then agree with his background
rule?
MS. MAYNARD: No, Your Honor, because if it
were an element --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then the fact that the
sentencing factor is an element really isn't
significant.
MS. MAYNARD: I think it might be a harder
case for us if it were an element of the crime, but it
wouldn't be an element that would be necessary.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But why would it be a
harder case for you?
MS. MAYNARD: Why would it be a harder case
for us? Because if it were a harbor -- hard -- if it
were an element of the crime, then it would be an
aggravated offense, and then one could debate whether or
not the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But in that situation
would there be a background rule that we normally think
Congress intends to punish intentional conduct?
MS. MAYNARD: I think there is a background
rule with respect to the definition of criminal offenses
that Congress intends some mens rea.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So you really then are
relying on the difference between an element of the
crime and a sentencing factor?
MS. MAYNARD: Not -- no, Your Honor, not in
this way, because it -- it would -- it would be a more
difficult caper -- case for us, I can see, but that you
would still be talking about somebody who was engaged in
wrongful conduct. There would be no danger.
I mean, one of the reasons the Court assumes
a mens rea requirement or reads in a mens rea
requirement when one's not there, is because of the fear
of capturing innocent conduct; but what you would be
talking about is someone who has taken a loaded weapon
to commit a crime of violence or a drug trafficking
crime and used it during in relation to that crime or to
possess it in furtherance of that crime, and is already
guilty. They are engaged in --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's entirely
fortuitous; you have two bank robbers, they both do
exactly the same thing, in one case the gun goes off and
the other it doesn't. Does that -- does it seem -- does
it seem fair to add three years onto the sentence of the
one whose gun happens to go off but not on the sentence
of the one whose doesn't?
MS. MAYNARD: They both engaged in
inherently dangerous activity.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, they both did.
That's my point, they both did exactly the same thing.
MS. MAYNARD: And it's common in criminal
law to hold criminals responsible for their unintended
consequences of their criminal acts, and that's -- in
your hypothetical it wouldn't be unusual at all to hold
someone liable for the accidental discharge when they've
taken a loaded weapon to commit a violent crime, here a
bank robbery, and handled it in such a way that it goes
off. It's completely reasonable for Congress to
conclude --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You get three extra
years for having bad luck?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, no, well they're -- just
to be clear, they're both subject to life imprisonment
for taking the gun and committing -- and using it to
commit the bank robbery. So it's not tacking on three
years; it's increasing the minimum; and that is a
significant difference, Justice Stevens that this Court
has recognized with respect to these various factors in
Harris itself, that the -- whether or not there was a
discharge.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, is this guy
likely to get life for a bank robbery, the gun
accidentally goes off? I don't know whether it's his
first offense or not.
MS. MAYNARD: As a practical matter, no,
Your Honor. However, had the accidental discharge
caused a death, then he would have committed a more
serious offense, and that may have been the penalty.
But the point is that one is often subject to higher
penalties than one might have expected by the unintended
consequences of one's criminal act.
JUSTICE BREYER: What would you think -- to
go back to Justice Stevens' question, I would start with
the assumption that, normally, not always, where you
have a criminal statute and the crime has elements, that
Congress intends that the elements be carried out with a
guilty state of mind; I would start with that
assumption.
Now I would agree with you that sentencing
is different, and the reason that it's different is
because sentencing often goes up or down depending upon
whether the harm that is foreseen does or does not
occur, irrespective of the state of mind. So we
couldn't apply that normal background rule, in my view.
MS. MAYNARD: I think that's correct, Your
Honor, and that's our view.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now -- now, having done
that I wonder if the background rule should come into
play once again where a mandatory minimum sentence is at
stake, for the reason that if the harm eventuates, there
are many ways in which the sentence will go up. If this
person had been killed, for example, it becomes a murder
in the course of a felony. There are all kinds of other
statutes that can aggravate the felony; and if you don't
apply the mandatory minimum, the judge still can give
him the higher sentence, if he warrants it.
But if you apply the mandatory minimum where
the judge wouldn't go up, the only impact that has is to
take people who the judge and others think fall into the
minimal category of bad behavior plus consequences, and
force them to have a higher sentence. Now, that would
be a rationale for a rule of lenity in mandatory minimum
sentencing matters.
MS. MAYNARD: But that would be a
reconceptualization of the rule of lenity, Justice
Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, it would. It would.
MS. MAYNARD: And what, it would be a -- as
you said for this Court, in Muscarello, the rule of
lenity has never been a rule where the defendant always
prevails; and it would be an odd notion to have a more
muscular rule of the rule of lenity in the sentencing
enhancement context than you have with respect to the
crime itself.
The whole point of having the mandatory
minimum is to take away discretion from judges. What --
and the language of the statute here in our view is
clear. It says "if the firearm is discharged," and I
think it's the present tense that gets you the -- the
temporal connection to the crime here. If it is
discharged while you are using or carrying it or
possessing it, in the offense in the principal
paragraph, Congress wanted you to have ten years.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I can't -- I can't --
the trouble is I can't find anything in the history of
this that really says why they use "is discharged" or
used "as opposed to discharges." And I find those very
metaphysical, those arguments, unless I -- I can see
either something in the history or some functional
consideration.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, in the blue brief they
lay out the House's final version, and we have the
House's final version in one of our footnotes. And then
they lay out the Senate's final version.
And one important distinction, Justice
Breyer, between those two versions is that the House's
version would have made it active voice, but not only
active. But it would have been amenable to the argument
that during and in relation to -- discharges, because
it's structured different.
But the House would have set the penalty for
a discharge at 20 years.  Okay. That's -- you can infer
from that that the House thought an intentional
discharge should subject you to 20 years.
The Senate's version, which put it in the
passive voice, said if the firearm is discharged and set
a mandatory minimum of 10 years. And I think you can
infer from that, Justice Breyer, the -- the current
structure allows what you're positing, which is more
culpable defendants who intend to discharge the firearm
to receive a higher sentence. And one could infer, I
think, that the House thinks that should be 20 years.
So I think the -- the current structure does
allow judges to take into consideration. It just sets
the floor. And Congress is entitled to do that, and I
think they have clearly done that and then to take out
of the realm of debate whether or not the defendant
intended to discharge the firearm or didn't mean to
discharge the firearm.
I would like to -- to say one factual point,
which is in the -- in the indictment Petitioner actually
was charged with use or carrying. It just seems -- if I
could explain, the "use or carry during or in relation
to," is one prong, one way in which to commit the
principal offense.
"Possessing in furtherance" is another way
to commit the principal offense. The "use or carry" is
not modified by "possession in furtherance of," and
"possess" is not modified by -- by "during or in
relation to," which is another reason it makes no sense
to -- to trail the "during or in relation to" down to
the generally applicable sentencing factors.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there a difference, a
practical difference, between the two formulations?
MS. MAYNARD: The legislative -- well, the
words are actually different; the text is different; and
the legislative history suggests that Congress wanted a
beefed-up "in relation to" requirement for possession in
order to make sure that incidental possession during --
you know, incidental possession while one is also
committing a crime wasn't captured. So the "in
furtherance of" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: What you're saying, to
make sure I understand, is that the "in relation to"
language modifies both "use" and "possession"?
MS. MAYNARD: No, sir. The "in relation to"
-- the "during or in relation to" modifier modifies only
"use or carry." And if one is charged with a "use or
carry" offense, then the government must show that you
"used or carried during or in relation to" in the way
those words have been given meaning by this Court.
If you're charged with possession, the
government must show that you possessed the firearm in
furtherance of. Now, the -- the "in furtherance of" and
the "in relation to" prong have been given similar
meanings by the courts, although generally it's thought
that the "in furtherance of," like I say, is a sort of
beefed up "in relation to" requirement because --
JUSTICE BREYER: "Carries," what about
"carries"? If a person is carrying the gun in his
pocket but he doesn't know it, which could happen, does
that fall within "carries" or not?
MS. MAYNARD: He would be carrying, Justice
Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: So is he guilty of the
first; do we know?
MS. MAYNARD: He would be carrying -- if I
understood you, he would be carrying. And if he was
also committing a crime, he would be carrying -- if he
was also committing a crime of violence, he would be
carrying it during the crime of violence. But under
this Court's decision in Smith, if it were --
JUSTICE BREYER: The carrying has to be --
although the statute doesn't say it, Smith says the
carrying has to be in relation to the crime.
MS. MAYNARD: The statute does say that
carrying has to be in relation to --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought it just said "who
in furtherance of any such crime possesses a firearm."
MS. MAYNARD: I am sorry. I thought you
were asking me a "carry" hypothetical. If you are
asking me a "possession" hypothetical --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, it's a "carrying." My
-- my interest is the -- whoever, blah, blah, blah, for
which the person may be prosecuted uses or carries a
firearm, or who in furtherance of any such crime
possesses a firearm. So I thought that the "in
furtherance" does not modify "carry".
MS. MAYNARD: It doesn't.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MS. MAYNARD: You are right. Okay. I am
sorry. I answered --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, you know, what happens
--
if the person has the firearm -- he is carrying the
firearm in his pocket and doesn't know it? He picked it
up from the tailor, and now is -- is there an intent
requirement there? Do we know? Did Smith talk about
that? Do we know? I mean is there, you know, a state
of mind requirement?
MS. MAYNARD: It's hard to see how one could
meet this Court's definition in Smith for -- for "in
relation to," which was to have --
JUSTICE BREYER: Smith says "in relation to"
and so the carrying has to be in relation to. And since
the carrying has to be in relation to, that pretty much
MS. MAYNARD: The underlying --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- covers the state of
mind.
MS. MAYNARD: The carrying had to be in
relation to the underlying drug crime or crime of
violence. This Court gave content to "in relation to"
in Smith to mean have some purpose or effect, facilitate
or further the underlying crime, not be by accident or
coincidence.
The gist of Petitioner's argument here is
they want to read that "accident or coincidence"
language down to modify "discharge." And structurally
that -- that just doesn't work. And if -- if I can make
one more point about why it's clear it isn't that, which
is that the -- the "in possession in furtherance of
requirement" -- I mean one of the things they say in
response to our argument is that we are willing to put a
temporal limitation on the sentencing factors, but not
an "in relation to" --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I just make sure I
understand your position? "During and in relation to"
modifies the first words it follows. "In furtherance
to" modifies "possession." Now, do either "in relation
to" or "in furtherance" to it modify the three
subsequent subparagraphs?
MS. MAYNARD: Definitely not, no.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So neither of them
applies. So it doesn't have to be "in furtherance of"
or "in relation to"?
MS. MAYNARD: The -- the sentencing factors
are set out separately. And you don't get to them --
JUSTICE STEVENS: None of the sentencing
factors require that that factor be in -- either in
relation to the crime or in furtherance of the crime?
It could be just walking down the street, you happen to
have a gun?
MS. MAYNARD: Well, you have to be guilty of
the principal offense, Justice Stevens, before you get
to sentencing factors. So you have to have either --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Sentencing factors need
not be in relation to the crime nor in furtherance of
the crime.
MS. MAYNARD: Right. The definitive --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It has to be during the
crime.
MS. MAYNARD: It has to be during and -- but
there -- but it's not because the word "during" appears
in the principal offense, which is how they would have
our argument be. The -- the -- it has to -- the
sentencing factor has to occur. First you have to
commit the principal -- let me just back up. You have
to commit the principal offense.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why does it have to be
"during"? It -- it doesn't in the statute?
MS. MAYNARD: It has to be "during" for
three reasons. One, the -- the language of the
sentencing factor says if the firearm is discharged.
It's in the present tense. So the present tense of the
"is discharged" language -- it has to be while you're
using, carrying -- "uses, carries, or possesses" is also
in the act.
The "is discharged" has to happen while
you're using, carrying, or possessing. That takes out
hypotheticals about, well, it was discharged at the
factory before I got it, and law enforcement discharged
it well after they took it from me to test the
ballistics on it. Those aren't covered because it's not
"is discharged" while you're using, carrying or
possessing.
Secondly, this Court in Harris recognized
that these are the types of sentencing factors that one
considers when deciding whether a certain fact is
present in the manner in which an offense is committed.
So the fact has to be present in the commission of the
offense. That's just the way this type of sentencing
factor operates, and the courts so interpreted these
particular sentencing factors in Harris.
And we know that it's not because of the
"during" in the principal paragraph, Justice Stevens,
because there is no "during" element to the "possession"
prong. Nevertheless, the sentencing factors apply to
that prong, and we would apply temporal in cases that --
JUSTICE STEVENS: There is an "in
furtherance." There is an "in furtherance of the
crime."
MS. MAYNARD: Yes, Your Honor, and if you
possess a firearm --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I want to make sure I
understand. You are saying it need not be "during" or
-- you said it has to be "during" but not because the
statute includes the word "during."
MS. MAYNARD: Yes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, what does -- where
does the "during" come from then?
MS. MAYNARD: The "during" comes from the
fact that the sentencing factor is in the present tense,
and says "is discharged." That means that the "is
discharged" must occur while the offense is -- is
occurring. So the temporal limitation comes from, and
is from, the nature of these types of sentencing
factors, which ask: Is this factor present? That's
what Congress cared about.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you say it can't come
from the prologue, because if it came from the prologue,
it wouldn't apply to the mere possession.
MS. MAYNARD: Exactly.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the possession could be
at any time, before the crime, after the crime,
whatever.
MS. MAYNARD: Possession -- it would just
have to be possession that was in furtherance of an
underlying crime. Once you're guilty of that, if the
--
firearm was discharged while you were guilty of that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you have to import some
-- some contemporaneous -- contemporaneous requirement
into the 1, 2, and 3.
MS. MAYNARD: Some temporal limitation, and
the limitation is what -- is that it must be discharged
while you're committing the offense for which you're
being sentenced when we're looking at sentencing
factors, which is set forth in 924(c).
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if it's committed when
the guy is trying to escape, and the gun goes off
accidentally? Is that in -- I mean is that during the
crime?
MS. MAYNARD: Again, it would turn on -- on
-- it wouldn't turn on whether accidental or intentional
discharge, Justice Stevens. That would present a
difficult hypothetical about whether or not the 924(c)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Two hours later when he got
home -- he carried the gun in -- IN furtherance of the
crime. He still had it with him all the way through,
and the gun went off after he left the bank.
MS. MAYNARD: If -- if it were determined
that the -- the 924(c) offense, which is the possession
in furtherance of crime, were still going on at that
point -- in other words he was still possessing it in
furtherance of the underlying crime of violence, and it
discharges -- then, yes, the sentencing factor, by its
plain terms, applies.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Then you're telling me
that it need not be during as long as it's in
furtherance of. So the "in furtherance of" is also
incorporated implicitly in the sentencing factors.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, the -- no, the "in
furtherance of," it -- the inquiry we would be making at
sentencing, Justice Stevens, is not was the discharge in
furtherance of. You would -- you would -- all you would
be asking is, were you still possessing the firearm in
furtherance --
JUSTICE STEVENS: This must be during?
MS. MAYNARD: The discharge must be
temporally related to the principal offense, yes,
because the discharge is discharged while you're in the
course of the principal offense, that's the way these
types of sentencing factors --
JUSTICE BREYER: I think I got everybody
mixed up, because the first sentence of the statute is
on the preceding page. And if I start at the beginning,
I would discover -- of my memo -- if -- it says, if --
in -- who -- any person who during and in relation --
during and in relation to any crime of violence or drug
trafficking crime, blah, blah, blah, of a certain kind
uses or carries a firearm.
MS. MAYNARD: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: So there it is right there,
or who in furtherance of such a crime possesses shall be
sentenced. Okay. So we've got the during and in
relation to covering the whole bunch. Then we have to
read that into little (ii) and little (iii).
MS. MAYNARD: No, Your Honor. I mean, just
to make sure I understand what you're say. The "during
and in relation to" only modifies the verb "uses or
carries"?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, exactly.
MS. MAYNARD: Okay.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then we have to read that
by implication where it says if the firearm is
brandished during or -- you have to imply that.
MS. MAYNARD: That's their argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, that's not your
argument?
MS. MAYNARD: No, Your Honor.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Forget it.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not your argument
because if that was the only -- if that was the source
of the contemporaneous requirement, there would be no
contemporaneous requirement for the in furtherance?
MS. MAYNARD: That's right. And also --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The provision -- the in
furtherance provision.
MS. MAYNARD: The reason we don't believe
that's the correct reading is because, as this Court
indicated in Harris, the principal offense -- the
principal paragraph sets forth the complete crime, and
it ends with "shall." So once you do the things in the
principals for crime, you're guilty. And then the only
question is, what shall your sentence be?
JUSTICE SCALIA: And, of course, some of
these difficult hypotheticals such as the one that
Justice Stevens put about the gun going off while the --
while the individual is escaping, that's going to be a
problem whether you adopt your interpretation or the --
or the petitioner's interpretation, even if you assume
that it has to be during and in relation to it's still
going to be a problem. Is this -- is this during and in
relation to the crime.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, just to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If it occurs, you know,
five hours later while he's escaping, I don't know.
MS. MAYNARD: Just to be clear about --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't have to decide
that.
MS. MAYNARD: It wouldn't have anything to
do with whether it intentionally goes off, Justice
Stevens. Your hypothetical could still raise a
question --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The strange thing about
this case is we're talking about a category of crimes in
which somebody person mistakenly fires the gun, that
doesn't happen very often. The whole -- the whole
dispute is about really a trivial set of crimes.
MS. MAYNARD: Well, I think it's important
to recognize, though, that Congress didn't want to open
the door to claims that -- that the firearm was
discharged accidentally.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Sure, when the
defendant -- and says I didn't really mean to shoot the
guy?
MS. MAYNARD: Right. I mean, the -- the
fact of a discharge is what Congress is clearly
concerned about, and you can tell that from the text.
What it did want to say is that in the indictment here
he was actually charged with uses, carries, and
possesses. The indictment is not perfectly worded. It
only has the "during and in relation to," and it -- but
the -- the instructions were proper and there were no --
the jury instructions in trial were proper and there
were no objection to the instructions, but I did want to
correct one point about that.
And if there are no further questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Four minutes, Mr. Forster.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF SCOTT J. FORSTER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FORSTER: This Court in U.S. Gypsum was
very clear when it said that far more than the simple
omission of the appropriate phrase of a statutory
definition is necessary to justify dispensing with the
intent requirement.
And our argument is simply this, merely
because this might be a sentencing enhancement rather
than an element of the offense, this Court never says
that the normal rules of statutory construction cease to
apply under those circumstances, which means that the
mens rea presumption is appropriate in this case, and
just like this Court said in the passage I just cited.
If Congress wants to dispense with that
requirement, they must do so clearly, and they simply
did not do that in this case. If they wanted to do
that, they could insert the words "intentionally" or
"unintentionally discharge," in which case that would be
clear. And that simply is not the way this statute
reads.
The best reading of the statute, I believe,
and this is what Your Honor was headed toward, is to
read the discharge to require during and in relation to.
I just think that's the best --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that helping? I mean,
this did take place during, and you would have thought
when something goes off accidentally it's in relation
to. I mean, you know, I can imagine an argument to the
contrary, but it isn't obvious. It just is --
MR. FORSTER: But, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: They have during, in
relation to and in furtherance of, so their in
furtherance of doesn't carry over. The first two do.
An accidental discharge is it not in relation to the
crime?
MR. FORSTER: Not under this Court's
authority in Smith. I think Smith is clear, the purpose
and effect and not be used by accident.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What was the case you
cited when you started your rebuttal?
MR. FORSTER: U.S. Gypsum.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is that the antitrust
case? You caught me by surprise.
MR. FORSTER: I believe it is. I believe it
is, Your Honor.
Mr. Chief Justice, if there are no other
questions, I thank the Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel,
the case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:06 p.m., the case in the
