IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DISTRICT ATTORNEY'S OFFICE :
FOR THE THIRD JUDICIAL :
DISTRICT, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 08-6
WILLIAM G. OSBORNE. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, March 2, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
KENNETH M. ROSENSTEIN, ESQ., Assistant Attorney General,
Anchorage, Alaska; on behalf of the Petitioners.
NEAL K. KATYAL, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the United States, as amicus curiae, supporting the
Petitioners.
PETER NEUFELD, ESQ., New York, N.Y., on behalf of the
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
KENNETH M. ROSENSTEIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
NEAL K. KATYAL, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioners 20
PETER NEUFELD, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 30
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
KENNETH M. ROSENSTEIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 62
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-6, District
Attorney's Office for the Third Judicial District v.
Osborne.
Mr. Rosenstein.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF KENNETH M. ROSENSTEIN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
The State of Alaska fully recognizes the
importance of DNA evidence. The State provides criminal
defendants with pretrial access to that evidence and it
has postconviction procedures that give prisoners a fair
opportunity to retest that evidence should new
technology become available.
So this case really isn't about the
importance or power of DNA evidence. Rather it's about
three things: First, it's about the proper procedural
device for asserting in Federal court a right to
postconviction testing. Section 1983 is not the correct
device because Mr. Osborne's claim clearly sounds in
Federal habeas corpus. The evidence he seeks has a
singular relevance to support a direct attack on the
validity of his confinement.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, he's -- he's not at
this point. All he's doing is seeking evidence. We
don't know -- he doesn't know presumably -- exactly what
that evidence is going to show. The evidence may prove
to be exonerating and it may not be.
Until one knows the tendency of the
evidence, one can't say that we have a Preiser problem.
So if -- if we don't have that kind of a problem, then I
don't see -- I guess I don't follow your argument that
this necessarily sounds in habeas.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, Your Honor, the --
Mr. Osborne's case is comparable to Balisok v. Edwards,
where the Petitioner was seeking damages for -- as a
result of a biased hearing in prison.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Right. And if he was
seeking damages in this 1983 action for false
imprisonment or imprisonment under an invalid
conviction, I would understand your argument. But what
he is saying in effect is: I want process to know what
this evidence has to say. And that is not seeking
damages, and it's not seeking release.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's correct, Your Honor.
It's not seeking damages, but the proof -- the
difference between this case -- the only difference
--
between this case and Balisok is that in this case the
proof is going to be happening in a laboratory; whereas,
in Balisok the --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No. The difference -- the
difference is that if he succeeds in this case in
getting access to the evidence, that doesn't get him
outside or even in position to go outside the prison
door. All it does is get him some evidence to test.
And what he does with that later, if he finds it
favorable, presumably is necessarily going to be in
habeas.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: But this -- his request is
simply a discovery request. He's split his -- his claim
away from his underlying claim of actual innocence, his
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, he's got to because
he doesn't know whether he has any evidence of actual
innocence at this point.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: But he -- to assert a claim
of actual innocence, he doesn't need to have the result
of a DNA test, and --
JUSTICE SOUTER: He's not asserting it. He
just says: I want to get to this evidence and see what
it has to say.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: But the -- this evidence
has a singular relevance, and his -- his true intent is
to -- is to assert --
JUSTICE SOUTER: No.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: -- a claim of innocence.
JUSTICE SOUTER: He has a singular objective
in getting the evidence, but we don't know what the
evidence means. The evidence may conclusively prove
that he is guilty, for all we know.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's true, Your Honor,
but what this represents, what his request represents,
is a discovery request.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, it's a -- that's --
that's a fair way of putting it, but what he -- I think
ultimately his strongest argument or his -- his basic
argument is this evidence is potentially so important
that the State has no valid interest in keeping me at
least from seeing it; i.e., testing it. And you can
call that discovery if you want to, but it's something
very different from the normal discovery that goes on as
an ancillary process to a criminal prosecution.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, the State does have
an interest in -- in insisting that Mr. Osborne follow
the established procedures.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, that may be. I'm not
getting into that here.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would the other side
concede the premise that he doesn't say that this is
going to exonerate him? That he has -- you know --
here's some -- some evidence out there. It may help me;
it may hurt me. I don't know which, but I'd like to see
it. Is that the only claim he's making? If so, it's --
it's a lot less -- what should I say -- a lot less
plausible a constitutional claim. There's some evidence
that I'd like to look at; I'm not saying it will prove
me innocent. I'd just like to look at this evidence.
Might, might not. That's a lot weaker claim than what I
had thought he was making, which is the claim that this
-- this new scientific evidence will -- will prove my
innocence.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, which is he doing
here? Is he saying the latter or not?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, he hasn't -- he has
never really asserted that he is actually innocent. He
holds out the possibility, and he's filed an affidavit
which is at joint appendix --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So it's not a
constitutional claim of entitlement to evidence which he
asserts will prove his innocence, but rather a
constitutional claim to evidence which might or then
might not prove his innocence? Is that --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: He has hedged, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Performance we should let
the -- let Osborne, Osborne's attorney, address that
question, because you're not really equipped to answer
for the other side.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, we're assuming the
premise, though, in the questioning.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, as this case started,
Your Honor, Mr. Osborne was asserting that it would
establish his innocence. But yet he has never -- he has
never made a declaration under penalty of penalty of
perjury that he is innocent. So, Your Honor, you're
correct. He seems to be, for lack of a better word,
fishing for evidence that -- that might help him.
And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There was evidence in --
at his trial at the state of the art at that time.
There was whatever the test was.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Justice Ginsburg, at trial
the State performed what is known as DQ alpha testing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That was not the state of
the art at the time, was it?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's my understanding,
that the RFLP testing was a much more discriminating
type of -- would yield a much more discriminating result
than the DQ Alpha. -
JUSTICE SCALIA: He didn't ask for that.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But when did the current
technology become available? When did the testing that
he now requests --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I'm not certain about that,
Your Honor. My -- I would guess that it was around the
late nineties. It was available before he filed his --
this Federal action.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does the State
routinely keep evidence of the sort Osborne is seeking
available? Or is there a cutoff point at which they
dispose of the evidence.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I can't answer whether the
State has a policy. It seems to be a decision that is
made jointly with the police, the crime lab, and the
prosecutors, and it depends, I would think, on the
status of the case as it proceeds after conviction
through direct appeal.
JUSTICE BREYER: What now? As far as I
understand, there's a procedural problem. I tried to
figure out the Heck line once in Balisok. My impression
of it is that if, Mr. Prisoner, you're bringing an
action challenging some confinement or the effect of
your action is going to be to let you go out of solitary
or out of prison, then proceed your habeas. But if what
you're trying to get is relief that may or may not mean
you get out of solitary or you get out of prison, then
you go to 1983. But, by the way, if you're in 1983 you
are complaining about an action or inaction by a State
official that violates a constitutional right.
Now, as I look at this case the prisoner, if
he wins, is not going to get out, and he is complaining
about the State violating a constitutional right by
refusing to give him DNA. It seems to me that second
question is the question that's the heart of the case:
Does the State have a constitutional obligation to give
him the DNA?
So I would appreciate your telling me why it
doesn't.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Justice Breyer, the State
doesn't have an obligation to provide this evidence to
him because there is no -- a -- prisoners have no
Federal right to postconviction relief, and the State of
Alaska has provided procedures by which -- which Mr.
Osborne if he chose to use them could make available the
evidence that he seeks. But he hasn't chosen to invoke
those procedures.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would you explain that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any reason to
think that if, in fact -- sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Just to clarify his
statement, he said that the State of Alaska provides a
means for him to get at this information; but if it did,
I think we wouldn't be here.  So would you -- Alaska is
one of the few States that has no statute.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So what -- you say --
this whole controversy is whether the State is obliged
to give him this information; but you're saying it's
simply that he picked the wrong procedure. That's what
I thought I heard you say just now; that there is a
means under Alaska law where he could get this DNA
postconviction. So would you please explain what the
Alaska procedure is?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Yes, Justice Ginsburg.
Alaska has a postconviction relief statute
and that is at page -- starts at page 10a of the blue
brief. And under that statute, a prisoner can assert a
claim for -- for postconviction relief when there exist
material facts -- I'm quoting from Alaska Statute
.72.010. Postconviction relief is available when a
person claims that there exists evidence of material
facts not previously presented and heard by the court
that requires vacation of the conviction or sentence in
the interest of justice.
Now, if Mr. Osborne were to state a
cognizable claim under that statute the Alaska rules of
court then apply the full civil rules pertaining to
discovery as of right to the applicant.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Has there been any case
in Alaska where a defendant postconviction was, in fact,
able to get DNA testing under the procedure you just
described?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, Your Honor,
there's -- there was one case and it's cited in the
yellow brief, Patterson v. State, that a prisoner did
apply in court and was granted access to the DNA
evidence, but then it came to pass that the evidence had
been destroyed by that time.
So in that case the relief was granted, but
through the destruction of the evidence no testing was
possible.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can you give me some idea
of how many cases there are in, say, the last 10 years
in which in State postconviction proceedings the
convicted prisoner has asked for DNA evidence?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I believe --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Three? 300?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Less -- we did an informal
search and found seven cases where there were actual
requests; and I believe that five of them involved court
cases, the one that I have just mentioned where the
relief was granted, and I believe the remaining are
pending decision.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, that relief
would require him to assert his innocence, wouldn't it?
He would have to bring a habeas corpus action claiming
that the State has no business holding him because in
fact he's innocent?
He doesn't want to do that? He just wants
to say, I'd just like to see this evidence. It might
help me. It might not help me, but --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's -- prisoners have
never been able to postconviction simply seek
over-the-counter the evidence that was used in
their earlier -- in their --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I don't know that they're
arguing with you on that score. What they are saying --
I think what they're saying, and this goes to a variety
of Justice Scalia's question, is that under the Alaska
statute in order to get to the evidence, or indeed in
order to make his -- his postconviction claim, he's got
to claim that the evidence of material fact requires
vacation of the conviction or sentence.
His argument is, I don't know whether it
requires it; because I haven't been able to test it.
What I want is to test it.
And as I understand it, under this
particular statute, he has no chance of doing so because
he can't tell you in advance what the test is going to
show. Isn't that correct?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Justice Souter --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, first tell me whether
that's correct or not. He doesn't know what the test is
going to -- he doesn't know what the test is going to
show; so --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That is correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- he cannot say that it
requires vacation of the conviction; isn't that correct?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That is correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Okay.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: But, but -- but only Mr.
Osborne knows whether he is innocent. And if he is
innocent --
JUSTICE SOUTER: But Mr. Osborne doesn't
know what that evidence is going to show. He hasn't
tested it.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Whether -- whether he
believes he's innocent or whether he doesn't believe
he's innocent, he can walk into court, as I understand
it, and say, I am absolutely innocent. But what he
cannot do prior to testing the evidence is tell you, is
allege, that the evidence is going to require the
vacation of the conviction.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: But if he is innocent, then
he does know the -- the result of the testing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you said the
State has -- has indeed granted a habeas request. In
that case, where it granted the habeas request, although
it turned out that the evidence was destroyed, in that
case surely the same situation -- the same situation
existed.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, actually, Your Honor,
it did not, because in that case he never asserted his
innocence. That was a request he made on
reconsideration after the denial of his ineffective
assistance claim. And he said that under the due --
under due process, I am entitled to have this evidence
so that I can present an actual innocence claim. So the
-- the case that you are referring to is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is the case you are
referring to. I didn't -- I didn't make it up. You
did.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, in -- in Mr.
Osborne's first postconviction relief case that was
decided in -- are you talking about the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. I'm talking about the
case you alluded to earlier where you say the State of
Alaska had indeed provided DNA evidence or had agreed to
provide it --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Oh, okay. Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- but for the fact that it
no longer existed. Now, in that case surely the same
problem existed that Justice Souter is -- is raising.
That -- that person also, while claiming innocence,
couldn't say for sure what the evidence would produce,
but that didn't stop the State from providing it; did
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: I know your time is up, but
I really have only one question this morning and I would
like to have a chance to ask it, and I am trying to
clear away some undergrowth. And the undergrowth first
I have cleared away in my mind is this Heck question.
The second is the Alaska court decision. And my
impression is that Alaska refused the test because,
among other things, they couldn't say -- they said the
conviction rested primarily on eyewitness testimony, and
they have a bunch of reasons. But the Ninth Circuit, as
a matter of fact, tried to blow apart those reasons.
Okay?
Suppose I agree with the Ninth Circuit.
Then my question is this: Does the Constitution of the
United States require you to give this evidence to the
defendant? And one of the relevant points in my mind is
I see it would be of significant advantage to the
defendant. Even if he's guilty, he can be proved to --
whatever. It is an advantage to him. Okay?
Now, why don't you want to give it to him?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Because, Your Honor, the
State of Alaska has a procedure that was not invoked in
the --
JUSTICE BREYER: I -- I -- there I -- that's
the undergrowth I tried to clear away. I am saying I
read all that procedure. Suppose I believe that the
Ninth Circuit is right about that procedure, namely that
the tests that they're using in that procedure are not
favorable enough to a defendant who is seeking, as this
defendant is seeking, the DNA.
He just wants some DNA. He'll pay for it.
The odds are eight to one he's going to lose. But he
thinks: I'm willing to run those odds. I won't put you
at any trouble. Now, why don't you want to give it to
him?
Because, Your Honor, the State of Alaska has
a procedure that would enable him to obtain that
evidence.
JUSTICE BREYER: No. The procedure has the
tests in it that the Alaska court -- didn't the Alaska
Supreme Court say, we will not give you DNA evidence
unless you can demonstrate: One, that the conviction
rested primarily on eyewitness ID evidence; two, that
there was a demonstrable doubt concerning his ID as the
perpetrator; and, three, that scientific testing would
likely would be conclusive. Wasn't that their test?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: With respect, Your Honor,
that was the test they applied in that case, but that is
not the test that would apply if Mr. Osborne were to
file a new postconviction relief application asserting
that he is actually innocent. If he were to do that,
then the full civil rules of discovery would available
to him.
JUSTICE BREYER: And then -- are different
-- then they'd give it to him?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Pardon me.
JUSTICE BREYER: In other words, all he has
to do is file a new piece of paper tomorrow, and he gets
the DNA?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Right. But Alaska --
Alaska has procedures for this.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you said something
significant. You said that he would have to allege his
actual innocence, which he hasn't done. So if he
continues not to -- not to put in a sworn statement
that, I am actually innocent, under your current
procedure he still couldn't get the DNA.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: If he doesn't allege his
actual innocence, Your Honor, then this is really an
empty exercise, a fishing expedition. He wants to just
see what -- what the evidence says. And that -- that is
not the way litigation works.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You gave the one case in
which in the habeas in Alaska the court granted access
to DNA, but the evidence wasn't there.
On how many occasions when postconviction
someone moved for the DNA evidence did the Alaska courts
deny the request?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: My -- my -- there were --
as I said, there were seven cases. And my understanding
is there have -- has not been a denial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you told us it was
granted in one case. What happened in the other six?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: There -- well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you said they
were still pending.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: There were -- there are
four or five that are pending. One of them is Mr.
Osborne's case, and another is being reviewed by the --
by the attorney general.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
We'll afford you rebuttal time since the Court used up
your time.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Katyal.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF NEAL K. KATYAL
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONERS
MR. KATYAL: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Ninth Circuit created a novel
constitutional right by extending Brady to the
postconviction setting. Mr. Osborne doesn't attempt to
defend that rationale. Instead, he attempts to mint a
previously unrecognized liberty interest in access to
clemency or State postconviction procedures. Assuming
the Court reaches the second question presented, it
should not constitutionalize rules for postconviction
access to DNA, an area of great legislative ferment in
the last few years. And even were it inclined to do so,
the unusual facts of this case, which include failure to
attest to actual innocence under threat of perjury, two
recent confessions to the crime, and a tactical decision
at trial to forego a highly discriminating RFLP DNA
test, all together make this a particularly poor
candidate for recognizing a new constitutional
entitlement.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What were the two
confessions? I know the one before the parole
authorities. What was the other one?
MR. KATYAL: There are two confessions to
the parole authorities. One is found at page --
petition appendix 71a. There's a small reprint which is
the written portion of the -- of the confession.
There's also separately in the record -- this is at
supplemental excerpts of the record, pages 248 to 261,
in the Ninth Circuit, which --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but isn't it true
that we've had DNA cases where the person has been found
innocent despite the fact they confessed?
MR. KATYAL: That is -- that is correct.
JUSTICE STEVENS: How do we know this isn't
one of those cases?
MR. KATYAL: Well, I am not quite sure that
we have had any situation like this, in which you have
had so many different facts altogether that -- that
suggested both that he -- that he's guilty and that --
and you are talking about a confession that's taken
place years after. I think the cases that are referred
to by the amici are situations in which someone has
confessed generally at trial or something like that.
Here you have two confessions years later.
They are very detailed. The one in the -- in the
supplemental excerpts to the record is a very long
story. And he says that he told his attorney about it
and talks all about how he had confessed to his mother,
how it was very difficult to exorcise. It is a very
in-depth confession, and it is a confession that the --
that the Alaska courts have credited.
It is not just our word. At joint appendix
page 221, the Alaska court found -- listened to that
04 confession in light of the 2006 affidavit that Mr.
Osborne makes much of claiming that he is innocent and
put those two documents side by side and said, taken
together, they don't -- the 2006 affidavit does not
really take --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Am I right in
understanding that the State has agreed that this
evidence is exonerating; that this evidence potentially
could exonerate him?
MR. KATYAL: The -- the State has so agreed.
JUSTICE BREYER: And is it true that all he
has to do is file a piece of paper in the court that
says: Whatever I said before, I did it under pressure;
I am innocent. And if he says those words, "I am
innocent," then he will get this DNA?
MR. KATYAL: Well, it is -- it is not clear
to me under State law. I think as I understood my
friend -- but that's what I understood him to say. I
can tell you, Justice Breyer, for purposes of the
Federal law, 18 USC 3600 has a requirement in it which
says that in order to get DNA testing you must attest
under threat of perjury that you are actually innocent.
That is a very serious requirement, done after years of
congressional debate. That is something that the Ninth
Circuit rule would disregard, and it would permit
someone to come in without that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You think we could attach
that to the new constitutional right that we invent? It
would be a constitutional right to get it if -- if --
but if you lose, you get another three years? Could we
say that?
MR. KATYAL: Our position, Justice Scalia,
is that there is no constitutional right to DNA, but
if -- were the Court inclined to find one and locate it
somewhere in Brady or the procedural due process clause,
something we think which would be very difficult to do,
but were it -- if that were the Court's inclination,
absolutely, it should at least mirror the Federal
statute and the -- and the rock solid requirements of
00, which do require that perjury -- that perjury
statement to be made in order to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you think there's a
constitutional right to establish innocence in some
cases where there is new and -- evidence that could not
previously have been discovered, that has a high
likelihood of exonerating?
MR. KATYAL: Well, this Court has struggled
with that and so far has said no. And the latest
position is Herrera v. Collins.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm asking for your
position.
MR. KATYAL: Our position is that the logic
of this Court's precedents is that there is no right at
present to actual innocence.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Mr. Katyal, the -- the
right that they're asserting may be located not in
procedural, but in substantive due process. What I --
what I would like you to comment on is what the
government's or any government's interest, the United
States or that of a State, may be in, in effect, in
denying that there should be such a right.
And this question occurred to me when I was
going through the briefs: What if -- we'll make this
Federal for your sake -- what if the United States had
imprisoned an individual who came forward and said:
Nobody realized it, but I was an eyewitness to the crime
for which X is -- is -- has been convicted and is
currently being incarcerated; and, in fact, I saw that
crime committed and he did not commit it. X's lawyer
arrives at this individual's prison and says: I want to
talk to the guy.
Would the United States have an interest in
saying, you cannot talk to him?
MR. KATYAL: The United States wouldn't --
wouldn't have an interest as a -- would generally permit
as a matter of prosecutorial ethics access to -- if the
United States knew that there was some exculpatory
material that it had within its purview, it would turn
that over. It just wouldn't be a constitutional --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, you know, prisoners
say all sorts of things. We don't know whether in the
long run it is going to be exculpatory or whether this
guy has some axe to grind.
But the question is, would the United States
have any legitimate interest in saying to X's lawyer,
you can't even talk with him?
MR. KATYAL: Well, I think that it would --
it would have to -- if it adopted such a rule and
allowed the talking in any situation --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why wouldn't it?
MR. KATYAL: Let me talk about DNA, for
example.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why do you need a rule, I
guess is what I'm saying.
MR. KATYAL: Let me talk about DNA. The
reason why with respect to DNA is it's a no-cost
proposition for a defendant to say: Hey, I'm innocent,
I want to get tested --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Oh, okay --
MR. KATYAL: -- So that's why --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Are you starting with the
premise that the United States would not have a
legitimate interest in my hypothetical in saying, you
can't even talk to him?
MR. KATYAL: Well, it depends on the
circumstances of the hypothetical and whether or not
there's some -- whether or not it would open up the
floodgates, I guess, to other requests and so on.
With respect to DNA, there is --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, let's assume that if
you let this guy talk to -- X's lawyer talk to this guy,
other individuals may say, boy, I can have my moment in
the sun, too; I'm going to claim this. You know, let's
assume the worst case there.
Would you still say, would the government
still say, we have an interest for that reason in not
even letting him talk to him?
MR. KATYAL: It's possible, because there --
it may be that as a policy matter they will allow it.
But as a matter of constitutional law, Justice Souter,
this Court has repeatedly said --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I haven't gotten to the
constitutional law yet. I just -- I just want to know
whether there would be a legitimate interest in saying
no. I mean, you can see --
MR. KATYAL: Again, there may be because of
floodgates or other reasons. But for the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You mentioned the
floodgates. There are seven cases in this State in the
whole history of Alaska.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is that right? That's
floodgates?
MR. KATYAL: Seven thus far,
Justice Stevens. If this Court were to recognize a
constitutional right to DNA for all 50 States, there
would really be, I think, quite a dramatically different
result.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Especially, I would assume,
one constitutional right in which you do not even have
to assert your innocence.
MR. KATYAL: Precisely. So we're talking
about seven in one State right now, but I think the
numbers could be great. That was what Congress said
when they passed 3600, which said there has to be
something to lose on the stake of defendants, so that
they can't come in, like Mr. Osborne, and have
questionable statements as to whether they're actually
innocent or not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why can't you do this?
Look at the consensus of the statutes in the States and
the Federal Government and say there's a range of
appreciation here, and there is a right but it catches
only the outliers? And so, the worst that would happen
is that the outlying States would have to bring
themselves into conformity with the outer reaches of
whatever the set of statutes is now in all the other
States.
MR. KATYAL: Because, Justice Breyer, that's
not the way this Court approaches due process questions.
Were it, for example, non-unanimous jury verdicts, which
two States have, would be impermissible.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not saying every
instance in which there are outliers is
unconstitutional. I'm just saying in this instance for
other reasons it might be unconstitutional; namely, you
have a good way of proving guilty or innocence, and if
that's so, the practical problem is not great. You
solve the practical problem in the way I just mentioned.
MR. KATYAL: But you enter the thicket of
practical problems, it seems to me, Justice Breyer, when
you do that, because the 44 States that have these
statutes do it in a variety of different ways with
respect to perjury requirements, felonies versus
misdemeanors, who gets access, who pays for it, do they
get lawyers. There's a host of policy questions that
arise --
JUSTICE BREYER: So the constitutional right
is bring yourself within any one of them, unless that
any one of them is a real outlier, which you can make as
an argument that you will never win?
MR. KATYAL: Were that the case, then Alaska
itself would be within that framework, because it
already has a process in place.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Neufeld.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER NEUFELD
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. NEUFELD: Thank you very much.
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the
Court:
It is absolutely undisputed in this case
that there is a DNA test that Mr. Osborne seeks that
could conclusively prove his actual innocence.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, there was a
more reliable one at the time of trial as well, and his
counsel made the tactical decision not to use it
because, I assume, she was concerned it would show his
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which apparently he had
told her about.
MR. NEUFELD: The test actually, the RFLP
test I assume you are referring to, is not actually more
reliable. It's more discriminating. And the reason it
didn't get used -- even the prosecutor didn't want to
use it as well, Mr. Chief Justice, because they felt
that the evidence was so degraded that if they tried
using that test there was a grave risk that it would
destroy all the evidence and not get any result. And
that's why they chose that DQ alpha test, which is more
sensitive, albeit not as discriminating.
JUSTICE ALITO: But what was the reason that
Respondent's counsel provided for not requesting that
test?
MR. NEUFELD: Respondent's counsel said that
she was doing it for strategic reasons, although I think
it is quite important that Mr. Osborne at all points
said he wanted the testing, okay, and that his counsel
rejected his advice. He even wrote to a Nobel Prize
winner to see what he could do about getting this
additional testing.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let's assume for the
sake of argument that there is some constitutional right
to obtain DNA evidence for testing postconviction.
Would you still -- would you say that that right
includes the situation where, A, the prisoner refuses to
assert under penalty of perjury that he or she is
actually innocent; and applies if there was a tactical
decision at trial not to seek DNA testing at all or not
to seek the most reliable form of DNA testing that was
available at the time?
MR. NEUFELD: Justice Alito, first of all,
he was never asked in this pleading to assert his actual
innocence. As represented by his counsel --
JUSTICE ALITO: You think that -- you think
that's a novel idea that never occurred to him?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, no, no. It's in the --
in 1983, it is not required or even asked that he make
that kind of statement. He did all through the State
courts. In the State courts he always asserted his
innocence; through his lawyers he asserted his
innocence, and indeed --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Under oath? Under oath
so that he would be subject to penalty for perjury?
MR. NEUFELD: No, because it wasn't
required. Indeed, Your Honor, to respond directly to
your question, to both of your questions, If this Court
decided, as Justice Scalia mentioned before as well,
that one requirement of this right is that a person
swear under the penalties of perjury, knowing that he
could be prosecuted, that he's actually innocent, then
so be it. It can be remanded for that purpose.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, he just --
MR. NEUFELD: That is what the Innocence
Protection Act requires, and no one has opposed that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, why isn't that the
end of this case, because I heard opposing counsel say
if you go tomorrow and file a piece of paper and swear
on that piece of paper you're innocent, Alaska will give
you the DNA. Isn't that what he said? I heard him say
that, I thought.
MR. NEUFELD: He said it, but I don't
believe that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if he said it in this
Court in answer to a question, I don't see why that
isn't binding.
MR. NEUFELD: Well, they took the same
position in the trial court in Alaska. They said that
he is not entitled to DNA testing under the
postconviction statute under any circumstances.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, wait. What I heard
was that if your client files a piece of paper that
says, I am innocent, then under this new procedure,
which apparently I hadn't read about because I didn't
find it or it wasn't obvious in the brief, that then
they will give him the DNA. Now that's either right or
it's wrong; and if it's right, I think that's the end of
it, and if it's wrong, well, then we'll have to proceed.
But I would proceed on the basis that this swearing
requirement is not sufficient.
MR. NEUFELD: Well, I don't believe that you
need the swearing requirement, because he has previously
asserted his innocence; but what's most important
here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but the whole
point is that, Justice Ginsburg brought out the point,
that he hasn't asserted his innocence under oath. So
there's no cost to him for asking for the DNA evidence.
If there's -- if we're writing up a new constitutional
right and we require as part of that that he assert his
innocence under perjury, and if he fails to do that,
he'll be prosecuted for perjury, that might at least put
some limitation on the number of people who can assert
the right.
MR. NEUFELD: And I would agree with that.
I think that's an excellent idea. And the problem is no
one's suggesting that Alaska can't do that as a
restriction. Indeed they can, but Alaska has had no
mechanism at all.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If you accept that -- of
course it does; and this is not a new procedure. I -- I
didn't understand it to be a new procedure, as
Justice Breyer has described it. It is the procedure of
habeas corpus.
They have a procedure for habeas corpus
which includes discovery, and all he has to do is come
in and say, you know, I have been wrongfully convicted;
I am innocent; and I want to discover this evidence in
order to establish it, so that I can get out of jail.
MR. NEUFELD: That contradicts the position
they took in the -- in the State court, Your Honor.
They specifically said in the State courts that it is
not enough to simply assert one's innocence; that you
actually have to have proofs, facts that -- that
demonstrate your innocence before you get to that
discovery. It is a Catch-22 situation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, we can ask your
opposite, opposing counsel. We can put it to him point
blank. That's what I thought he said, and we -- we
certainly will clarify that. But there's another
possible impediment here to your claim. If we assume
that there is this constitutional right, and it's
available in 1983, this trial was in 1993. He brings
the 1983 action in 2003. Counsel told us that this
better method of testing has been available since the
late nineties.
With any constitutional right, there's an
obligation of due diligence on the part of the claimant.
You can't come in 10 years later, for example, and say
-- say there was a tainted juror or something like that.
It was -- it -- when you're claiming even evidence that
wasn't available at the trial, you have to make the
application with due diligence.
MR. NEUFELD: I agree with that, Your Honor.
I mean, not only is Alaska not making a claim that he
did not act with due diligence here, but they're not
doing -- they're making that claim for a reason. As
soon as he finished his direct appeal, he immediately
filed a pro se petition seeking postconviction DNA
testing, within months. And then -- in the late 1990s.
And then eventually he was assigned a public defender to
represent him, and that led to the 2001 filing in the
State court which predated the 2003 filing in the
Federal court.
So he's moved as quickly as he possibly
could as soon as he knew that there was this powerful
evidence that could be dispositive.
This is the very first case litigated to our
knowledge anywhere in the country where the prosecutor
concedes that a DNA would be absolutely slam-dunk
dispositive of innocence, but doesn't consent to it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is very strange. Why
did they do that, I wonder.
MR. NEUFELD: Well it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There was a lot of other
evidence in the case, wasn't there?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know what they
thought they were doing.
MR. NEUFELD: 10 -- 10 years ago,
Justice Scalia, the U.S. Department of Justice
articulated a materiality test for DNA testing; and they
said, like you're saying: Yes, let's look at the
evidence of guilt; but then let's say to ourselves,
looking out of the other eye, what if there's a
favorable result? What impact would that have on the
favorable results?
That was the position adopted by the United
States Department of Justice 10 years ago. That was the
position, of course, that we're urging here. That was
the position adopted by the U.S. Congress five years
ago, and that materiality test has been adopted by 41
States to date.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if it is so
clear --
MR. NEUFELD: Only Alaska --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sorry, counsel. If
it is so clear that this is the right way to go, that
the Federal Government, 41 States -- does it make sense
for us to devise a constitutional right to displace what
the legislatures have done?
MR. NEUFELD: It is not a question of
displacing what the legislatures have done,
Mr. Chief Justice. It is a question of when the State
of Alaska chooses to provide a mechanism for
postconviction relief. And here they do.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It is exactly a
question of displacing what the States have done because
now this question is going to be subject to
constitutional law and it's going to be litigated in a
variety of cases with a variety of claims. Do you get
the right to it when you confess? Do you get the right
to it when you've waived it at trial? Do you get the
continuous right to it as technology advances and makes
the test more sensitive? All of those matters will be
Federal constitutional questions for us to decide.
MR. NEUFELD: I don't think necessarily,
Your Honor. I think first of all, here we have a clean
slate if you will, because there were no mechanisms
passed by the Alaska legislature.
We have seen, and which is interesting, we
actually think the Innocence Protection Act as passed by
Congress is a marvelous statute that no one is -- is
questioning one bit. It is odd that the Solicitor
General walks into this courtroom and asks this Court to
adopt a materiality test that was rejected by Congress.
The one that we are asking for here is
simply that you look at the evidence, the evidence of
guilt that Justice Scalia pointed out --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but the whole
question -- it is kind of along the same lines I've been
talking. The reason they might -- they're saying don't
adopt that test, is because the question is whether it
should be adopted as a matter of constitutional law.
They may, and I suspect they do since they represent the
government, think Congress's balancing makes perfect
sense. It is a different question here.
MR. NEUFELD: Well, I agree with you. Our
position is, is that the test that they're calling for
here is irrational; that it's completely irrational when
you have something as powerful and new as DNA evidence,
which can conclusively -- unlike any other forensic
discipline that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, just to get back
to the point you were making earlier, it really doesn't
matter what the Congress said. It is a question of
rationality under the Constitution.
MR. NEUFELD: That is -- that is correct. I
only use what Congress said and what the other 41 states
said to illustrate how there is an overwhelming
consensus now that to do it the way that Alaska wants to
do it is frankly irrational.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is the irrationality
ultimately that they require an assertion, with some
basis for the assertion, that in fact there is evidence
that would show innocence? Is the irrationality the
cart before the horse?
MR. NEUFELD: I think I understand the
question. Please interrupt me if I don't and I
apologize.
JUSTICE SOUTER: You -- you were asked a
question earlier what it was in effect about the Alaska
procedure which -- which in effect was constitutionally
frustrating. I understood that you did not claim that
the requirement to claim innocence was the problem,
although they did require that; but that the -- that the
real problem was that you not only had to claim
innocence; you had to be in a position to claim that the
evidence you were seeking would exonerate you. And in
the DNA case you couldn't do that, ultimately, until it
had been testing. And so it was that second point, in
effect that they are putting the cart before the horse,
tell us what the test is going to show before you test
it, that I thought was the sticking point for you. Am I
correct about your position?
MR. NEUFELD: You are correct; and
Justice Souter, they never ever said in -- in their
brief, in their petition for certiorari, that they
believed that a condition for getting the test should be
that a person swear out an affidavit asserting
innocence. They are raising that now in a reply brief a
week before this oral argument.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Well, that goes -- that
goes to the first point.
MR. NEUFELD: Yes.
JUSTICE SOUTER: And I -- I was concerned
with the second. I will be happy to get back to the
first, but I just want to know your position on the
second, the cart before the horse point.
MR. NEUFELD: The second point is -- and
that -- which is why the only rational test is the
Catch-22 or cart before the horse that you're referring
to -- which is we can't speculate, based on the other
evidence, whether it's going to be a DNA exclusion or a
DNA inclusion. If you look at the amicus briefs that
have been submitted here by exonerees, by people who
received clemency, all kinds of people, you will see
cases where the evidence of guilt was much more
overwhelming than it was here. You will see cases where
percent of the judges that reviewed those cases found
the evidence to be very compelling evidence of guilt or
indeed overwhelming evidence of guilt, but nonetheless
DNA trumped all that evidence and excluded those.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you will see cases
where the defendant maintained that the defendant was
innocent. Now, whether this was a requirement imposed
by Alaska or not, it seems to me you cannot point to the
practice of the other States and say Alaska must have
the same practice.
When, in fact, you don't comply with the
practices of the other States. Almost all of them do
require an assertion of innocence, which your client has
not made. I cannot imagine how you can simply -- oh,
look at all these other -- 44 other states, when your
client does not meet the requirements that those States
would impose.
MR. NEUFELD: I'm not ignoring it at all;
I'm simply saying that 1983, by its very nature, doesn't
require it, and Alaska practice --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Why shouldn't --
MR. NEUFELD: -- didn't require it, but if
you do --
JUSTICE SOUTER: Whether 1983 requires it
depends in part on whether we recognize a free-standing
right to test DNA evidence. As I -- as I conceive it,
that sounds to me like substantive due process and
rightly so.
One condition for recognizing a substantive
due process right could be that the individual claiming
the right to test claims that he is actually innocent.
What would unreasonable about that?
MR. NEUFELD: There would -- nothing be
unreasonable about that, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOUTER: Is your client prepared to
make that claim?
MR. NEUFELD: Your Honor, I assume he
certainly would. I --
JUSTICE SOUTER: I'm not asking you. I'm
asking for his position through counsel now. Do you
know?
MR. NEUFELD: I know he has told every other
lawyer who has represented him that he was actually
innocent. I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Was his assertion
before -- his confession -- his confessions before the
parole board made under oath?
MR. NEUFELD: I believe it was made under
oath, Your Honor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So he's guilty of
perjury one way or the other, either before the parole
board or in his assertions of actual innocence here.
MR. NEUFELD: Well, wouldn't it be ironic,
Your Honor, if we do the DNA test and he's exonerated
and it proves he didn't do it at all, then the State
went ahead and prosecuted him for perjury because he did
something just so he knew he could get out because,
under Alaskan law, unless you accept responsibility,
you're not going to get out.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, wouldn't it be
ironic --
MR. NEUFELD: Two of our --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Excuse me, counsel.
Would it be ironic to say that you do not have access
when you're guilty of perjury one way or the other?
MR. NEUFELD: I think that would be
terrible. If the -- if the primary goal of our criminal
justice system or one of them is that someone who is
actually innocent of the crime for which he is serving a
sentence can't -- okay -- present the evidence that will
win him his freedom. He --
JUSTICE BREYER: Could you say this -- could
you say, suppose -- I'm just testing this out -- that
like any other governmental action, this action of
refusing the DNA evidence is subject to the Fourteenth
Amendment's requirement that there be a reasonable
basis? Can't be arbitrary. Now, withholding DNA is a
governmental action, and so you cannot do so
arbitrarily. If you were to do so simply because the
defendant would not sign a new complaint under this new
procedure, which I somehow missed in the reply brief,
that's a good basis for withholding it. He should be
willing to do that.
If the reason they won't give him the DNA is
because before the parole board he said he was innocent,
that, to me -- not to others but to me -- that would
mean nothing. Of course, he's going to say he's
innocent. He doesn't want to spend the rest of his life
in prison. Okay?
So, I -- I would say, but not maybe others
would say, that if that's their reason for not giving
it, I'd hear further argument, but that would be
arbitrary. But if their reason for not giving it is
just because he won't file a new piece of paper in which
he says he's innocent or there's nothing to lose there,
then I think the State's being arbitrary. Okay?
Suppose we said that: The rule is
non-arbitrary with illustrations, send it back to the
States. And of course when they apply their own
statutes, by and large they're not being arbitrary.
MR. NEUFELD: I think that's a very sound
approach to this, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, it does help you win.
(Laughter.)
MR. NEUFELD: It has that added advantage,
Justice Breyer.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. NEUFELD: But -- but, quite honestly,
we've had two exonerees that are pointed out in the
prosecutors' brief and in the exonerees' brief who did
in fact that. They actually said to the parole board,
yes, they were guilty, because they knew that was the
only way they could get out. And then the DNA testing
was done a couple of years later and, boom, it turned
out they were completely innocent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you have a --
JUSTICE ALITO: Sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you have a
constitutional right to the DNA evidence if the accuracy
of the test was the same as the one that your counsel
submitted at trial?
JUSTICE ALITO: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words,
limits it to -- what was it -- 16 percent or something
like that?
MR. NEUFELD: I think you would -- because
number one --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, all right.
Then, obviously, the next question is at level of
accuracy does your constitutional right no longer apply?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, the constitutional right
doesn't apply with a -- with a level of accuracy. The
constitutional right applies in prohibiting the State
from arbitrarily preventing you access to the evidence.
There's a very compelling record --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, just so to
follow up on that -- so you -- if -- if the evidence
showed that there was -- would show that there was a one
out of two chance that your client was innocent, then
you think you still have a right -- a constitutional
right of access to that evidence?
MR. NEUFELD: No. I think the reason you
have it here, Your Honor, is that Alaska concedes -- I
mean, when have you ever heard it before in a case?
Alaska concedes that this powerful DNA test is so
powerful that if he gets a favorable result, it is
dispositive, he is actually innocent. Okay. That's how
powerful this is.
And so when you try and compare this to
other types of either earlier DNA or other types of
scientific evidence, you can't. And it's because of the
unique power of these STRs, and the CODIS system, which
allows for cold hits. So, it's not just the 232 people
who have been exonerated. We've also identified --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So fingerprint --
fingerprints apparently are covered by it. They have
fingerprint evidence that they are not releasing. So do
you have a constitutional right of access to that
evidence?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, I know it's slightly
outside the record, but just this week the National
Academy of Science said that fingerprints don't have the
same indicia of reliability that these DNA tests have.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I'm sure --
MR. NEUFELD: And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sure they're not
as accurate as the DNA tests. I'm trying to figure out
what the limit of the constitutional right you're
asserting is.
MR. NEUFELD: The limit is -- the limit is
-- it's the same limit, if you will, that the Innocence
Protection Act articulated and at least 41 of the States
that passed acts have articulated, and by common law the
other States all gave DNA testing, the ones that didn't
have a statute, with the sole exception in the country
being Alaska, is if there's either a reasonable
probability that the DNA tests will -- that a favorable
DNA test result can prove innocence, okay, and you did
not -- you know -- that's the standard if you will,
okay, to get the test.
I would point out that I could understand
people having some disagreement about where that bar
should be in terms of how much proof of innocence the
test would provide.
JUSTICE ALITO: How can this constitutional
right be limited to DNA evidence? I presume that there
are -- that there may be other scientific advances in
the testing of physical evidence, and if that happens,
why wouldn't the right apply to those as well? Advances
in -- advances in detecting fingerprints or testing
fibers or all sorts of other things?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, again, fibers didn't do
any better than fingerprints. In fact, they did a lot
worse in the National Academy report issued last week.
I do think, however -- and I would hope that the day
comes that will be more truth machines like DNA, which
will make it easier for factfinders to have dispositive
evidence of guilt or innocence. But right now, there's
only one test that caused the President of the United
States to appropriate billions of dollars for testing,
that caused Congress to create a special statute saying,
we don't even want this in habeas; we want this statute
to be very special. We'd like to give people --
JUSTICE ALITO: I'd like to get back to the
second part of the question I asked at the start, which
you never really got a chance to answer: Would it be
unconstitutional for a State to say that a -- a prisoner
can get postconviction access to DNA evidence, but not
where it appears that the prisoner is gaming the system?
Not where the prisoner declined at trial to ask for DNA
testing for a tactical reason because there was a chance
that the DNA evidence would be inculpatory? Would that
be unconstitutional?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, first of all, in this
case, that didn't happen. The record is very clear that
he personally requested the DNA testing, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: His counsel -- his counsel
forwent the DNA testing, and we attribute the actions of
counsel to the defendant.
MR. NEUFELD: And the prosecutor also
forwent the DNA testing because they --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But can we get an answer
to Justice Alito's question -- a hypothetical, the one
he put -- could you put that condition on a statute or a
rule consistently with the constitutional of the United
States?
MR. NEUFELD: I don't think so if you -- if
you couch it in the loosest terms that Justice Alito
did, namely, "gaming the system." Because I don't
believe a person in Mr. Osborne's position could ever be
gaming the system. Now, let me explain why so.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well -- well, let's assume
that counsel and the defendant -- after full discussion
and being fully advised, say this is too dangerous; we
don't want the DNA test; we'll shoot the dice; we're not
going to have the DNA test. He loses. Can you then get
the DNA test? Or, as Justice Alito's question pointed
out, could you have a condition that when you've made
this conscious choice, you lost your right for later DNA
testing? That's what he asked. I still don't have the
answer.
MR. NEUFELD: Okay. I would say, yes, in
much the same way that the Innocence Protection Act says
if a defendant expressly and voluntarily waives on the
record a right to that DNA testing, which is so
fundamental because it goes right to the core of
everything, innocence versus guilt, then it would not be
unreasonable to prohibit him from having the DNA test.
But that was --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sorry. I'm sorry.
With the different questions asked, I have lost where
the answer is. You say it is still part of the
constitutional right if he forewent the test at trial,
or it is not?
MR. NEUFELD: What I'm saying is it would
not be an unconstitutional restriction like the
Innocence Protection Act if the State of Alaska required
-- which it does not now because there is no legislative
scheme but in the future required -- that the -- a
defendant who doesn't want DNA testing has to
voluntarily and explicitly waive that on the record.
That -- the voluntary and knowing waiver is a
requirement in the IPA, and if -- if Alaska did
something like that, I think that would be -- that would
not be irrational.
However, I must point out in all honesty
that there are a number of people who are mentioned in
the exonerating briefs such as Eduardo Velasquez and Mr.
Tony, whose lawyers did just that. They said, for
strategic reasons, we don't want the DNA test. And then
-- boom -- years later they get the DNA test, and they
are completely exonerated. So --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, you seem to be
sympathetic to that position. But as Justice Alito's
question again points out, what you are doing is setting
up a game in which it would be really unwise to have the
DNA test. Take your chances.
MR. NEUFELD: Why would it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You have a -- you have a
built-in -- you have a -- a built-in second chance.
MR. NEUFELD: Let's for a moment --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that's just -- that's
just not sound trial strategy, counsel, and you know
that.
MR. NEUFELD: Justice Kennedy, let's for a
moment think about it in a purely logical way. If
someone is innocent and wants to have a DNA test -- okay
-- as Mr. Osborne did, they will do what they can to try
and get that DNA test.
If they get the DNA test years later,
they're not getting a new hearing. They are not getting
a -- or they are not getting a new trial. They are not
getting any of the other things that this Court often is
worried about. All they are getting is a darn test.
And they stay in prison while they get that darn test.
And if that test shows that they actually committed the
crime -- okay -- if it shows they committed the crime,
then they get nothing.
Not only do they get nothing, they get
punished. They get punished because no -- no court in
habeas or in any other postconviction relief will ever
think about them again. And, in fact, the parole board
will --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But they will have acquired
the advantage of having a chance of the jury's
acquitting them at the trial. Because by not asking for
the DNA testing, they was a chance the jury might let
them off. Had they asked for it then and had it shown
conclusively, the game was over. So it is gaming the
system.
MR. NEUFELD: Well, the reason why I -- I
don't believe it is gaming the system -- and perhaps,
you know, you can help me with this -- is if he's
getting the test now and he doesn't get out of prison
while he's having the test and he's actually using his
own money to pay for the test and if the test shows he's
guilty, the parole board is going to turn him down. He
can't go back in any other courts asking for any other
remedies. So he is in a much worse position.
On the other hand, if it proves he's
innocent, then he's out. So how does that game the
system?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ex-ante. We're -- we're
looking at it at the time of the trial. Does its pay
for the defendant to ask for a DNA test? Well, of
course, it doesn't. Because if he asks for it and it --
it finds that he's guilty, that's the end of it. There
is no chance of the jury acquitting him.
MR. NEUFELD: Well -- well, why --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So why not just not ask for
it and if it turns out that the jury happens to convict
him anyway, then ask for it?
MR. NEUFELD: In -- in all practice, it is a
moot point. Because this is a transitional right for a
very small group of people who were tried during the
80s and early 1990s.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: On that -- on that point,
I just want to make clear: In the present posture of
this case, I take it that if the Federal Innocence
Protection Act applied, he would not qualify?
MR. NEUFELD: No. He would -- he would
qualify.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: He --
MR. NEUFELD: All he would have to do is --
is go back and actually swear out a declaration under
penalty of perjury --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but -- but as the
case now stands he does not qualify.
MR. NEUFELD: Well, he's never been required
to do that or asked to do that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: As the case now stands, he
does not qualify.
MR. NEUFELD: Other than -- other than that,
he meets every single other criterion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a biggie, though.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You're -- you're, in
effect, asking us -- and you would say the -- the
Solicitor General appears here -- you're -- you're, in
effect, asking us to say that the Federal Witness
Protection Act on these facts is unconstitutional.
MR. NEUFELD: Oh, not at -- not at all, sir.
All I'm saying is that if he was on notice that that was
required as part of the procedure in Alaska, then no
doubt he would sign that affidavit even under penalty of
perjury. The problem is that it's not a requirement of
83, and there was no legislative scheme. I -- you
know --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I am quite dubious that --
that he would indeed sign it. I -- I was really struck
by his affidavit in this case, number -- or paragraph 9
of which says: "I have no doubt whatsoever that
retesting of the condom will prove once and for all
time" -- and one expects to follow -- my innocence.
That's not what it says. "Will prove once and for all
time either my guilt or innocence."
MR. NEUFELD: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, you know, what is
this?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, first of all, each and
every time with his own counsel, Justice Scalia, he was
adamant about asserting his innocence. You have to
appreciate that at this point in time, when there's a
discussion about, you know, what a prize -- and it is
our position that this action ends, if you will, okay,
and the Court grants him access to the evidence under
83.
And as was pointed out earlier during the
argument of my adversary, there is a possibility that --
that the testing -- because, look, I wasn't at the -- at
the commission of the crime. I don't have a videotape
in my head. I'm trying to be as honest and forthright
with you as I possibly can.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if there was a
videotape? Is that covered by the constitutional right
you are asserting?
MR. NEUFELD: I -- well, you know, given
what I now know about --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are there
photographs or other evidence that --
MR. NEUFELD: I don't think so. Given what
I now know about Photo Shop, I don't have -- I don't
necessarily hold out that much reliability for that
either, Justice Roberts.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's a good point.
What -- how long under the Constitution does the State
have to retain this evidence?
MR. NEUFELD: Under the Constitution there
is no duty under current law to preserve the evidence.
We --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Would that be a
corollary of the constitutional right you are asking for
here?
MR. NEUFELD: I don't believe so. I --
however, with one caveat. And the one caveat is it is a
different situation if a person like Mr. Osborne or
somebody else specifically says, I want to do DNA
testing in this case, files whatever appropriate
procedure in whatever court to commence that action, and
then, and only then, the other side goes out and
destroys the res that is the subject of that litigation.
At that point I think that would be in bad faith.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And I agree that
would be -- that -- yes. I am just wondering if there
would be any objection to an absolute rule that says
what: After two years, after one year of conviction?
MR. NEUFELD: No -- no objection. But on a
practical level again, what we're seeing is that States
all over the country want to preserve this evidence, not
just for the wrongful conviction cases but also to
enable detectives who are working cold cases to have
access to evidence.
And if the evidence isn't there any more,
they can't work them. So we're seeing a movement across
the country now to preserve that evidence.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: May I -- may I just ask
one point.
MR. NEUFELD: Certainly.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I take it he is not now in
custody for this offense?
MR. NEUFELD: I believe he is in custody --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Not for this offense?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, I -- I think what
happened is -- and I -- and I -- I can't swear to this
-- is -- is that he was -- he got a conditional release
on the other matter. And then the conditional release
was violated as well.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: He's being held on other
--
changes.
MR. NEUFELD: That's right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But he's not now in
custody for this offense.
MR. NEUFELD: He's -- he's not, but I don't
think that would make a difference in the outcome.
Certainly, if a person had a death warrant in one State
and then they were charged in another State, they would
still have a liberty interest in the outcome of that
other case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Was he released on
parole with respect to this offense?
MR. NEUFELD: I -- I believe he -- he was
released on what's called conditional release.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And was his
confession a necessary predicate to that release?
MR. NEUFELD: Well, under Alaska law one of
the key requirements to get parole is that you accept
responsibility for the crime. And so without a certain
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So a confession that
would be perjurious if he claimed actual innocence now
was responsible for his release?
MR. NEUFELD: I would hope, Mr. Chief
Justice, that I would be principled enough that if I was
actually innocent and they told me that the only way I
could get out was to say I committed a crime, that I
might say, forget it. I'll spend the next thirty years
in prison. But I can certainly understand --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I understand that.
MR. NEUFELD: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But he's been --
other than other crimes he committed, he's been released
on the basis of what you say is an unprincipled
confession. And now he is --
MR. NEUFELD: I believe he has been -- he's
back in, though, I think, because of the conditional
release. It's been violated. One second.
He had a parole -- I'm -- I'm told that he
had a parole revocation hearing on the other case and
that he was given six more years to serve on the -- on
the underlying case which is the core of this oral
argument.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So his parole was
revoked because he committed another offense?
MR. NEUFELD: That's my understanding.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay. Thank you,
counsel.
MR. NEUFELD: Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, counsel, we'll
give you three more minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF KENNETH M. ROSENSTEIN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I -- before you start,
would you -- I want you to clear up the question that
Justice Breyer asked. Assume on remand he would now
make the declaration under perjury that he's innocent.
I understood you to say that would enable him get
discovery, not necessarily to say he would get the DNA
evidence. Am I right?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: If he were to file a new
application for postconviction relief with an affidavit
that the civil rules of discovery would apply, and he, I
believe, would be -- be able to obtain the evidence that
he seeks. However --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How about --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would you resist that
request?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, there are -- there
are possibilities of procedural default. Right. And
that would be for the court --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You cannot confirm that
you would acquiesce and recommend that he get the DNA
sample under those conditions?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I -- yes. I -- I believe I
could.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you would still want
to leave yourself open to make the objection that he had
a chance to get this at trial and -- and -- and decided
not to get it.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: As I say --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wouldn't those objections
continue to apply?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I'm --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, it -- it seems to
me that -- that all -- all that you have to concede is
that there is some means for him to get into court, with
those -- those exceptions that other States make; and
other States make an exception for gaming the system.
So, so long as he can get in in habeas corpus it seems
to me you can very well leave for later whether you are
going to concede that even though -- even though he
didn't ask for it at trial, he can get it now.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That's true, Your Honor.
And -- and that was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, why give it away?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- any more than you gave
away the fact that this is going to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Why don't --
JUSTICE BREYER: We would like to know what
you do --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why don't we -- I'm
sorry. Justice Stevens.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes. I just want to be --
if your answer, as I understand it, is he can now apply
for discovery, but you don't know what will happen then.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Well, before you reach the
discovery issues there would be the issues of procedural
default.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Once those were cleared
away then he would be able to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But the net result is that
it is perfectly clear to me from the argument that you
have not conceded that if he now files the paper, he
will definitely get the DNA.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Not that he would -- that's
correct. Not that he will definitely get that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Okay.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I want to clear up --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you -- you referred
to the civil rules, and in discovery, in criminal cases
as in civil cases, it -- ordinarily you have to prove
that you have a basis for a claim. Like you don't get
on the civil side discovery before you can pass the
(b)(6) threshold that you have stated a claim.
Are you giving that up here? Because he's
seeking the discovery but he hasn't established that he
has a tenable claim.
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Justice Ginsburg, Mr.
Osborne by filing an affidavit that would accompany his
application, that would -- I think that would operate to
state a claim.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would there be instances
when you, as the Attorney General of Alaska, would waive
procedural defaults, in order to determine if there was
guilt or innocence in a case where DNA conclusively
proved it, simply pause of your interest in not
confining innocent people?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: That -- that's conceivable,
Your Honor; but in -- in Mr. Osborne's case, he's had 14
years to step forward and declare his innocence as any
truly innocent --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All you're can say in
answer to my question is, to your particular approach to
your duties here, is that that's conceivable?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Yes, Your Honor. It is.
Because I don't think that the mere existence of the
possibility that DNA could exonerate is necessarily
sufficient -- a sufficient basis to then do the testing.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. This is where I --
look.
He files a new piece of paper. Now, if
you're going to oppose that, on the ground that it
wasn't procedurally correct, one; on the ground, two, he
didn't ask for this DNA at trial, though he might have
met with the charge, what was at issue at trial is
something very different; three, that he wasn't
guilty -- you know, too much evidence against him, met
with the claim, there wasn't much evidence against
him -- okay, we have the case in front of us; we'll
decide it.
But if you're prepared to concede "I'm not
going to raise those things," then their client has what
he wants -- the DNA. So which is it?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I -- I'm not sure I
understand your -- your question, Your Honor. I'm
sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm going to just repeat
it. He -- His client follows your procedure. "Please
give me DNA."
Now will you give it to him? Or are you
going to meet him with the same defenses that you raise
here?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: The --
JUSTICE BREYER: Wrong procedure. You
ask -- you could have gotten it at trial, which he says
isn't true, and there was too much evidence, which he
says isn't true. Okay? So what are we going to have,
Mr. Rosenstein?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: If he -- if he were to do
as you say, then with respect to the request for
discovery, I believe that our only defense would be the
procedural defense of -- you know -- lack of due
diligence or -- or something along -- or untimely --
JUSTICE BREYER: If the only defense is
procedure --
JUSTICE SOUTER: -- that defense --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Pardon me?
JUSTICE SOUTER: If he walks into court and
swears, "I am innocent," subject to penalties of
perjury, "Please let me look at the DNA," as I
understand your answer, your answer will be, we will
then raise issues of procedural default, waiver, et
cetera. You will not say, on the contrary, "let him
look at the DNA." Is that -- is my understanding
correct?
MR. ROSENSTEIN: I -- I can't say that we
would actually do that, but we certainly have the -- the
right to do that. And there's nothing wrong with
proceeding --
JUSTICE SOUTER: In any --
MR. ROSENSTEIN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the case in the
