IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MARYLAND, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-680
MICHAEL BLAINE SHATZER, SR. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, October 5, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
GEN. DOUGLAS F. GANSLER, ESQ., Attorney General,
Baltimore, Md.; on behalf of the Petitioner.
TOBY J. HEYTENS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting the Petitioner.
CELIA A. DAVIS, ESQ., Assistant Public Defender,
Baltimore, Md.; on behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
GEN. DOUGLAS F. GANSLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
TOBY J. HEYTENS, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioner 20
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
GEN. DOUGLAS F. GANSLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 58
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this term in Case 08-680,
Maryland v. Shatzer.
General Gansler.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GEN. DOUGLAS F. GANSLER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. GANSLER: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
This case is here from the Maryland Court of
Appeals. In that case, the court of appeals suppressed
a statement that was given by Respondent following what
the trial court found to be a valid waiver of his
Miranda rights and following a free and voluntary
confession.
The reason why the court did so is because,
two years and seven months prior to that, the defendant
was in a different custodial interrogation and at that
time invoked his right to counsel. We ask that this
Court reverse the Maryland Court of Appeals.
It is our position that a break in custody
from custodial interrogation should be the bright line
that this Court adopts in order to end the irrebuttable
presumption that this Court created in the Edwards case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Without regard to
the time? A break in custody of one day, do you think
that should be enough?
MR. GANSLER: Your Honor, we do think one
day should be enough, as long as it is not in the
pretrial detention category. Obviously, the three cases
that have come before this Court, Edwards, Minnick and,
Roberson, all -- two of them were three days, and one of
them was one day, but those defendants were in the
pretrial detention status.
So if in fact a defendant is brought in,
questioned, and then released back to his or her daily
routine, and away from the isolation of the custodial
interrogation, we feel that that should be the bright
line for a break in custody.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So what if it's
repeatedly done? You know, you -- you bring him in, you
give him his Miranda rights. He says, I don't want to
talk. You let him go. You bring him in, give him his
Miranda rights. He says, I don't want to talk. You
know, just sort of catch and release, until he finally
breaks down and says, All right, I'll talk.
MR. GANSLER: There is parade of horribles
of catch and release and Your Honor just went through
one of them, and there are obviously a number of
hypotheticals that one could posit. We would suggest
that the break of custody would be the end of the
Edwards irrebuttable presumption. However, there are
still three responses to that. The first would be the
defendant could still say that his or her Miranda rights
were not given voluntarily and willfully. Secondly, the
due process jurisprudence that this Court had prior to
Miranda still is in existence, and therefore the
defendant could argue that that confession was given in
an overborne way, that his will was overborne.
But finally and I think most relevant,
because this is sort of the other side of this case, is
that there has been -- since 1982 eight Federal circuits
and over 20 States have had the break of custody rule in
effect. And in fact this Court in the McNeil case,
albeit in dicta and parenthetically, assumed a break in
custody as the rule. There has not been one published
opinion, at least that we could find, that has this --
that has that scenario --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is the rationale for the
break in custody that there is a likelihood of
non-coercion? Is that the reason that you offer for the
rule?
MR. GANSLER: Your Honor, it goes to --
yes, this Court has said, most recently again in
Montejo, that the reason for Edwards is that we want to
prevent badgering.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right. But this
person was in custody in the sense he was in prison and
the brief said, oh, he was released to the general
population. But the possibilities for coercion or
pressure are very substantial in the prison. The warden
comes in and says: Oh, your cell doesn't have a window.
I mine, there's countless way in which a prisoner in the
general prison population would consider that he is --
that there has been no break in custody. I think that's
a very difficult rule that you are proposing.
MR. GANSLER: Well, the courts -- the lower
courts have shown that there is a difference between
police interrogational custody and correctional custody.
What we are suggesting is once the person -- in our
case, for example, in the second interview, the
defendant was in what's called -- what's called a
maintenance room in the room, with a metal table and the
two chairs. It was clearly an interrogation context.
When that person is released from that, some people are
habitual criminals and they're put back into the general
population amongst -- that's where they live for that
time period. Other people go home. But the break in
custody for Edwards purposes ought to end at the end of
the interrogation.
Now, could there be an interrogational
situation while the person's in prison? Absolutely.
You can envision a correctional officer coming to the
cafeteria when there's, the public is there, the public
being other inmates, and that would not be deemed to be
an interrogation atmosphere. If, however, they cleared
the cafeteria and had officers standing by the doors and
blocking the doors and saying no one's allowed to come
in here, that could then become interrogation custody.
And this Court and other courts, the courts
all the time, have to decide in the Edwards context
whether or not the defendant was in custody when the
statement was given.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if the defendant goes
home, he can contact a lawyer. In prison he can't do
that. So, if the whole idea is to protect his right to
counsel, then it makes a big difference whether he's at
home or in prison.
MR. GANSLER: Your Honor -- well, first of
all, the defendant while they're in prison can contact a
lawyer in some circumstances. For example, during the
two years and seven months between these two
interrogations he could have written, he could have
called.
But let's say that that was unavailable to
that particular defendant. It's our position that what
Edwards does, Miranda, Edwards, Roberson, Minnick, it
provides the opportunity to consult counsel. But the --
what we are talking about here is the custodial
interrogation situation. In other words, the police
don't have to get somebody a lawyer. Whether or not
somebody has the opportunity to consult a lawyer or not,
as long as they are provided with their Miranda rights,
the Miranda rights themselves are the protection that
the defendant has.
We know, for example, in this case --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do we know exactly what
the Miranda warning in this case was?
MR. GANSLER: The Miranda warnings in this
case the judge, the trial judge, found exactly comported
with the Miranda warning --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But what did it tell the
person in prison he could do about a lawyer?
MR. GANSLER: That he had the right to a
lawyer and --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Did it tell him how he
could get a lawyer?
MR. GANSLER: It didn't --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If you're in prison and
they give you the Miranda warnings, what would that tell
the average prisoner with respect to access to a lawyer?
MR. GANSLER: It would tell them they have a
right to counsel and if they couldn't get one one would
be provided to them.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And would they have
provided a lawyer to him right away if they had -- he
had asked for it?
MR. GANSLER: Well, had he asked for one,
which he did the first time, what they did there --
JUSTICE STEVENS: When he is in prison, I
mean.
MR. GANSLER: Yes. It's unclear from the
record whether they would have or not. That would be
conjecture. What they do what the bright line of
Edwards says is they have to stop asking questions.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I understand that.
MR. GANSLER: Right.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm just wondering if he
thinks, well, I'd like a lawyer, what can he do?
MR. GANSLER: He could -- during those two
years and seven months in this case, he could have tried
to get a lawyer through -- either his own lawyer in the
case.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Right on the spot, when he
is in the room there and they give him the Miranda
warnings and he says, that sounds like a good idea, what
would happen?
MR. GANSLER: He would not be given a lawyer
by the police at that time. There's not a lawyer sort
of waiting outside.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So the Miranda warning is
a little misleading, isn't it, in that context?
MR. GANSLER: Well, I would argue that it is
not, because he is given the right. He is said, if you
want a lawyer before talking to us, that's fine; you
have to invoke your right to counsel. He invokes the
right to counsel, they stop talking to him. What he
can--
JUSTICE STEVENS: Do they also say it will
be provided to you?
MR. GANSLER: Yes, but he can -- there's a
number of --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And it's not going to be
provided to him.
MR. GANSLER: Well, it would be, Your Honor,
if, for example, the lawyer in his underlying case came,
he could say, look, I need a lawyer, they're asking me
questions about this other case; can you represent me on
that case?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What if asks for a
lawyer. He said: I don't want to talk to you without a
lawyer, correct?
MR. GANSLER: In 2003, yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And the State doesn't
provide him with a lawyer, correct?
MR. GANSLER: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So what
gives him an understanding that one will be provided the
next time he's questioned?
MR. GANSLER: Well, what he does understand
from the first time he is questioned -- and he
understood the rights because he himself invoked that
right to counsel. So he knew that he could say "I want
a lawyer," and he did. What he understands is the
police will stop questioning him at that point.
There is no, as far as I can tell from the
jurisprudence and this Court's holdings, there is no
obligation for the police to actually go out, nor would
I suggest that you want to have that rule, to go out and
actually ascertain, get a lawyer.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, because we tell the
police they have to stop.
MR. GANSLER: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So presumably they
wouldn't re- engage until the lawyer is present,
correct? That's what Edwards tells them not to do.
MR. GANSLER: Well, Edwards tells them to
stop questioning. Minnick says that if they have the
opportunity to consult with a lawyer they still can't
start without the lawyer being there. But that is a
different analysis than that because had they asked him
on the second time, after they read his rights and he
said, I want a lawyer, they couldn't keep going until
there was a lawyer present. He chose during that two
years and seven months when he had a mental reset that
he didn't need a lawyer.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, this is a
different part of your argument. This is not the
custody or break in custody. This is the time and the
fact that such a prolonged period of time has minimized
any coercive effect, correct?
MR. GANSLER: No, Your Honor. We would
still argue that -- in this case, obviously both exist.
The Court could fashion a bright line rule. This Court
has shown an interest in bright line rules in this area.
And this Court could adopt a bright line rule of a
particular time period. We are arguing the better
bright line rule would be a break in custody. Obviously
a break in custody plus --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Catch and release then
no longer -- catch and release is unimportant to you?
There is no meaning to Edwards in that situation,
because every prisoner, because he is a captive, is
questioned in a place and then told to go back to his
room. His room happens to be a locked cell. So he
doesn't have the freedom to leave and he doesn't have
the freedom necessarily to make calls to discuss his
choice with anyone.
MR. GANSLER: Well, in this case --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: This is a very different
situation then someone who is free to go home.
MR. GANSLER: I'm not sure -- the question
sort of posits two different scenarios. One scenario is
when the defendant is arrested, they are questioned and
then they are put into a cell. That is a different
scenario. That would be a pretrial detention analysis,
which in Minnick, Roberson and Edwards extended up to
three days, which we would argue is sort of the end of
the time line right as it exists today.
The different scenario, which is in this
case, is, yes, he is locked up in the general
population, he comes in for the interrogation, he is
then released back to his daily routine. And at that
point our view is that the rebuttable presumption of
Edwards ends. And you know --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Because he is not in
custody, when he is in jail.
MR. GANSLER: He is not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: When he can't leave --
JUSTICE STEVENS: True, we have to reach out
and find some arbitrary number, but after all, Edwards
is an arbitrary rule.
MR. GANSLER: The reason why I think break
in custody is not as problematic, and this goes to the
Justice's earlier question as well, is because literally
the year after Edwards, 1982, was the first of the eight
Federal circuits that found the break in custody rule.
And there is no -- they have been able to work with
this.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What -- there is no
small --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In those cases, was there
a considerable interval between --
MR. GANSLER: Not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It was just the break in
custody? A week --
MR. GANSLER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- was enough?
MR. GANSLER: Yes, Your Honor. Obviously,
in different cases there's different lengths of time.
But if -- in Justice Kennedy's question, if we were
going to adopt a time limit, I -- we would suggest,
like, for example, a seven-day time limit. The Court
suggests that is arbitrary. The reason why I would pick
seven days is, right now the rule is three days, and you
cannot envision the situation, at least I can't, where
somebody would be held without being presented for more
than three or four days, so --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do you say the rule is
three days? What rule is that?
MR. GANSLER: Because right now, if you look
at Edwards being the next day, Minnick and Roberson
being three days, that that is the only cases from this
Court which says when the Edwards presumption goes. So
we don't have -- whether -- what Respondent's rule would
do is, in our view, extend it right now from the
three-day limit -- now, many have suggested that's in
perpetuity.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yeah, but you -- you are
not arguing for a seven-day limit no matter what, even
if he is held in jail, are you?
MR. GANSLER: If he is held in jail on his
own case -- see, the most difficult scenario, in our
view, is one that we don't think the Court needs to
reach here, which is actually the Green case from the
District of Columbia, where he is held on his own case
in a pretrial detention --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. GANSLER: -- scenario, because then he
does have different incentives to cooperate or not
cooperate with the police and then the question would
be, well, does that -- is the break of custody there at
conviction or at sentencing? And we can quibble about
that.
We don't need to get to that in this case.
But if he is held in jail on another case, that's where
he lives. He is there for 10, 15, 20 years, and he is
brought in, away from the life that he is accustomed to,
and put there with different officers in a metal room --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose it's the same
officer. Does -- you said in your brief and just now it
was a different officer. Suppose it was the same
officer?
MR. GANSLER: Well, I actually think for --
in this case, with Detective Blankenship and Detective
Hoover, the Court should assume it's one and the same.
In fact, Roberson said just that, that within the same
department -- but it is instructive in this sense. In
Respondent's -- if Respondent's rule were to be adopted,
there is no way that one police department can know what
happened in front of another police department, in front
of another police department, while that person is being
detained --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, you could limit it
to the same police department, the same investigation,
so you are not covering the waterfront of every
interrogation about any crime, any place.
MR. GANSLER: Except for right now, we live
in a world of Roberson, where we do. So in other words,
if a defendant invokes in California for a shoplifting
case and then is transported to Iowa and then to
Maryland, the Maryland authorities have no idea whether
he invoked in one of the other two.
What is worse is right now, since we don't
have a break in custody rule, this defendant, Shatzer
himself, could have invoked counsel 20, 25 years ago in
some other State. We have no way of knowing that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, the
hypothetical you are positing is an investigation about
unrelated crimes. We are talking about, and I think
it's what Justice Ginsburg was pointing to, it was an
invocation on this crime, on this criminal activity, not
one in another State or another police department. And
so that's a substantially different question.
MR. GANSLER: It is, though he is not being
held on -- on that crime. He is being held on a
completely unrelated sexual abuse case. I mean, it's
related in the sense it's the same crime, but it's a
different case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I thought
Roberson told us it's not a different question, that
it's the same question. Roberson did not draw a
distinction between what crime he was being questioned
on the second time.
MR. GANSLER: That's exactly right, and
that's what creates the problem that if defendant -- if
we don't have a break in custody rule, a defendant who
invokes anywhere at any time is forever immune from
being questioned by the police, regardless of what would
be a sort of a wholly irrational view and an absurd
result, which I think is where we live right now.
And it becomes, obviously, greater in a
world where we have DNA. Obviously, there was no DNA in
81, but with these cold cases coming back 15, 20, 25
years later --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I wonder if you're
right about that premise. Supposing the prison had a
rule that the inmate does not have to see visitors and
they say that: Somebody here wants to talk to you. And
he says: I don't want to talk to him. And if he
refused to talk, then if he did talk, it would be
voluntary, rather than the situation you described. Do
I make myself clear?
MR. GANSLER: Yes, Your Honor, and I don't
know sort of what the protocol of each of the prisons
would be, but I would think that if a prisoner did not
want to speak with the officers that came to see him
about a crime, the prisoner would be able to say so and
has. And this defendant has -- has actually been able
to invoke that himself. If there's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What is the shortest
time period that any circuit court has found a break in
custody in a similar situation?
MR. GANSLER: A break in custody that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Between the invocation
of counsel and a requestioning. You said a number of
circuit courts have recognized this break in custody
theory.
MR. GANSLER: Actually, all -- eight Federal
circuits. I don't know what the shortest is. But there
are cases that are weeks rather than years that they
have --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Which are days?
MR. GANSLER: What's that?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Any are days?
MR. GANSLER: Not that I am aware of, Your
Honor.
And with that, I will reserve -- if there
are no further questions, I will reserve the remainder
of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Heytens.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF TOBY J. HEYTENS
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES,
AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. HEYTENS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This Court has repeatedly made clear that
Edwards v. Arizona is a prophylactic rule designed to
implement the protections of Miranda v. Arizona, and it
does so by operating as an anti-badgering rule. On the
facts of this case, I don't think there is any colorable
argument that Mr. Shatzer was badgered into waiving his
Sixth Amendment rights.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, I know that you're
going to go into the question of how we shape a rule,
and I would like you, and perhaps on rebuttal your other
counsel, to comment on the following: I don't see -- as
Justice Kennedy had a problem, so do I have a problem
with anything that just says break in custody, and
taking time seems fairly arbitrary.
Suppose you -- could you try to shape a rule
on the civil situation, the codes of ethics, where you
are not supposed to talk to a client who is represented
by a lawyer? That's where my mind is going. And the
best I could do at the moment is you would say: When,
due to a breach in custody and the passage of time, the
questioner did not and would not reasonably believe that
the suspect was looking for or was represented by
counsel?
What I've tried to do is take the purpose of
the civil rule, the ordinary ethical rule, and then use
it to shape a standard. So I would appreciate any
comments on that thought.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Breyer, I think there
is a few problems with that approach. First of all,
this case is not about the Sixth Amendment right to the
assistance of counsel. It's about the Fifth Amendment
right against compulsory self-incrimination, and this
Court has said several times that rules of legal ethics
are not relevant to the Fifth Amendment
self-incrimination rule. It says that in the Burbine
case, for example. That is the case where, although the
questioner knew that the suspect had an attorney who was
trying to reach him, the Court said that is not a Fifth
Amendment self-incrimination problem, because we have to
look at things from the perspective of the suspect.
The question is whether the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Quite a lot of what I read
was about the problems of counsel. Counsel has nothing
to do with this, nothing at all?
MR. HEYTENS: Counsel has something to do
with it, but the Court has made clear going back to
Miranda that when we're we are talking about the Fifth
Amendment right to counsel, the only reason that counsel
matters is to help to make sure that --
JUSTICE BREYER: If -- are we interested in
counsel or not? If we are interested in whether he's
represented by counsel, and Miranda covers both, then I
would repeat my question.
MR. HEYTENS: We are not --
JUSTICE BREYER: If we are not interested in
representation by counsel, then I would withdraw my
question and you don't have to answer it.
MR. HEYTENS: We have -- in the Fifth
Amendment context, we are interested in counsel only as
a derivative of his right not to be forced to
incriminate himself. It is in this context a purely
derivative right, and we need to look at it from his
perspective.
I think the reason that this case matters in
an intensely practical way is, there are approximately a
million and a half prison inmates in this country right
now, many of whom are serving extremely long sentences.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, couldn't we say that
in -- in the situation where there is a change from
pretrial status to post-conviction status, the Edwards
rule is no longer an irrebuttable presumption, but it's
simply a rebuttable presumption? And that there -- that
the rule would not apply if the prosecution could show
that under the circumstances the reason for the rule,
the concern about law enforcement badgering, was not
present?
MR. HEYTENS: That would certainly be open
to the Court to say that, Justice Alito. Ultimately,
this is a -- a second-order --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would it be a good idea to
say that?
MR. HEYTENS: I don't think it would be a
good idea.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought we liked clear
lines in this. I mean, the police won't know what to
MR. HEYTENS: And, Justice Scalia, that's --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But carrying -- carrying
that analysis one step further, if you are just talking
about people who were inmates pursuant to prior
conviction, why wouldn't the better rule be that if the
inmate is given the opportunity to say no, I don't want
a visitor today, and then if he accepts the visitor, you
would say he is no longer in custody? But if he says, I
don't want to, then he -- then he is in custody and you
preserves the presumption.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, Justice Stevens, I
suspect that's what the police would do, if you ruled
against the State in this case. But I think the reason
that you shouldn't do that is you have to ask yourself
what is the benefit that such a rule is trying to
accomplish. The Court has made clear again --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, that -- such a rule
would accomplish the benefit when he really wants --
willing to talk, he would say: I would be glad to talk
to the officer.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, Justice Stevens --
JUSTICE STEVENS: If he doesn't want to, he
should just say no.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Stevens, if he didn't
want to talk to the officer, there was nothing to
prevent him from invoking his Fifth Amendment right to
counsel.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it is a little
different when the man first comes, says, will you talk
to officer. He can very clearly say no. But if he is
in the room with two or three people around in a
different setting, then he is still in custody.
MR. HEYTENS: He is in custody, Justice
Stevens, but the premise of Miranda is that a person who
is given the Miranda warnings can choose to decide
whether to talk or not to talk.
JUSTICE ALITO: If the change --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You started to tell us why
this case was important. Would you -- would you finish
that? You said there were --
MR. HEYTENS: Certainly. The reason this
case is important, Justice Scalia, is that because under
the Maryland Court of Appeals decision no police
officer, no corrections official, can approach any
prisoner without first attempting to determine if at
some point, to someone, at some place, during the period
of continuous incarceration he has ever invoked his
Fifth Amendment right to counsel.
JUSTICE STEVENS: That's not true, because
my hypothetical, if you told him you don't have to talk
to the officer, and you could produce something, they
could question every -- everybody in jail all over the
country.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, they can't approach him
for questioning.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They can't force him to
attend the questioning. But if they give him an
opportunity to say, I -- I'm a prisoner, I just want to
stay in the prison population and not go to an
interrogation room. And if he is willing to go, you
could question him. You do not have the example of no
possibility.
MR. HEYTENS: Justice Stevens, the problem
in that situation, again, though, is that ultimately the
only basis for applying this presumption at all is if
it's appropriate to apply an irrebuttable presumption
that, even though we gave him the Miranda warnings and
even though he said, I am happy to talk to you, we
should presume that when he said that, that wasn't the
truth.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I thought that you
couldn't approach him. I thought that once he's invoked
his right to counsel, you can't approach him and say,
would you like to talk now? Right? Isn't that -- isn't
that the rule?
MR. HEYTENS: Well, under Rhode Island v.
Ennis, you are entitled to -- to update him on the
status of the interrogation, but you are not entitled to
resume custodial interrogation unless there has been a
break in custody or something has terminated Edwards.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, if the incarceration
is a continuation of custodial custody, to be redundant,
if it is a continuation of the custody, then why
wouldn't asking him whether he would like to see
visitors who want to ask him about a particular crime,
why wouldn't that be a violation of Edwards?
MR. HEYTENS: I think defendants may well
argue that it was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sure they would.
MR. HEYTENS: -- Justice Scalia, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the -- the -- the scheme
that Justice Stevens proposes wouldn't work. You would
be violating Edwards when you asked him if he wanted to
see interrogators.
MR. HEYTENS: I think there would be a risk
of that happening. I think the other reason is --
again, this is a second order prophylactic rule that the
Court has adopted solely in order to prevent people from
being coerced, coerced into incriminating themselves
when they don't want to.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You join counsel for the
State in just not wanting to argue for a time rule,
which seems to me the only thing that would work.
MR. HEYTENS: We -- we -- think the break in
custody approach is the more appropriate one that will
lead to fewer line-drawing problems. It is certainly
open to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's become apparent,
and I'm indicating that I think the time rule might have
some benefits.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, we certainly don't
oppose the Court adopting a time rule in the event that
it rejects our primary submission. In United States v.
Green, the government argued for a raw passage of time
approach, and we think, ultimately, this is the Court's
rule, it's a second order prophylaxis rule that is
designed to implement the Fifth Amendment, and it would
certainly be open to the Court if it thought necessary
to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you don't give us
any -- any suggestions. As -- you know, the State opens
the bidding with seven days.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the Speedy Trial Act,
with many exceptions, requires that you go to trial
within 70 days. Would that be a benchmark?
MR. HEYTENS: Well, I think as a practical
matter, though, there are so -- as you point out,
Justice Kennedy, there are so many exceptions to that.
We think that would be far longer than would be
necessary or appropriate under the circumstances. I
mean --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In this -- in this case
it's two years and seven months. Why should the Court
take that -- a period of that length and say, well, we
are going to now rule for all future cases it should be,
say, six months.
MR. HEYTENS: Well, I think that is another
potential defect in adopting a pure passage of time
approach, though I think this case is particularly easy.
And I think the fact that the Maryland Court
of Appeals in this case concluded that two years and
seven months is covered by an anti-badgering rule just
shows at some point how far this has departed from the
original purposes of Edwards in the first place.
So, I do think -- I mean, the Court could
simply say this case is too long, though at that point
the Court isn't providing a great deal of guidance to
the lower courts that have to deal with these problems
on a day-to-day basis.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or to the police who have
to decide whether they can interrogate or not.
MR. HEYTENS: Absolutely. It would also not
provide very much guidance to the police to just say two
years and seven months is too long. And that's again
why we think an approach that is either -- either
tethered to the break in custody, which as I think I
have said, we think better maps on to the concern that
motivated Edwards --
Let me address for a moment the catch and
release situation.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't want to
interrupt that, but there were two aspects to Edwards.
One was the coercion, but the other was the respect for
the advisement of counsel. And so the test that you are
proposing only addresses the coercion prong of it, not
the respect for the invocation of counsel.
MR. HEYTENS: The Court has mentioned
respect in the choice. I think, with respect,
ultimately though, that can't be the basis for the
Edwards rule. The Court has made clear repeatedly that
the Fifth Amendment prohibits only compelling someone to
be a witness against himself.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Davis.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CELIA A. DAVIS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. DAVIS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Creating exceptions to the rule of Edwards
means a clear rule is lost. It introduces uncertainty
into the determinations of what constitutes custody and
what length of time might be adequate to excuse the
protection.
JUSTICE ALITO: This is an area where it is
very difficult to draw lines, at least I find it
difficult to draw lines. So let me start you out with
an extreme hypothetical, and I would like you tell me
whether you think the Edwards rule reaches this far.
And if it doesn't, then I would like you to tell me why
it doesn't. And what limitations, if any, on the rule
you would be willing to defend as consistent with the
rationale for the rule.
Someone is taken into custody in Maryland in
99 and questioned for joy riding, released from
custody, and then in 2009 is taken into custody and
questioned for murder in Montana.
Now, at the time of the first questioning,
the -- the suspect invokes the Fifth Amendment right to
counsel. Now, does the Edwards rule apply to the second
interrogation?
MS. DAVIS: Yes, it does, Justice Alito.
The Edwards rule provides two ending points as it stands
right now.
JUSTICE ALITO: And you don't think that's a
ridiculous application of the rule? First of all, how
are the authorities in Montana possibly going to know
whether this person was interrogated previously on a
crime for which the person was never convicted in
Maryland, and that invoked the right not to be
questioned without -- without an attorney? And you
think there is badgering in that situation?
MS. DAVIS: Yes, Justice Alito, because
badgering in this context has become a term of art. It
is used in quotation marks in the Montejo opinion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't mean badgering.
MS. DAVIS: It means an attempt by --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We ought to get another
term for it then.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Questioning?
MS. DAVIS: I think it means returning in an
attempt to get a suspect to change his or her mind. And
in this case, the suspect said when first questioned --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There was no attempt in
this hypothetical to get him to change his mind. They
didn't know he had made up his mind.
MS. DAVIS: Well, first of all, I didn't
answer the question properly. But the police, I think,
can run a rap sheet and find out from prior arrests if a
person has been taken into custody. And that would
alert a police officer that that person may have invoked
their right and they should do more to find out. And
second --
JUSTICE ALITO: So all right, they run the
rap sheet and they find out, if they do, that the person
was arrested ten years earlier in Maryland and then
what? They try to find the detective that questioned
the -- the suspect in 1999 in Maryland? And they find
out that the detective is retired and is now, you know,
fishing down in the Florida Keys, and they have to track
this person down and say, now do you recall whether this
person -- that's the rule you are arguing for?
MS. DAVIS: Well, the police officer should
attempt to do so. But I understand that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry to
interrupt you -- interrupt there, and I will let you get
back to the answer. They should attempt to do so. The
rule here does not allow the police to approach that
person, a murder suspect. And you are saying he cannot
even be approached to see if he would waive his rights
ten years later because he was -- invoked the right in
connection with joy riding?
MS. DAVIS: Yes. Because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MS. DAVIS: -- if they have invoked the
right, then the second approach means an attempt to
persuade the person to change their mind about having
counsel. And where they haven't done so in the interim,
that amounts to --
JUSTICE ALITO: Let me pose you my
hypothetical again, the same joy riding questioning, and
then 40 years later after the person has gotten a law
degree and become an entrepreneur and made $20 million,
he's taken into custody and questioned by the Federal
authorities for stock fraud. Forever, you know, this
right that was invoked back in adolescence continues
forever.
MS. DAVIS: It should. But let's look at
this case, Your Honor, because here this suspect was
questioned about the same allegations by detectives from
the same police department and while he was in custody
continuously. And under those circumstances Edwards and
the rationale of Edwards should apply strongly.
JUSTICE BREYER: Just in case -- just in
case we don't -- we want to put a time limit on it,
which I know you don't want us to do. I'm now thinking
and I would like your comment, if you want, of a
combination of what Justice Alito said and what I said,
that is, that there are two parts to the Edwards thing.
One is the lawyer part, and the other is the
incriminating self part.
Now the lawyer part would be handled by
shaping a rule based on the rules of evidence, along the
lines I suggested. And that would give you a time. And
then the Miranda part could be handled by saying: but
the suspect retains the right to show that this
questioning is badgering without the question marks. In
other words what they are really up to is to try to get
him to change his mind. Now would that work?
MS. DAVIS: I -- I believe the Court could
adopt a type of rebuttable presumption under these
circumstances but it shows the difficulty that courts
would have and police officers, too, in measuring
degrees, degrees of coercion or degrees of custody. I
think the foregoing discussion has illustrated that
prisoners may be under different types of coercion in
their prison context. I just --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can I ask something?
What does that have to do with the hypothetical Justice
Alito gave you, which is the person is not in custody,
right?
MS. DAVIS: Well--
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He is arrested for joy
riding; he is let go; and you are saying that for 20,
years he is now immunized from being reapproached by
the police under the Edwards rule?
MS. DAVIS: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So you are advocating
that no break in custody ever stops the Edwards clock.
MS. DAVIS: Right. The problems with the
break in custody are a break will exist in almost every
case, and even in Edwards there was a change in
custody --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but not --
MS. DAVIS: -- between the police to a State
or county jail. So there is a change in -- a break in
custody right there. The prisoner was removed from the
police department and taken to the county jail.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It was one day. He
said he wanted the --
MS. DAVIS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- to remain silent
in the evening, and at 9:00 the next morning they were
back.
MS. DAVIS: But a -- a release from custody
does not signal that a person who has asked for counsel
has changed.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you are now -- you
are now accepting your adversary's point that somehow a
-- a change from a locked room in a prison to a
different locked room is a release from custody.
MS. DAVIS: No, I don't --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If we don't -- if we
don't accept that proposition, isn't there a clear break
when someone is let to go home? When someone is
released and permitted to go home?
MS. DAVIS: There is more of a break,
Justice Sotomayor, but it doesn't say anything about
that person's choice to proceed with counsel, and if
counsel is not provided then the attorney is excluded
from the adversary system of Federal justice.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask you about a
different approach? We are dealing in this case with
somebody who was constantly in custody but for a
different reason than the during the pretrial situation.
He is in the general prison population. What -- what
would be wrong with the rule that said that a person in
that situation should be advised that somebody wants to
question him, and he has a right to say I do or do not
want to talk to the visitor? And if he is willing to
talk to the visitor, then you have to give him new
Miranda warnings and you start from scratch.
But have the -- have the focus on whether he
is in custody at the time of the questioning, and say
that an inability to refuse to go to the interrogation
room would be not treated as custody. It would be
treated as in the general prison population. What would
be wrong with such a rule?
MS. DAVIS: I don't think anything's wrong
and I don't think a new rule is needed to cover that
situation, because it is conceivable that a person, even
in a prison environment, if they have control, if they
were to telephone out or to be free to refuse visitors,
might not be considered in custody.
But in this case Michael Shatzer lived in a
prison environment. He was not free to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But the record doesn't
tell us whether he was given an opportunity to say "I
don't want any visitors today."
MS. DAVIS: No, it does not, but I think the
State has the burden to show. The circumstances --
JUSTICE STEVENS: No, it's a question who
has the burden of showing he's in custody or is he free
to live leave. If he has the burden, he didn't carry
the burden in this case.
MS. DAVIS: Well, the record does show that
he lived in a maximum security prison --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Correct.
MS. DAVIS: -- and does not show that he
would be free to refuse.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you can still live in
a maximum security prison and say I don't want any
visitors.
MS. DAVIS: We don't know that he could have
refused under the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: As far as the records
show.
MS. DAVIS: Right, we don't know that. But
Justice Stevens --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do -- do we have to ask
him, you know, what visitors? I mean, is that the
question?
MS. DAVIS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you want to have any
visitors today?
MS. DAVIS: This shows --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He says, I don't know. Is
it my mother?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or -- or do you ask him,
are you willing to speak to investigators about a crime?
And he says what crime? I mean, how specific does --
does the request for permission to have visitors have to
MS. DAVIS: Well, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- for this rule to cut in?
MS. DAVIS: This discussion shows the
problems with allowing such a determination in the first
place. Our position is the definition of custody for
Miranda purposes must be the same for Edwards purposes,
for a prisoner lives within confined space under
constant surveillance, and with no freedoms and limited
expectation of privacy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So then I don't
understand why your answer to Justice Alito's
hypothetical was what it was, because that person
obvious was not in custody.
MS. DAVIS: It -- all I'm saying is that if
we were to adopt the language that this Court in Montejo
utilized, if a person is in control, if a person is not
in custody, they are in control and can shut the door or
walk away. If that's an operable definition, then it
did not apply in this case, because Michael Shatzer did
not have such freedom of --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, if you're -- if you
are going to use the Edwards, which I think is a good
idea, as counsel part, which I think is a good starting
place, you and every other member of the bar deals with
this problem every day of the week. Not every day of
the week, but very often. You know somebody's
represented in a case, and you know you are supposed to
talk to the lawyer. But eventually time passes, and
then you are probably free to talk to him, because the
whole thing's gone away.
Now that's a pretty vague rule. You could
make it more specific, but the -- the bar has lived with
that kind of situation, I guess for years.
MS. DAVIS: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: So why can't we here?
MS. DAVIS: We -- I think we should. The
police officers have lived with the Edwards decision
which says --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, that's not what I
mean. I mean that the obligation to deal with counsel,
you don't have, after enough time passes, that it's no
longer reasonable to think that that individual either
has or wants counsel.
MS. DAVIS: Well, in this case there is no
reason to think that this suspect changed his mind.
When first given his --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me, what is the
ethical rule about counsel? I thought if -- if there's
counsel in a particular case and you want to approach
the client about that case, you can't do it without
going to counsel.
MS. DAVIS: I think, though --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But when there is an
entirely different case, there is totally different
litigation, you can't approach the fellow without going
back to the counsel whom he hired for a different case?
I don't think that's the ethical rule. But that's the
effect of Edwards. Even if it's a different crime, you
have to go back to the counsel whom he hired for a
different prosecution? That bears no relationship to
the ethical rules of -- of counsel.
MS. DAVIS: Well this Court could adopt a
rule that the Edwards protection -- an alternative that
was raised in United States v. Green -- that the Edwards
protection extends to the same case for which the police
initially questioned the suspect and for which he asked
for counsel. That's one alternative and I submit that
would be more clear than --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It would make a
difference? Does it make a difference? If -- we can
limit it to the same case. But here, the reason that
the police came back is that they had additional
evidence, and so they wanted to ask him, confront him
with the new evidence. It's not the same situation that
it was when he was initially questioned.
MS. DAVIS: Well, I think from the suspect's
point of view it is the same situation. He was in the
same position, facing the police in 2003 as he was in
06, in that he was accused of committing crime and in
the interim he had no access to counsel and I think that
this is significant in this case, because it's not clear
that even if he had been able to call out of the prison
he would have had representation, because the public
defender's office was under no constitutional or
statutory duty to provide counsel for a person who's not
presently being questioned and who has not yet been
charged.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if -- what if we
limited Edwards to the same crime? That would -- that
would really make it much easier form the police to --
MS. DAVIS: I agree.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to know whether this
person in fact invoked the right to counsel.
MS. DAVIS: It would be easier, yes; and it
would apply to this case because it was the same crime.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So that would --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Would that require us to
overrule Roberson?
MS. DAVIS: Well, it does present some
tensions with Roberson. However, in this case, since it
is limited to the same crime, does it extend as far as
Roberson does? And I would like to answer Justice
Stevens' question.
In this case, the suspect was told -- he was
advised of his rights and said, "I have the right to
talk to a lawyer and have him present with me while I'm
being questioned. If I cannot afford to hire a lawyer,
one will be appointed to resent -- represent me before
any questioning, if I wish."
Those rights were never fulfilled in the two
years and seven months they've had.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but the
Miranda Rights do not require the police to provide
counsel. They have to mean -- mean you have to stop
questioning, until the person has right to counsel.
MS. DAVIS: Yes. They have to.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And the one thing
this person knew from the prior Miranda situation -- was
03?
MS. DAVIS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that, if he said,
"I don't want to talk without counsel," the one thing he
knew is that the police would stop questioning because
that's what they did.
MS. DAVIS: But that's not the same, Chief
Justice Roberts, as having the counsel present during
questioning.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, Miranda
doesn't --
MS. DAVIS: If your Miranda advice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
MS. DAVIS: -- says that you have the right
to have a counsel present during questioning, and all
that advice means, after time, is, We will stop
questioning you, then the right has been diminished over
time.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why is there a greater risk
of badgering when the questioning is about a different
offense?
MS. DAVIS: I think the risk is the same.
The risk --
JUSTICE ALITO: I thought you just said we
could -- you were suggesting an -- as an alternative,
that -- that Edwards be limited to situations where the
questioning is about the same offense.
MS. DAVIS: Well, that's possible -- well,
the rationale that was extended in the Greene case is
that, if questioning is about a different time, the
perception, from the suspect's point of view, that the
police are badgering him, would be less.
JUSTICE ALITO: I mean, this isn't fanciful.
We just were asked to take a case involving a statute of
limitations issue for a murder that was committed like
years ago, and it said suppose somebody is questioned
by State authorities for a murder and taken into custody
and then released and then, 30 years later, taken into
custody by Federal authorities and questioned for a
civil rights violation, based on the same underlying
transaction.
You would say the Edwards rule applies in
that situation?
MS. DAVIS: Yes. It does. Now, a police
officer in that situation, really, has three
alternatives. One, they could wait until counsel was
present, to be sure of obtaining a statement admissible
in the State's case-in-chief.
Number 2, they could take a chance, as
happened in this case, where Detective Hoover never
opened a case file and didn't know that the suspect had
ever invoked his right, take a statement anyway, and run
the risk that it may have to be excluded. Or, three --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you are being very
unrealistic. Have you ever known defense counsel who
says, "Oh, yes," to submit to the interrogation? I
mean -- you know, once they are lawyered up, they are
not going to talk. You know that.
MS. DAVIS: Yes. I know that, but that --
this Court, in Miranda, was concerned with the limits
that society must impose, consistent with the
Constitution, in prosecuting crimes, and I think Edwards
strikes the balance between the individual faced in
captivity questioned by interrogators and the State.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you say, "in
captivity," but you think the rule applies, whether they
are in captivity or not. In -- in Justice Alito's
hypothetical, the person was free for 40 years, so
captivity is not a limitation on your -- your proposed
rule.
MS. DAVIS: Well, a person is going to be in
custody in each Edwards scenario at the time they are
questioned, so the question is the intervening time
period. I want to say --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, you agreed that, if
he is questioned and he is not in custody when he is
being questioned. If he stopped on the street or in his
living room, they can question him there. That's the --
MS. DAVIS: Yes, because Edwards only
applies to custodial interrogation, and, under these
circumstances, Edwards strikes a balance in a familiar
and predictable way. The fact that these case -- this
case does not -- does not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, we --
MS. DAVIS: -- permit an exception.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We don't have a case.
None of the cases in this area, where we have applied
Edwards, has dealt with a situation with -- where a
prisoner has been released from custody, in any sense of
that word, i.e., sent home.
In all of the three situations that I am
aware of, in which the Edwards rule has applied, the
prisoner has stayed in jail -- some form of jail.
Correct?
MS. DAVIS: Yes, some form of jail. But
there is -- you know, Chief Justice Roberts referred to
the difference between the -- the police station and the
prison.
There are also pretrial detention centers,
and there is a range of custodial scenarios that -- that
police officers might encounter. And advancing an
exception to the rule for a break in custody presents
practical problems.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I suppose, if
they are in a pretrial detention center, they know they
are still being looked at for the crime as to which they
have invoked the Miranda warnings.
MS. DAVIS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you wouldn't call
that -- and I don't understand the other side to argue
that that is -- there is a break in custody there.
MS. DAVIS: But a transfer within -- look.
If it doesn't, then -- then it doesn't, but there should
not be a break there. Otherwise, there would have been
a break in Edwards and in many --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. No. I agree
with you. There shouldn't be a break there, but, here,
the situation is quite different. There is a break
between jail for questioning and prison for 15 years --
or whatever your sentence is.
MS. DAVIS: But, from the suspect's point of
view, the only thing that changed is the State agents
who temporarily held him in a room for questioning. He
was still --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but -- but wouldn't
it make sense to treat the -- the change from a pretrial
detention to a general prison population as, by itself,
a no longer custody, provided he is told that he doesn't
have to talk to people who want to pay him a visit.
He could say -- they could have a rule, say
that the prisoner does not have to talk to everybody who
comes -- comes around, and then you could treat that as
the functional equivalent of not being in custody.
Wouldn't that be a sensible rule?
MS. DAVIS: It's -- it's one possibility,
but I don't think it's a workable rule. The
circumstances of custody within an institution can
change dramatically.
JUSTICE STEVENS: They can, but, if you say,
as a condition to -- to questioning, he just has to know
that he doesn't have to see visitors he doesn't want to
see, which doesn't seem, to me, a very hard rule to
administer.
MS. DAVIS: It doesn't, Justice Stevens, but
I think the problem is it's a hard rule for police
officers to know. If they go to an institution to
question someone, how do they know if that rule is
applicable to that prisoner?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Doesn't -- but doesn't the
beginning of the Miranda warning tell him that he
doesn't have to --
JUSTICE STEVENS: They have the prisoner
there, and he shows up, and then -- that's the end of
MS. DAVIS: I still think it presents
difficulties.
JUSTICE STEVENS: I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I have a
clarification of the facts for a moment?
In 2003, he was in one State facility, a
sentenced prisoner. Correct?
MS. DAVIS: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And he was just moved
from one State prison to another. He wasn't in pretrial
detention in either of these timeframes. Correct?
MS. DAVIS: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We are just talking
about a change in facility, not in status?
MS. DAVIS: Exactly. And, Justice
Sotomayor, I wanted to answer your question about the
time period, where the circuit courts have sanctioned a
break in custody. One is cited in the Respondent's
brief, at page 27, is Holman versus Kemna, and a one-day
break was -- was authorized in that case. That's a very
short time period.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What were the
circumstances? I don't recall the case.
MS. DAVIS: Well, that was the case that is
not entirely analogous, but it's close, where the
question was whether a statement was tainted by an
Edwards' violation. It also involved the Sixth
Amendment, I believe, so --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Was the prisoner in a
prison the entire 24 hours? Or was the individual
released home, that sort of --
MS. DAVIS: I think it was a release home.
If I recall correctly, I would have to double-check, but
there was a one-day period that the Court recognized.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do I misunderstand Miranda
warnings? Isn't he told, at the very outset of the
Miranda warning, that he doesn't have to talk, if he
doesn't want to talk?
Is that -- is that any less strong than --
than asking him whether he wants to receive visitors, in
general? Or, in particular, a visitor who wants to ask
him about a particular crime?
I mean, he is -- he is told that with the
Miranda warning, which he is given the second time. If
you don't want to talk, you don't have to. If you want
a lawyer to be present, you are entitled to a lawyer,
or -- and -- and or, else, we terminate.
I don't know why that isn't enough.
MS. DAVIS: It isn't enough, Justice Scalia,
because -- and I think this came out of Arizona versus
Roberson. Merely repeating advice, when the right to
counsel has not been fulfilled, is not enough because
the person, over time, might lose hope of ever seeing an
attorney, and, certainly, a prisoner has less means than
someone on the street to hire an attorney.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He doesn't care whether he
gets an attorney, so long as he doesn't have to talk to
investigators. That's the issue, whether he must talk
to these investigators, and he is told, right up-front,
You don't have to do it, and if -- if you want an
attorney for it, we will get you an attorney.
Otherwise, we -- we will terminate the interview.
MS. DAVIS: But, if he has asked for an
attorney in the past and, over two years and seven
months, has never seen the right fulfilled, I think that
the -- that the pressure to cooperate with interrogators
has increased.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That is a -- isn't
that a Sixth Amendment question? That's not a Miranda
question, if he has not been provided a lawyer.
MS. DAVIS: Well, in this case, Chief
Justice Roberts, the Sixth Amendment never attached
because this suspect had never been charged.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. Right. And
it's the Fifth Amendment we are worried about, and that
is directed to coercion --
MS. DAVIS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and that is
addressed, if you stop questioning him. You don't even
start questioning him, if he says, Look, I don't want to
talk without a lawyer.
MS. DAVIS: But I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Talking stopped, as
it did the very -- the first time he was approached.
MS. DAVIS: It did, but for a prisoner in
custody questioned about the same offense, the coercive
pressures that were present in Miranda are present for
him as well. That's why we think the core holding, the
core rationale, of Edwards applies very strongly in this
case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why wouldn't he think, I
invoked my right to remain silent without a lawyer two
years and seven months ago, I will do it again; they
will have to stop questioning? Why wouldn't that be the
most likely mindset of the defendant? He knew that it
worked the first time. Why should it not work the
second time?
MS. DAVIS: I think it's -- it's possible.
But in this case, where the right to counsel went
unfulfilled for that period of time, a person might lose
hope that that advice that he asked for help would ever
be fulfilled.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if he says -- I'm
sorry --
MS. DAVIS: Go ahead.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are you done
answering?
So if he said, instead of I want to talk to
a lawyer, if he said, I want to remain silent, your case
comes out differently? He doesn't say anything about a
lawyer. He says, Look, I don't want to talk to you.
MS. DAVIS: I think it would come out the
same way.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but all your
arguments about he hasn't been provided a lawyer, there
is an ethical obligation to provide a lawyer. Those --
those are off the table.
MS. DAVIS: Well, what's different is in
this Court, I think may be clear in Michigan v. Mosley:
Asking for help from an attorney is materially different
than saying, I choose to remain silent. And the reason
is a person who invokes the right to silence while
questioned in custody is in control and chooses to stop
the questioning.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He doesn't ask for an
attorney. He just says, I don't want to talk without an
attorney. That's what he says. He doesn't demand an
attorney. He says, I don't want to talk without an
attorney. And the investigators say, Okay, in that
case, we won't talk to you.
MS. DAVIS: Well, and they treated it as a
clear invocation of the right to counsel by documenting
it in two places and putting that in the case file.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The right to counsel in the
course of interrogation.
MS. DAVIS: Yes. I -- I think what he said
was, "I won't speak to you without an attorney," is the
same as asking for an attorney.
JUSTICE ALITO: I can think of -- I can
think of at least one situation in which the Court has
held that there is a time limit in which something has
to be done in order to comply with a Constitutional
requirement. If we were to choose a time period here,
what would -- what would you propose?
MS. DAVIS: Oh, anything over two years and
seven months.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE ALITO: What would be --
MS. DAVIS: That still doesn't solve the
problem.
JUSTICE ALITO: What would be a serious --
what would be a serious answer to that question?
MS. DAVIS: We've argued that Edwards
continues to the end, and the reason is --
JUSTICE ALITO: All or nothing.
MS. DAVIS: It's all or nothing, Justice
Alito, because -- because this Court has already said in
Edwards, We will allow the police to come back if the
suspect changes his or her mind or if an attorney is
present. And those two -- those two alternatives are
available every day and they are easy for the police to
ascertain.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Your adversary says that
they -- he can't change his mind. It has to be a
spontaneous, you know, somehow they have to be in a room
together that wasn't planned and he has to come up and
say, I am confessing out of the kindness of my heart.
The police can't even approach him, according to you,
once he has invoked counsel, to ask him whether he wants
to change his mind.
MS. DAVIS: That's right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's the point.
MS. DAVIS: That is the badgering. That is
the specter of coercion that is inconsistent with the
Constitutional right related to Miranda to have counsel
present. And that is the reason why --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there is no
termination point, really?
MS. DAVIS: It is not confined to time,
Justice Sotomayor, but the termination point is,
especially for a prisoner, it's easy for the prisoner to
contact the police. Just tell the jail guard that you'd
like to talk to the police about that investigation.
They will make arrangements quickly for that to happen,
I'm quite sure, or counsel could be present and
questioning can proceed in that instance, and those are
the reasons I would ask this Court to affirm the
judgment of the Court of Appeals of Maryland.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Ms. Davis.
General Gansler, you have two minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF GEN. DOUGLAS F. GANSLER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. GANSLER: In response to Justice
Breyer's question, the ethics rules do not apply to the
police, only to lawyers, and I think Justice Scalia hit
it right, exactly right, where this -- he's actually --
in this case, he is not represented at all. He is in
custody because his case has been concluded.
JUSTICE BREYER: My thought is, can you use
the rule for lawyers, which has worked, to help shape a
rule that would work here?
MR. GANSLER: Yes, and I will get to that in
one second. And I agree -- and that's exactly right.
The visitors in jail theory that Justice Stevens brought
up: The defendant could say, "I told them I don't want
to talk to any visitors, no matter what. I don't want
to talk to any visitors. They dragged me up there, made
me go into this room and answer questions." Then you
have -- while Edwards, in our view, would have already
been terminated, you have still the argument that my --
my Miranda warnings were not waived voluntarily and
freely, and moreover, I was denied due process.
In terms of the time limits of the cases, in
The State of Maine, Stafiali was six hours, and the
following day, Dunkins v. Thigpen in the Eleventh
Circuit was the next day, following a break in custody.
Now, those cases, the guy basically went home in those
scenarios.
--
The confusion seems to be, in a lot of the
questions, regarding what is custody? We will not -- we
don't argue -- we are talking about interrogational
police custody, which is different than being in jail,
lying on your cot, watching cable television. We --
this is -- in our scenario, the three days that now
exist, whereas no one questions in the Roberson,
Minnick, and Edwards cases, those three days were
pretrial police custody situations. There is no break
in custody --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But -- but there was no
difference in those cases, as I understand it. Each of
the prisoners was in a particular room being questioned,
and then he was released into a more general room later.
MR. GANSLER: My understanding of this case
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And brought back.
MR. GANSLER: My understanding of this case,
they were in the -- sort of the box, as we call it, and
then they were put into a holding cell, a cell, and then
brought back to the box. Very different --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There is no difference
between that and a holding cell, a maintenance room, and
being put back into general prison to go sleep.
MR. GANSLER: The latter -- the latter
scenario is very different, because that's where they
live. That's their daily routine. Through no part of
the state, they are habitual offenders. They live in
the general population of a jail, in this case it is
medium security, not maximum security, and they were put
-- there were people around. They have recess, they
have television, they have a cafeteria, and so forth.
Finally, going to Justice Alito's question
regarding the time limit, where you do it. This Court
has the County of Riverside -- obviously, there's
hours from presentment is the time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the case in the
