IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JOHN ROBERTSON, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-6261
UNITED STATES, EX REL. :
WYKENNA WATSON. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 31, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:16 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JACLYN S. FRANKFURT, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Petitioner.
ROBERT A. LONG, JR., ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Respondent.
ELENA KAGAN, ESQ., Solicitor General, Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of the United
States, as amicus curiae, supporting Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JACLYN S. FRANKFURT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ROBERT A. LONG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 23
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ELENA KAGAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States,
as amicus curiae, supporting Respondent 53
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JACLYN S. FRANKFURT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 65
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:16 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 08-6261, Robertson v. United
States, ex rel. Watson.
Ms. Frankfurt.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JACLYN S. FRANKFURT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. FRANKFURT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
This case presents the question whether,
under our Constitution, the power to prosecute criminal
contempt in a Federal court rests solely with the
sovereign. The United States now agrees that the fact
that a criminal offense may only be prosecuted by the
sovereign is a foundational premise of our Constitution.
Because Mr. Robertson was prosecuted for criminal
contempt in a private right of action, his prosecution
was unconstitutional, a nullity in our view, and his
convictions must be vacated.
Ms. Watson defends the lower court's ruling
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. He didn't make
that argument, though. I mean, his -- as I recall, his
only complaint was that he had been promised that --
that he wouldn't be -- he wouldn't be prosecuted. And
that was his only complaint below, wasn't it?
MS. FRANKFURT: His complaint below was that
he had a plea agreement with the United States.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. FRANKFURT: And that the only lawful or
constitutional way he could have been prosecuted was in
an action brought by the United States; that the local
statute didn't authorize a private right of action, and
that the Constitution could not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He made the constitutional
claim below?
MS. FRANKFURT: He said below that -- that a
private right of action was neither lawful under the
local statutes nor constitutional, and the parties
responded that it was; and the lower court held it is
authorized by local statute; it's constitutional; in
fact, this was a private right of action prosecuted by
Ms. Watson on her own behalf and therefore your plea
agreement fails.
We have never argued, if it was actually her
prosecuting, that -- that she was bound by the plea
agreement. We argued it can't be her prosecuting, it
can't be under the Constitution, it can't be under the
local statute. And if it's the United States, then we
are entitled to the benefit of the plea agreement we had
with the United States.
The -- Ms. Watson defends the lower court
ruling that a private right of criminal action is
constitutional, but really has mounted -- excuse me --
mounted very little attack on our constitutional
argument that the Constitution contemplates that crimes
are public wrongs brought on behalf of sovereigns.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me. We have
plenty of plea agreements jurisprudence that say if the
Southern District of New York prosecutes someone and
they sign a plea agreement and say, we're not going to
prosecute you for further crimes, we read that to mean
that the Southern District of New York won't prosecute
you for further crimes. We don't read it that no other
government agency is bound, who has jurisdiction over
that criminal activity, that they are equally bound.
So why isn't this case the same?
Assuming -- that you're making a broad statement, that
this has to be brought in the name of the government.
Assuming that's correct, does that mean that -- why does
that mean that both the U.S. Attorney's Office and the
Attorney General's Office, which appear to be two
different entities enforcing two different sets of law,
why would both be bound?
MS. FRANKFURT: Well, it's important to
clarify, because there is -- there is a lack of -- it is
not parallel to the Federal system. So even assuming --
and I believe there is a circuit -- that the Second
Circuit says when the Southern District signs it's the
Southern District only, and the Third, Fourth, Eighth,
and Ninth view it differently when something reads as
broadly as this, which is the government. In the
District of Columbia --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. It's not just
the Southern District; it's also what, the State?
MS. FRANKFURT: No. No, I believe in the
Second Circuit they might read something signed by the
Southern District as not binding in the Eastern
District.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I got you.
MS. FRANKFURT: But in the District of
Columbia, only the United States Attorney prosecutes
criminal offenses of the type that occurred here. There
is a bit of a red herring here from this plea form.
This is a plea form that is used in Superior Court both
in traffic offenses, which are the type of offenses that
the District of Columbia prosecutes, and in criminal
offenses.
And the cross-outs are just to conform the
plea form, so that if you cross out "D.C." it reads
"United States v. John Robertson," which is how --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That did puzzle me. I was
wondering if there's -- if there's coordinate
jurisdiction. Can the -- can the District prosecute for
crimes that the Attorney General can prosecute for?
MS. FRANKFURT: There is -- there is not
coordinate jurisdiction. There is some -- some
provisions for consent if there are multiple offenses
and one goes to one, one goes to the other.
But all the offenses we're talking about
here are United States offenses. It was the United
States's position below that only the United States
prosecutes contempt. It was actually the Attorney
General's conviction in the lower court that it could
not, representing the District of Columbia, prosecute
contempt.
So that if we are construing the party to be
the United States as the Solicitor General now asks --
you know, Young and Providence Journal really apply,
which is then the prosecuting entity is the United
States, whether represented by a private prosecutor or
by a United States attorney. That's a very different
situation than different offices or -- because the
District of Columbia could not be prosecuting this case
representing the -- the Attorney General couldn't be
prosecuting this case representing the District of
Columbia government. That's not in the picture as an
option.
The -- the case -- if it's
prosecuted by a sovereign, it's prosecuted by the United
States, and the only argument that the Solicitor General
is now making is that that wouldn't bind if private
prosecutor representing the United States, as happened
in Young. We have a local case that says when a private
prosecutor in a criminal contempt case signs the plea
agreement on behalf of the United States, it's a binding
plea agreement and binds the -- the United States.
So the cross-out on the plea form, I
believe, are a bit of a red herring. The cross-out on
the caption just makes it read United States v. John
Robertson in a felony, which is the only way felonies
can be prosecuted. The cross-out on the signature line
just makes it read the United States Attorney, who is
the only one who can sign such a form in a felony case.
And it doesn't define a particular prosecuting entity
between Federal and State, or between two different
Federal jurisdictions that have concurrent jurisdiction
over, let's say, mail fraud or something like that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is this law unique to the
District or do other States -- I mean, the problem that
they are trying to get a handle on is domestic violence.
And the prosecutors are busy prosecuting drug crimes and
the rest. So the District's solution is, we will allow
the abused person to initiate this criminal contempt.
Are there other States that have the same procedure?
MS. FRANKFURT: I -- the -- the same
procedure is a question of how that is defined. If the
question is whether there are other States that have a
wholly private right of action where the person is
construed as bringing it on her own behalf, not on
behalf of a sovereign, in a criminal case, we have seen
nothing --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I -- I mean, however you
describe it in practical terms, are there other places
that say, abused person, you can initiate this and you
can have your lawyer present it, whether it's on behalf
of the State or -- but just the practical of how you go
through the motions; are there other States that allow
the victim?
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes, there are other --
there are other States that allow the complainant to
either bring it to the attention of the court in the
form of a request for an order to show cause and to
actually prosecute as a private prosecutor, the way,
let's say, in Young, they would have characterized a
private prosecutor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In criminal cases, because
I -- I -- correct me if I am wrong, but my -- my
recollection is that orders to show cause for contempt
in the civil -- on the civil side occur frequently, and
that allows a jail sentence in California I think of 5
days -- and this is civil, because it's coercive. Now,
you are talking about something different, I take it?
MS. FRANKFURT: I am. I am talking about
criminal contempt. For instance, in the District of
Columbia before this case came down there -- we had an
opinion, based on a local legislature's determination,
that said a beneficiary of a civil protection order may
initiate a criminal contempt proceeding and may act as
private prosecutor the way in -- in Young this Court
said as a matter of supervisory authorities they didn't
want interested parties.
There are jurisdictions, I believe, that
allow for interested parties to take that role. But the
role is the role of the lawyer on behalf of the
sovereign -- sovereign, whichever sovereign it is, who
is the ultimate party --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And, of course --
MS. FRANKFURT -- and who can nolle the case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the States don't have
the same compulsion that the Federal Government has,
which arises from the separation of powers. And --
which -- which means that it is the executive that has
the right to prosecute, and States are not bound by such
a thing. And they can perhaps allow private individuals
to prosecute, whereas the only exception we have made
from the -- from the chief executive's authority to
prosecute is Young, which is a very narrow exception,
dealing with the Court's ability to protect itself from
contempt of its orders.
And here the court had nothing to do with
the appointment of this private party, right?
MS. FRANKFURT: That's absolutely true. In
our view to the extent there are any sort of exceptions
from procedural rights or the normal process in contempt
proceedings, they are narrowly tailored and governed by
the doctrine of necessity. And that -- and so while
Respondent's counsel indicates, well, there are a lot of
differences in contempt and just add one to this list,
they make no attempt to ground that in the document of
necessity, which is really the only thing that -- that
justifies any sort of procedural difference in the
contempt context.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Am I right that the
District has been following this procedure for quite
some time?
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes. Well, I guess it
depends on what the question what "this procedure" is.
The District --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, where a private
party initiates, the beneficiary of an order of this
kind, initiates a contempt proceeding against a person
who violates it, and seeks a punishment for it, not just
discontinuance.
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes. The -- the District
had a case where it said it believed itself not bound by
the supervisory authority of Young and it would allow
interested parties to prosecute contempt in the domestic
violence context only, not outside the domestic violence
context. And it has had cases prosecuted in that
fashion since that time, which I believe was 1984. But
it has -- it was not until this case that the issue
arose because of the plea agreement to suggest that that
person was prosecuting in her own name --
JUSTICE STEVENS: It doesn't say to me that
the plea agreement goes to the question of whether there
is sort of an inherent violation of the Constitution by
adopting this procedure at all.
MS. FRANKFURT: I -- I --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I have trouble figuring
out whether the plea agreement has any relevance to the
kind of basic argument you are making.
MS. FRANKFURT: Well, we actually see two
arguments, and maybe that's -- that we are making, which
may be part of the confusion.
If this proceeding really was, as the lower
court interpreted, the lower court -- the lower court
interpreted the local statute and what occurred and
said: This really was a private right of action brought
by Ms. Watson on her own behalf; no government party
initiated it, controlled it; and we believe that is
constitutional. That's what the lower court said. If
that's what occurred, then we believe this Court could
well say that is unconstitutional.
We -- we defer to the lower court's view of
what occurred pursuant to the local statute. This was a
private right of action, the lower court told us so, and
we don't think that the Constitution can tolerate such a
thing. And, therefore, like in Gompers where criminal
penalty was imposed, Gompers v. Buck's Stove, a criminal
penalty was imposed in an action between private
parties, that judgment must be set aside. She never had
power to invoke the authority of the court in the first
place. That's one way to view it. The Solicitor
General --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or just to say the lower
court was wrong --
MS. FRANKFURT: The lower court was wrong.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- on that premise.
MS. FRANKFURT: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We have another option,
once we say they were wrong on that premise, to send it
back and let them look at the second question, which is
whether or not a private party can bring an action in
the name of the sovereign.
MS. FRANKFURT: Well, I think that the
second way to view it, as -- as I was going to say, is
what the Solicitor General of the United States now
agrees -- they thought below that it was Constitution,
but they now agree that the Constitution cannot tolerate
private criminal rights of action.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And if -- if that's true,
they have been following an unconstitutional practice
for about 25 years; is that right?
MS. FRANKFURT: I believe --
JUSTICE STEVENS: And nobody thought about
it in all this time?
MS. FRANKFURT: And certainly since, you
know, since they made the argument to the lower courts.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Because it is done many,
many times, as I understand it, over the years.
MS. FRANKFURT: It was done many times,
received -- when the original -- when the interested
prosecutor decision was made, it was made on the same
foundational premise as Young, which was let's look and
see if we are concerned about conflict of interest.
By the nature of asking, the court asking
questions of conflict of interest, the court was
thinking of the woman as representing the government.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This wouldn't be allowed
under Young. I mean, if Young made anything clear is
you couldn't appoint as a prosecutor an interested
party. And here is the most the interested party of
all.
MS. FRANKFURT: That's true. It certainly
would not be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So don't -- don't -- don't
say that Young would have allowed it.
MS. FRANKFURT: No, no, no, no. It
certainly wouldn't be allowed under Young. But to
finish my -- my answer to Justice Sotomayor and Justice
Stevens as to the second route: If this Court -- what
the Solicitor General I believe is asking this Court to
do is to say it's not constitutional to have such an
action brought on behalf of a private party, therefore,
construe it as an action brought on behalf of the
sovereign.
This Court -- if this Court goes that route,
as opposed to deferring to the way the lower court
described it, rather says this must have been on behalf
of the sovereign, the sovereign was the United States,
then the question is whether the plea agreement barred
The lower court said the plea agreement
didn't bar it because it was Ms. Watson's; obviously it
didn't bar it. Ms. Watson is not the United States.
But if in fact it was on behalf of the United States,
then the question is does the plea agreement bar it. We
think that the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Does -- does the Justice
Department concede that the sovereign here is the United
States? Does the Justice Department concede --
MS. FRANKFURT: I believe --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that there can't be a
separate prosecutor from -- from the Assistant United
States Attorney and that is the prosecutor for the
District of Columbia?
MS. FRANKFURT: I -- I don't want to speak
for the Justice Department, but I do believe --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't understand them
to be saying that?
MS. FRANKFURT: I do believe that they --
that they concede that the -- the relevant sovereign is
the United States.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, we can ask the
government.
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes. And --
(Laughter.)
MS. FRANKFURT: But -- but I believe that's
what their brief said. They certainly said that below
and I believe that's what they are saying here because
they are saying it's prosecution on behalf of the United
States. They have given section 518 permission in this
case because they believe that the United States is
interested.
And so the District of Columbia's role,
oddly enough, all the way through this proceeding and
then they withdrew at the merits stage in this Court,
was they believed themselves representing the
Petitioner. They had never perceived themselves to be a
public prosecutor. And they in fact said in the lower
court that they had no authority to prosecute contempt
in the District of Columbia. We agree with that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Have -- have we had cases
that said that Federal separation of powers principles
are binding on territorial governments, for instance?
MS. FRANKFURT: You know, I -- I think that
the question is -- I don't think -- I disagree with the
government, with Respondents that this Court has said it
hasn't. I think in -- I think Springer appears to apply
separation of powers principles. I think that
Metropolitan Airport Authority used Springer in a
separation of powers -- a constitutional separation of
powers analysis. I think even if this Court looks at
Whalen, which involves D.C., we will see a separation of
powers analysis applicable to the District of Columbia.
Our --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is the District a
territory?
MS. FRANKFURT: I don't think we are a
territory, no. No, it is Article I power that is being
exercised. Our focus hasn't been entirely separation of
powers, because in our view, you know, separation of
powers is about the division of powers within
government. Here the problem was that the problem was
that the -- there is no authority under the Constitution
to give the power to prosecute time, which has
historically, way back, been an attribute of sovereignty
and to take it entirely away from the sovereign at all.
Which is what -- what the lower court
finding was and what Ms. Watson now defends. But we see
a long, long history in the common law, in the English
common law, in our common law, and in our constitutional
jurisprudence of criminal actions being public wrongs
prosecuted acting on behalf of the sovereign and
criminal contempt falling right within that even more
so, because this is indication of public authority, and
to the extent there are any deviations from due process
or separation of powers principles, they are justified
only by the doctrine of necessity.
If the Court has no further questions, I
will reserve my --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Could I -- I have this
question. This -- again, I'm trying to see the case in
the broad -- in the broader sense.
Supposing there is a civil lawsuit that's
settled and part of the settlement is a consent decree
that would enjoin certain conduct, and the defendant
then violates the decree and engages in the prohibited
conduct. Are you saying that the only person who could
prosecute for contempt would be the sovereign?
MS. FRANKFURT: For criminal contempt?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes. Now whether -- whether
in some situations a private prosecutor could be
appointed --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So, no, the question would
be whether the lawyer for the -- the party who entered
into the settlement could bring a contempt proceeding
against the adversary who had violated the settlement.
MS. FRANKFURT: On their own behalf? I
don't -- I don't believe so. Not a criminal contempt
proceeding.
We are drawing a fairly rigid distinction
between who the lawyer is and who the lawyer represents.
In our view, the party in a criminal action has to be
the sovereign, the United States.
Now in the contempt context there is a
limited exception for appointment of private prosecutors
when the executive is declining to prosecute and the
judiciary needs to vindicate its authority, and if it's
referred to the public prosecutor in the Young situation
and the public prosecutor has declined but the judiciary
still needs to vindicate its authority, it can appoint a
private attorney to represent the sovereign.
But at root it's the sovereign that is
prosecuting, no matter who the lawyer is who is standing
in the courtroom. And the problem in this case was the
holding of the lower court that said -- that Ms.
Watson -- it was her case. The prosecutor said it was
her case; the lawyer said I can't control her; she gets
to make all the decisions.
JUSTICE STEVENS: What do you think the best
authority from this Court for your basic proposition is?
What is your strongest case?
MS. FRANKFURT: I think the strongest case
is Gompers v. Buck's Stove. That says fundamentally --
and I'm not quoting verbatim -- but it says
fundamentally erroneous as if a tort action of A -- for
battery of A versus B, a sentence of 12 months is
imposed. Well, that's exactly what we have here, is we
have a sentence of 12 months imposed for an action that
our lower court said was solely between private parties.
JUSTICE STEVENS: You think Gompers is the
best case?
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes, I do.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And what is your position
and can you advise us -- I know it's not in your case --
if there is a plea bargain in the Southern District of
New York, does it -- does bind, do you think, the
prosecutor in the Eastern District? What is your view
of that proposition? I know it's not part of this case.
MS. FRANKFURT: Right. My view is this
Court should go with the Third and Fourth Circuits who
have -- expressed -- quite eloquently about the United
States not being a bunch of separate fiefdoms, but that
when the United States speaks, they speak for the
government at large. That is different than a case --
of some of the cases that were cited, where it says the
United States will make a recommendation to the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, and then the
criminal defendant comes back and says well, the INS is
down, too.
And people looks at the agreement and say
well, no one would have read that to mean that the
United States included INS, because they were talking
about a recommendation to INS.
But when the government has written in, my
view is that -- that the Third Circuit and the Fourth
Circuit speak eloquently to that. But I don't see that
that issue is presented here, given the context on which
it arises in D.C. where this is conduct that should only
be prosecuted in D.C. court by the United States. It
was going to be the United States Attorney or a private
prosecutor representing the United States. We have
local law that says private prosecutors do sign plea
agreements by the United States and I would think the
converse would be true.
I'll reserve.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MS. FRANKFURT: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Long.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT A. LONG
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. LONG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I think it's very important to be clear
about what is properly before the Court. This started
out as a case about a plea agreement, and the
Petitioner's claim is that his plea agreement with the
U.S. Attorney barred his criminal contempt proceeding.
He has not made the claim that a private interested
party may not bring a criminal contempt proceeding. He
has said --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, but the
argument is that because a private interested party
can't bring it, the party is bringing it on behalf of
the United States and his plea agreement therefore is
with the United States.
MR. LONG: Well, I mean if I could,
Mr. Chief Justice, there are I think several questions
in the case, and some are actually no longer in dispute
so that will help to simplify a very complicated matter
a little bit.
One is according to the question presented,
whether the criminal contempt proceeding for violating a
civil protective order must be brought in the name of
the United States, so actually have United States in the
caption. And I think now all the parties agree, there
is no constitutional requirement that the caption of the
case actually say "United States." So to the extent
that answers the question about what does the plea
agreement cover, we don't have a dispute about that.
There's no constitutional reason why the court of
appeals has to be reversed.
So the other part of the question, as it's
framed in the question is does it have to be brought
pursuant to the power of the United States. That's not
language that is in the court of appeals opinion --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I'm not sure I
understand your point. Yes, the caption doesn't have to
be styled in a particular name --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But the prosecuting
person --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- the person whose name
is listed is acting for someone.
MR. LONG: Yes. Is the real party in
interest the United States?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Exactly.
MR. LONG: And I agree, that's mostly what
we have to talk about this morning, but I'm trying to
bracket it with issues that are really not properly in
dispute here.
One is, the caption is not a constitutional
issue. Another is, as Petitioner has said over and over
again, the actual ability of a private, interested
party, the question that was left open in Young, under
the Constitution, under the Due Process Clause or under
separation of powers, is that constitutional for
Ms. Watson to even do this, as the representative of the
United States or on her own behalf?
They have said over and over again, they are
not raising that question. In their reply brief to the
court of appeals, they say they in no way challenge
that. In their post-argument brief to the court of
appeals, they say the assertion that they are
challenging it is just wrong. In their supplemental
brief to this Court at the cert stage, they say they --
they decline to raise that question. And even in their
reply brief here, they say they have not raised the
issue left unresolved in Young.
So that is a very important issue. And I
think that issue is really --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can you define what you
see as that issue? What's the issue that you think --
MR. LONG: That's the issue of whether a
private interested party, either on their own behalf or
as the representative of the sovereign, can bring a
criminal contempt action.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What do you mean? Not on
their own -- not on their own behalf. I mean, that --
that's a quite different issue. That's the issue that
was decided below, whether --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- whether a private
interested party can be authorized to bring the suit on
behalf of the sovereign.
MR. LONG: Yes. What I'm trying to do is
narrow down to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand, but you --
you covered two things. You said whether a private
individual can bring it on his own.
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or whether a private
individual can be appointed to bring it on behalf of the
sovereign.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And I thought it was
only -- only the second of these that you say is out of
the case. You say the first is out of the case, too?
MR. LONG: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No.
MR. LONG: I think -- I think the -- all
they have conceded is that for purposes of this case, we
are going to assume that -- well, I may have given you
the wrong answer to you -- we are -- they have said over
and over again, we assume, that a private interested
party can bring a criminal contempt proceeding. And so
we think, given the importance of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: As representative of
the sovereign?
MR. LONG: Well, I -- I think that question
is fairly before the Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And nobody doubts --
I didn't think it was at issue that the United States,
rather than operating through the Assistant U.S.
Attorney, can appoint you to handle the prosecution.
MR. LONG: Exactly. Exactly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And that's what they
don't dispute, right?
MR. LONG: Maybe a different way of making
the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry, that's --
they don't dispute that? That's the point you were
trying to make?
MR. LONG: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry, repeat it for
me. I sort of --
MR. LONG: The point is, they are not
disputing, and they've said over and over again they're
not disputing that a private, interested individual,
like Ms. Watson, the individual in this case, can bring
this proceeding. Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: On whose behalf? That's
the issue that I'm trying to --
MR. LONG: And the issue that I think is
before the Court is, would that be as a representative
of the United States or would that be as a private
person?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay. Are you saying
that it's out of the case that if we say it's on behalf
of the United States, they are not challenging that they
can do that?
MR. LONG: Yes. Yes. I think they have not
challenged that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's so -- so if we
say they can act on behalf of the United States, you --
MR. LONG: Yes. And I will say, there is an
oddity to this, because in many ways, the bigger
question is the question that the Court left open in
Young, since that's not been properly raised, not
properly decided, by the court below, not properly
briefed, it is a little odd to be answering this other
question of: Well, assuming that the private party can
do this, would it be in the interest of the United
States?
JUSTICE BREYER: So in other words, if, in
fact -- you agree or don't agree, I don't know -- but
the government says and they say, the government of the
United States has here -- and it can, under the
Constitution, delegate to a private person the authority
to prosecute.
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: There is a big argument
against that.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: The argument is: This
would be the one person you can't delegate it to because
they are very biased.
MR. LONG: Right. And my --
JUSTICE BREYER: And that argument, you say,
is not in this case.
MR. LONG: Exactly. Exactly. So --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So now we have what
is in the case, which is the question of whether,
leaving that argument out of it, did they hear or --
MR. LONG: So let me now address the point
that: Is it a constitutional requirement? No matter
what the legislature says, that any criminal contempt
proceeding must be brought in the interest of the
sovereign, not in the interest of a private party. That
may seem like a fairly obvious proposition, but I want
to submit it's actually much harder than the Court
actually should agree.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know what you mean
by "in the interest of"? On behalf of? Is that what
you mean? Are you saying -- you acknowledge here that
it is on behalf of the United States but you say it
doesn't have to be in the interest of the United States,
is that it?
MR. LONG: Well, the language that the court
of appeals used is in the interest of the United States.
Who is the real party in interest?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know what that
means. Are you asserting that this suit has been
brought on behalf of the United States by your client?
MR. LONG: No. I want to make an argument
that actually, the D.C. legislature and the D.C. courts
are constitutionally permitted to determine that in this
specific situation, the interests of the individual
actually predominate over the interests of the
government and there is not a constitutional problem.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why is that even relevant?
Why do you even get to that? Isn't the question what
the parties understood the plea agreement to mean?
MR. LONG: Well, I agree with you completely
Justice Alito. The ultimate question is exactly what
you say. And we think under any reasonable construction
of the plea agreement, it does not bar this proceeding.
As Justice Stevens said, these have gone on for.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's highly relevant, I
think, because I think you would you like to make the
argument, which I would like to hear, is that: Forget
the United States. The Constitution permits this woman
to bring the case as a private citizen.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, if you are right about
that, the plea agreement drops out.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Because nobody says made a
plea agreement with her. Because that is the argument
you want to make at some point.
(Laughter.)
MR. LONG: I will make the argument,
although if I am wrong, I still think the plea agreement
doesn't bar this prosecution. Here's --
JUSTICE ALITO: But, well -- well, with
respect, even if the Constitution permits this, if the
parties understood the plea agreement to mean that this
was going to be barred, then why isn't that the end of
the matter?
MR. LONG: Well, it's what a reasonable
person would have understood Justice Alito, when the
plea agreement says, crosses out District of Columbia,
crosses out corporation counsel, and we are now all
agreed that Ms. Watson, in her own name, can bring this
proceeding under a statute that authorizes it and has
for 20 years --
JUSTICE ALITO: And I suppose the argument
could be that the -- that the government has no
authority under D.C. law to enter into such an
agreement, as well require these two --
MR. LONG: Well, that's -- now we are
getting into statutory issues, Justice Alito. I mean,
this case is a constitutional case, with no such
statutory issue was raised or decided by the court
below. Typically, this Court treats the D.C. court of
appeals as -- as final, as a practical matter, on issues
of D.C. law. So, I think that is going off in a
completely different direction.
But on the issue --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Gee, I have really lost
you. What is going off in a different direction?
Really?
(Laughter.)
MR. LONG: The issue is, it's a matter of
D.C. statute. There was some problem with this
prosecution. I mean, that's really something else.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, okay. You're --
you're asserting that this agreement with the United
States Attorney cannot cover this case because your
client was not acting on behalf of the United States,
but rather in her private capacity.
MR. LONG: Yes, and let me make that
argument.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's perfectly okay,
right?
MR. LONG: If -- if that is a constitutional
requirement. It is in Blackstone, we admit that, for
crimes in general, but we are talking about contempt.
But if it's a constitutional requirement, it has got to
be in the Constitution someplace. Petitioners say it's
because the Constitution uses words like "crimes."
Well, you know, the Court has been very
cautious about implying common law rules,
constitutionalizing common law rules, because of words
in the Constitution --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, one way you
can find it in the Constitution is that we have built a
body of law about the obligation of people bringing
prosecutions that wouldn't fit within your situation.
For -- what are the Brady -- what's the
Brady obligation of your client?
MR. LONG: Well, if you will bear with me, I
think the Constitution does answer questions like the
Brady question, but it's not the penumbras and
emanations of words like crimes. It's because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What are the Brady
obligations of your client?
MR. LONG: Well, I -- I think because the
way -- the way this Court has defined criminal contempt
does not look to the interest of the party versus the
interest of the sovereign; in fact, the Court has said
over and over again in Bagwell and Hicks and other cases
that in all criminal contempt cases, civil and criminal,
to some extent the interest of the sovereign is that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What -- what are the
Brady obligations of your client?
MR. LONG: Due process says this is a
criminal proceeding, Your Honor, if I can explain in a
minute, and therefore, all the due process rights of a
-- for a petty criminal offense apply. And I would say
that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So your client has to
provide the -- her husband a lawyer? Who has to provide
a lawyer in this criminal contempt proceeding?
MR. LONG: D.C. courts do provide lawyers if
the -- to the defendant. I mean a very important point
here is these are often pro se cases, where the woman
comes in to say -- or the petitioner; it's usually a
woman, it doesn't have to be --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't know if you have
answered the Chief's question. He has asked to have a
lawyer; is there a Brady obligation? What are the
constitutional entitlements --
MR. LONG: They -- they come from the Due
Process Clause. And if I could have just the Court's
indulgence for one minute, I think the answer to a lot
of these questions is not looking to penumbras and
emanations from crimes, but looking at this Court's
decisions deciding what is criminal contempt and what is
civil contempt. And as I started --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But can we get to the
Brady? That was one of the questions I had, too. Let's
say we have the -- we'll call it a private person as
prosecuting.
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does that person have a --
a right to look at all the government files to see if
there is any exonerating evidence?
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, how does it work?
That's what we want to know.
MR. LONG: This is a determinate sentence,
so under this Court's cases, without regard to whether
the government's interests are -- take precedence over
the private interests, it's criminal. So you get all
the rights that the Due Process Clause gives you in a --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But how does it work?
Does -- does the -- does the person who is bringing this
prosecution have the right to go in and -- and look at
the -- all -- all of the files that the police have --
MR. LONG: Well, right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- and that the prosecutor
has? That's the only way Brady would work.
MR. LONG: In this case the court said that
the Brady rights did apply. I mean, this is another
reason why I would urge the Court not to try to decide a
number of very important questions about a very
important system that has not really been properly
presented in D.C.
JUSTICE BREYER: What do we do about that?
Because it's very hard for me to focus on the case --
the issue you want me to decide --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- without thinking about
the one you don't.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the reasons, as I have
categorized this -- the --
MR. LONG: There are -- it may be that this
is the wrong case.
JUSTICE BREYER: So what do --- so what do
we do? I mean, I think of this as like Aeschylus; you
have the Furies gradually giving way to justice.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, private --
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- vengeance is out and
justice is in, and we have 3,000 years of that, and they
are all going to be variations of that theme and we
could think of 100 arguments. Boasting. Then is this
special?
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, before I can answer
that question, I would like to know whether the
government could appoint the private person. After all
there is a check -- there is a check against the total
Furies, it's the government doing it. Now you say no,
the government can't do it, so -- but they can do it on
their own. Maybe -- I don't know.
MR. LONG: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: How do I get my -- how do I
begin to answer these questions bound together in my
mind in some partial way?
MR. LONG: Well, part -- part of the answer
is, of course, that the court exercises control.
Another part of the answer is that the D.C. legislature,
which is exercising delegated legislative authority from
Congress, has determined that this is in the public
interest.
And you know, the third part of it is that
we are not granting these private individuals excessive
authority.
JUSTICE BREYER: But you want to do that.
You see, so there is no control. You are saying we want
the private individuals to have the authority to bring
criminal contempt; they are on their own; they decide
it. The government has nothing to say about this. It's
a totally private matter.
MR. LONG: No, but -- but you know, D.C.
tried for over a decade to do this with public
prosecutors, and there just were not enough resources.
So what we are allowing here, if I could take it a
stop --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Some problems have no
answers. I mean, that doesn't prove anything.
MR. LONG: Well -- there may --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you think that Congress
could -- could set up a private organization to expend
Federal funds -- we are going to abolish the Department
of Education. And we are going to give its function to
a private organization that will take care of all those
things. No good, right?
MR. LONG: Well, but there is a long, long
tradition of having private individuals undertake
prosecutions of crimes. I mean, so what you're
saying --
JUSTICE SCALIA: On -- on behalf of --
MR. LONG: On behalf of.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- on behalf of the
executive.
You are looking for a section of the
Constitution; I suggest Article II, Section 1, the
executive power shall be vested in the President.
MR. LONG: Well, but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And just as the executive
power includes the power to expend funds appropriated by
Congress, so also the executive power except in the --
in the instance of necessity acknowledged by Young,
which I think was wrongly decided anyway -- except in
that one narrow instance, the -- the power to prosecute
belongs to the executive.
MR. LONG: But -- but Justice Scalia, we are
dealing with the District of Columbia. The Constitution
does not assign any powers over the District to the
executive or to the judicial branch.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now the State
of California, trying to save money, say we have a very
good idea. We are going to pass one law, abolish all
the prosecutors' offices and say wherever there is a
victim of crime, that victim will bring the prosecution.
Now you really are back to the Furies. Is that
constitutional?
MR. LONG: Well -- and again, there is
abundant historical precedent for that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, there was, before --
before Aeschylus. Or whatever. But the --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: You would say that that is
constitutional --
MR. LONG: Well, if --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- to have a statute that
all criminal prosecutions would be brought by victims,
period?
MR. LONG: Well, I think there would be
today serious due process problems to work through with
that sort of system.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. If there are,
then why aren't there the same here?
MR. LONG: Well, I would also say the
Framers would have understood that to be a perfectly
normal system. They would not have thought it was
unconstitutional, because private prosecutions were --
were common at the time of the Framers.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I don't think that's
right. Private prosecutions were common at the time of
the framing? You have got to go back a long way before
they were common.
MR. LONG: Well, I mean there -- that issue
is debated in the briefs and I think it was less common
in the colonies in the United States than it was in
Britain, but certainly wouldn't have been regarded as --
as unconstitutional.
But this is -- now we are back to the
question that I say really the Court should not decide
because it was never properly -- whether this can be
done by a private individual at all, even as the
representative of the government. So I don't think you
should get into that.
But if you do --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm not sure why -- how
we can avoid it.
MR. LONG: Well, you could wait for a case
that presents it -- that properly presents it, where it
can be decided --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, this case properly
presents the argument that a private party can't bring a
criminal prosecution on their -- in their own -- perhaps
their own name, they can, but on their own, in their own
interest. It always has to be a government interest.
That's what the argument is.
MR. LONG: Yes. And that -- that is
something that the Court we think could properly decide.
But Justice Breyer, I would --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You are saying the
answer to that is, no, they can bring a claim in their
own name?
MR. LONG: Yes, we -- we are arguing two
things. They can bring it in their own name, that's not
unconstitutional; and they can certainly -- they could
certainly bring it as the representative of the
government, that is also constitutional. And -- and so
there are two ways --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no. But the last
question is the one that they are disputing; it can't be
in their own interest.
MR. LONG: Yes, absolutely.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And you are saying it
can.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Answer why.
MR. LONG: Because the D.C. Council said
they could do it. So we have a legislature that has
said that the interest of a private party here takes
precedence, and that is not an unconstitutional
determination by the legislature. In this Court's
criminal contempt cases, the Court has said we don't
look to whose interest is paramount or what this -- the
legislature or what the Court says whose interest is
paramount.
We recognize that both kinds of contempt,
civil and criminal, further the sovereign's interest in
vindicating the court's orders and further the private
interest in seeing that that order which applies
particularly to that party is followed.
So you don't look to that at all. You just
look to the nature of the punishment. And if it's a
determinate sentence versus a coercive sentence, then
it's criminal. So that answers all the questions about
Brady and what sort of due process --
JUSTICE BREYER: You might -- you might --
you might say this. To answer your question that is
here, there are a couple of ways of doing this. One way
you would say is, well, don't worry about this so much.
If the answer is no, you can still bring your private
prosecution but you have got to get government
permission, because you are doing it in the way of the
government.
But if the answer to the question is if you
can't do either, they you might say, then why wouldn't
you say why well, aren't we back to the Eumenides, and
the answer is going to be this is say contempt.
Contempt is special.
I don't know whether either or both of those
ways would work. So what would you think, since the
government has changed its position, of sending this
back so some of these things can be worked out? At
least we would have some opinions that would help us.
MR. LONG: Well, you know, I think that
would be an unfortunate result in the sense that, you
know, the plea agreement in our view doesn't prevent
this prosecution on any reasonable interpretation. You
know, we also think for the reasons I have been trying
to spell out that there is no real basis for the Court
to hold that it is unconstitutional, only in the
criminal contempt setting, for the D.C. legislature to
find that the private interest here justifies allowing
the private party to bring this action but it's still
criminal.
Because it's a determinate sentence, you get
all the due process just as you would as -- if the
government brought it. You get all the due process
rights which in fact the defendant did get here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, unless you
think it's a violation of due process for an interested
party to be able to criminally prosecute someone at
their -- at their discretion.
MR. LONG: Well, and that -- and, you
know --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You want to plea bargain
with a -- with an interested party?
MR. LONG: Well, but Mr. Chief Justice and
Justice Scalia, I mean, this is a system that is in all
the States. It's not just domestic violence. It's
child custody. It's child support. The amicus briefs
say this is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Criminal -- criminal
contempt prosecution or civil contempt prosecution?
MR. LONG: Well -- well, but -- yes.
Criminal contempt for violation of court orders about
domestic violence, about child custody, about child
support.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Those are in every
state?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, there can be order
to show cause, but you are saying that every state
allows a private person to have a criminal prosecution
for criminal contempt?
MR. LONG: Well, the -- the amicus briefs
at -- 19 allow -- at this point, 19 allow you to file a
motion. These things are typically begun by motion, not
a charging document. And just say --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, a -- a motion is
different.
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then the courts decide --
then the court decides based on the position of the
defendant, of the person who is charged with contempt --
MR. LONG: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- whether or not to
proceed. And the court certainly can appoint a
prosecutor, and does in many states.
MR. LONG: Absolutely, Justice Kennedy. And
that's really what we're asking. I mean, if you think
about these situations, many thousands of cases, most of
these individuals have no lawyers. They are pro se. A
civil order is entered, about domestic violence, child
custody, child support. It's violated, or the
individual thinks it's violated.
What do they do? They come to the court on
their own, so now they are pro se, so now maybe we're in
the Furies and Young and Province. But this is -- to
make the system work, we at least, I submit, have to
allow those individuals to come to the court and file a
motion, even though they are interested in, say,
somebody's violating the order, Judge, you should do
something about it --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, well, that's a
different matter.
MR. LONG: No. No. No.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's -- that's -- why
isn't it a different matter?
MR. LONG: I mean, that's what -- that's
what happened in this case. It so happens this woman
was represented by the D.C. Attorney General, who is a
public prosecutor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, so now you are into
the question of what counts as a prosecution.
MR. LONG: Yes, yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And there again, I am at
sea. I don't know what the authority is.
MR. LONG: Well, if I could -- if I can just
do it step by step. I mean, in this case and in tens of
thousands of other cases, the first step is just
allowing that motion to be filed. And if you don't
allow that, you say that's unconstitutional, the entire
system will -- will blow up.
So if you at least get to that, then we say,
well -- the judge looks at it and says, well, civil's
not appropriate here because the violation is over; if I
am going to punish this, it's going to have to be a
determinant sentence, that's criminal. At that point,
under this Court's cases, due process requires all sorts
of things to protect the defendant.
He gets a lawyer, or the other -- now, it
would say, you don't have -- the Constitution doesn't
require that there be a lawyer appointed to prosecute
every one of these, or that would be my submission. So
let the individual come in and file a motion. Let the
court come in and look at it. Don't require a
prosecutor to be appointed, interested or disinterested.
And then at that point, if the Court is exercising
sufficient control over this, to say if -- if the
person, the woman, happens to have that lawyer, that
lawyer has to just stand aside and can't play any
role --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that the situation here
in D.C.? When the woman comes in, can the judge look it
over and say, Ah, you don't have anything here; I'm not
going to -- I'm not going to allow you to go ahead.
MR. LONG: Well, you know, we have no record
on any of this, Justice Scalia, because it was not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How do you understand --
how does the statute read? As I understand it, it's not
up to the judge to decide whether there is enough there
to allow her to go forward or to appoint somebody on his
own. She is the prosecutor. It's up to her whether
there is --
MR. LONG: The way the statute and the court
rules read is you file a motion, not an indictment or an
information, a motion to hold the person in contempt.
As I understand it, it is set down for a
hearing. I mean, that's sort of the way the family
court works. So they will have a hearing and the judge
will look at it, will see what's going on, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A hearing on whether she
can prosecute or a hearing on -- on whether he's going
to be guilty or not.
MR. LONG: You know, I am very uncomfortable
to spend -- I have gone and observed one of these and
I've talked to one of the judges, but none of this is in
the record, Justice Scalia. I mean, I think what they
typically do is try to figure out what it's about,
whether it's civil or criminal. If it's criminal, they
would appoint a lawyer for the defendant and then they
would take it from there, but this is a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But can your private
prosecutor, however you want to describe her, could she
enter into a plea agreement with the defendant?
MR. LONG: Well, they can -- they can agree
to withdraw.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, she said you
could be subject to you 180 days; I will agree, and
you'll plead guilty to 30 days.
MR. LONG: Again, none of this is in the
record. My understanding is, that doesn't happen,
although I am honestly not sure. I think it would be up
to the Court to -- to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or pay $1,000 to your
victim, which is me.
MR. LONG: Well, you know, I have no
information about whether that sort of thing happens or
how the Court would treat it. But I think my basic
point is, you know, this is a very important system, not
just to the District of Columbia, but to the whole
country. And the details --
JUSTICE BREYER: I accept that --
MR. LONG: And the details matter. And to
change it to a system where we now say there have to
be --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But a specific
country -- this is the point Justice Scalia was
making -- the rest of the country, it's a state system.
MR. LONG: Well, but -- but D.C., Your
Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And -- and there --
MR. LONG: -- is like a state in the sense
that separation of powers --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but that's --
that's the question. That's the question that I don't
know that we have enough information in the record
about. Is this really -- is this prosecution like a
state? That's the Solicitor General's position, which
is, it's on behalf of the local government, not on the
behalf of the Federal government as a sovereign. I
think that's what this case speaks to.
MR. LONG: If you look at them -- if you
look at this Court's decision in Palmore. I mean, we
are dealing with an Article I court of the District of
Columbia, not an Article III court, to the extent that
the sovereign's interest is at stake here. Let's keep
the interest of that Article I court.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there somewhere I can
look to see what happens? All I can find in the long
law is that a violation of the order is a contempt.
Fine; no problem. And then the only word about the
Petitioner, it says the Petitioner is entitled to relief
under this chapter, which contains about 50 different
things. And it doesn't say what kind of relief. It
doesn't say how you get relief. It doesn't say if you
are just asking -- all those things you raised. So how
do I find out actually what is in the system.
MR. LONG: You mean the relief for contempt?
JUSTICE BREYER: It doesn't say that. It
says the earlier part of this statute which goes on for
six pages in an earlier part of this statue, which goes
on for six pages, seven pages. It says, a Petitioner
has a right to seek relief under this subchapter.
Now, that contains civil contempt. It
contains how you get protective orders. It contains a
lot of things that are absolutely noncontroversial. So
I am trying to figure out: What is the system?
MR. LONG: Well, I think -- I think the
honest answer is, Justice Breyer, you can find some of
these things by looking around, but since we've been
talking about issues that were not properly litigated
and not decided and we do not have a well-developed
record, some of these things are just not going to be
available.
And again, we think -- you know, this case
started out about a plea agreement. It's really a small
case. We are now talking about these great big issues.
We think the plea agreement doesn't bar this under any
reasonable construction, and so the right result is
either to dismiss the cases as improvidentally granted
or to affirm.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
General Kagan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ELENA KAGAN
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE RESPONDENT
GENERAL KAGAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
There are two questions, properly raised, in
this case. Petitioner is right about one. Respondent
is right about the other and the disposition. There are
a couple of questions that are extremely interesting --
I can see why the Court is interested in them -- but
were not properly raised in this case, and this Court
should not decide them.
What Petitioner is right about is that in
this criminal contempt action, Ms. Watson, the
Respondent, was and must have been exercising sovereign
power, that she was acting as a state actor for purposes
of the Constitution.
What Respondent is right about --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Whose state power was
she acting on behalf of?
GENERAL KAGAN: The way we understand this,
Justice Sotomayor, is that Respondent was exercising
sovereign power on behalf of the Article I court, the
D.C. court, which of course is partly a local court, but
is exercising power whose initial source, original
source, is Congress.
So she is exercising sovereign power in
order to vindicate the Court's order, the order of -- of
restraint.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Courts don't have the power
to incarcerate people. I mean, if you are prosecuting
for a criminal offense, you are exercising more than the
power of the Court.
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I don't believe that is
the case, Justice Scalia. Imagine Respondent
essentially doing the same function that an appointed
person would do in Young. There, of course, the court
appointed the person to prosecute contempt. Here
Respondent is essentially doing the same thing, is
acting in order to prosecute a contempt on the court and
to vindicate the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But nobody asserted in
Young that the prosecutor appointed by the court was
only exercising the power of the court. Surely it was
the power of the government that the -- that the
prosecutor was exercising. Now, the court was given the
power to appoint that prosecutor, but I would think it's
extraordinary to say that there's nothing but the
court's power in play.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, the court is surely
part of the government, and in the end this is power of
the United States. The court is created through power
of the United States. It's an Article I court. And so
Respondent is no doubt exercising sovereign power and
exercising it on behalf of the United States ultimately.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then why doesn't an
agreement by the United States not to prosecute carry
the day?
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, so this goes to the
second question, in which I think Respondent is right.
And the reason is that when a single U.S. Attorney's
Office says that the government will decide to drop a
certain set of charges, that U.S. Attorney's Office we
believe is -- is speaking for itself, unless there is
some indication that it is speaking more widely in such
a way that will bind other parts of the government.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's -- that's
absolutely startling. The different U.S. Attorneys all
work for your boss, right? They work for the Attorney
General. How can one part of the Attorney General agree
to something that doesn't bind the other part of the
Attorney General?
GENERAL KAGAN: The United States Government
is a complicated place and the fact that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I take your word for
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: -- and the fact that the
Southern District of New York agrees to do one thing
does not bind, for example, the INS, does not
bind the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe or maybe not,
but surely it binds the New Jersey U.S. Attorney. If
you -- just think about it. The -- the U.S. Attorney
from the Southern District says: Look, you agree to go
to jail for 10 years and I will drop these 3 charges.
Done. Then the U.S. Attorney for New Jersey can come in
and prosecute under those three charges?
GENERAL KAGAN: Assuming that the U.S.
Attorney in the second office has jurisdiction and
assuming that the plea agreement does not say anything
to suggest that it should be read more broadly, I think
the answer is yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, how do you
get -- I mean, you are a defendant. You have to go to
all more than 50, all the U.S. Attorney's Offices and
say, will you agree to this and get everybody to sign
off?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, Mr. Chief Justice,
even if you are right I think that we prevail. There
are two views in the court system. One is the Second
and Seventh Circuit and they take the position that I've
taken, which is that the default position is that the
contracting party binds only the contracting party and
that the plea agreement needs to say something in order
to apply more broadly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It can't do that.
If the U.S. attorney in New Jersey has the authority to
prosecute this, the U.S. Attorney in New York can't say,
oh, and by the way I bind all the other U.S. Attorneys.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, the U.S. Attorney in
New York could -- presumably that U.S. Attorney will
know who else might have jurisdiction over the
underlying conduct and would go and get an agreement
from those other U.S. attorneys. But unless the U.S.
Attorney does that, under one approach the agreement
bars only the contracting entity. But even if you're
right --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But do I understand your
position that in this particular case the U.S. Attorney
could have entered into a settlement agreement that
would have bound the Respondent?
GENERAL KAGAN: We actually don't think that
that's right, Justice Stevens. We think that in fact
the U.S. Attorney did not bind the Respondent, but we
don't think it could have bound the Respondent, and it
goes back to my answer to Justice Sotomayor, because
Respondent here is representing the D.C. court system.
And so the U.S. Attorney really would have had --
JUSTICE STEVENS: You draw a distinction
between the D.C. Circuit -- the D.C. and the United
States?
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes. Ultimately the D.C.
court system is an actor that is wielding United States
authority. But it's a very different --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But you would agree, I
take it, that the attorney for the District of Columbia
could have bound Respondent? Somebody could bind
Respondent without Respondent even knowing about it,
that's what I'm asking.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think only the D.C. court
could have prevented Respondent from going forward. I
think that the U.S. --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And I have to agree with
you that to accept this argument that the prosecutor
here is an agent just of the court, just of the D.C.
court, not an agent of the executive?
GENERAL KAGAN: If -- who would you like the
person be an agent of, Justice Scalia?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I'm not making the
argument.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Usually we have
questions the other way.
GENERAL KAGAN: I apologize.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know that courts
have ever asserted that they themselves have the power
to prosecute.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I do think that that's
the situation that we find in Young, where a court
appoints a person to prosecute a contempt on behalf of
the court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not on behalf of the court.
On behalf of the government, and that's why Young said
you should offer it first to the United States Attorney,
and only if he won't bring it, then you can appoint
somebody else to bring it. But the -- the prosecutor is
not the court. My God. What a terrible situation. The
prosecutor's the court, the judge is the court?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I do think Young is
different, Justice Scalia, because Young was a
separation of powers case. This case is not because it
arises in D.C. In Young, absolutely the judge has to go
to the U.S. Attorney's Office first. But that's not the
case here, because normal separation of powers
principles are not in application in D.C.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't it the case that only
the U.S. Attorney can prosecute for this crime? Could
the D.C. attorney general or whatever the name of it,
what, counsel, prosecute for this felony?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Scalia, I don't
believe that is entirely clear. I think that the court
could ask the D.C. Attorney General to prosecute the
crime in the same way that the court in Young asked the
U.S. Attorney's Office.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Because it's all up to the
court; the court's the big prosecutor, right?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, just as -- I know you
dissented in Young, Justice Scalia. But just as the
court in Young goes to the U.S. Attorney first and when
the court is told no the court can appoint its own
independent prosecutor, essentially that's what is
happening here. The court is appointing --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, if there were a
finding of innocent, or not guilty, by this prosecutor,
could the official prosecutor then prosecute again, or
would there be double jeopardy? If you are saying they
are somehow separate, does the double jeopardy clause
apply?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, this Court held in
Dixon that the double jeopardy clause does apply,
because they're all exercising power --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but that was the
same authority.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, and they all are
exercising power from the United States. Dixon involved
this very statute.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you don't think this is
a Bartkiss-like case, like Bartkiss v. Illinois?
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I am not familiar with
that case, Justice Kennedy, but I do think that the
double jeopardy clause -- -
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That a State prosecution
doesn't bar a later Federal prosecution.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, that's exactly right,
because ultimately all of these power are exercising
power that comes from the same source, which is the
United States Government.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is your argument the broad
argument that the Chief Justice was talking about, that
we have a man who drives in a car from Baltimore to rob
a bank in Washington and the U.S. Attorney in Washington
gives him a piece of paper which says, I will not
prosecute you for this now or in the future, and
suddenly the U.S. Attorney in Baltimore prosecutes it.
Are you saying that that is barred or not barred?
That's the broad argument.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, under several --
JUSTICE BREYER: Or are you making a narrow
argument?
GENERAL KAGAN: Under several circuits'
law --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I'm just asking you
your position on that. Can the -- does this piece of
paper from the U.S. Attorney in Washington bar
prosecution by the U.S. attorney in Baltimore? Yes or
GENERAL KAGAN: I have a principal position
and I have a back-up position. My principal position is
yes, it does, for the reason that I gave to the Chief
Justice. To the extent that there is skepticism --
JUSTICE BREYER: It does bar?
GENERAL KAGAN: It does. The full rule is
that the bar is only as to the office that -- that
executes the agreement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, could I ask
you could a 1983 or I guess Bivens action be brought
against Ms. Watson? The defendant, you know, it turns
out he's not guilty and he thinks there was malice.
Could he bring a Bivens action against her?
GENERAL KAGAN: Mr. Chief Justice, I have
not thought about that question. I am completely clear
as to your -- the question that you asked to Mr. Long,
which is does she have Brady obligations. She does have
Brady obligations. She was held to Brady obligations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: She's a State actor.
She's acting on behalf either of the United States or
the District of Columbia. Therefore, she can be sued
directly and be personally liable.
GENERAL KAGAN: She -- it is absolutely
right that she is a State actor for constitutional
purposes. And she was treated as such throughout this
litigation.
To go back to Justice Breyer's point -- may
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, briefly.
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Breyer's question,
the Chief Justice's question: Even circuits that apply
a default rule whereby the government is the entire
government and there needs to be limiting things in the
agreement, I think if you look at this agreement you
will find those limiting things, both in the cross-outs
in the caption and in the particular promises that the
United States Government has made, which applies really
only to the United States Attorney's Office.
Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
Ms. Frankfurt, you have 7 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JACLYN S. FRANKFURT
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. FRANKFURT: Thank you.
I just want to say in response both to -- to
Mr. Long's comments, that a lack record as to what
actually occurred or the general comment, about whether
or not Ms. Watson was treated as a State actor -- I
actually think there is a -- a decent record in this
case that what occurred was not a motion to request the
court to issue a show cause, but in fact, a -- a motion
that requested -- that triggered a ministerial act,
which was an act -- which was used as a charging
document, which the judge believed she had no
discretion, and the Assistant Attorney General, who was
representing the Petitioner, believed she had no
discretion to control, and Ms. Watson was treated as
bringing the action on her own behalf.
That's what the lower court held as a
factual matter, and I think it is quite supported by the
record.
JUSTICE ALITO: Can I ask you this: The
District of Columbia Court of Appeals said we are
satisfied that no objectively reasonable person could
understand that Mr. Robertson's plea agreement bound
Ms. Watson and precluded her contempt proceeding against
Mr. Robertson. If we accept that, is there any other
issue in this case?
MS. FRANKFURT: If you -- yes. The issue is
whether she could constitutionally bring the case on her
own.
JUSTICE ALITO: And did you preserve that?
If -- if Mr. -- Mr. Robertson had said, I understand
this only means that I am not going to be charged with a
-- a criminal offense by the United States Attorney's
Office for the District of Columbia, and it has no
application to this civil contempt proceeding.
MS. FRANKFURT: We absolutely raise that
because our argument from -- from the very beginning was
she can't constitutionally be representing herself in
this proceeding. If this is happening constitutionally,
she represents the United States, and if she represents
the United States, then our plea agreement bars it
because our plea agreement was with the government.
It indicated the government will not -- will
not pursue, and any reasonable person in a --
JUSTICE ALITO: But that's a separate
question. So the first question is: What was agreed to
under the plea agreement, right?
MS. FRANKFURT: Yes, and at the time that we
signed the plea agreement, there was no precedent for
the notion of a private person bringing a criminal
action in her own name, interest and on her own behalf.
No one would have contemplated that such a thing was
constitutional, because you know, back until appeals of
felonies --
JUSTICE ALITO: Just so I understand what is
before us, you preserve -- you saying -- you are saying
you preserve the issue that even if your client fully
understood that this plea agreement had no application
to a criminal contempt proceeding, he preserved the
argument that he could contest the criminal contempt
proceeding on the ground that it would be
unconstitutional?
MS. FRANKFURT: I'm sorry. I am not -- I am
not sure that I'm understanding, or that my words
haven't been misinterpreted.
It's certainly not the case that when my --
that the reasonable interpretation of that plea
agreement was that it wouldn't apply to a criminal
contempt proceeding. The only --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, I understand that. I
understand there's the contract issue. But did you --
in the lower court, did you argue even if he gave that
up, under the plea agreement, the criminal contempt
proceeding still could not be brought?
MS. FRANKFURT: Even if he gave up the right
of a private person to prosecute on her own behalf? Any
agreement --
JUSTICE ALITO: Even if he didn't get that
-- a bar to that under the plea agreement, the contempt
proceeding would still be barred for some other reason?
Did you make that argument?
MS. FRANKFURT: I am not sure that I can
answer that we did, because I am not sure that I -- I
understand the question. I -- I know that we did make
the argument that it could only have lawfully been
brought on behalf of the sovereign, and that the
sovereign was the United States. And so our view was if
this Court views it the way the lower court did, which
was as an action between private parties, then it's
unconstitutional under Gompers.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You did raise, undoubtedly
you say, the point that the only way in which she could
be the prosecutor was as an agent of the United States?
MS. FRANKFURT: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that it was
unconstitutional for her to -- to represent herself.
MS. FRANKFURT: Absolutely. I think we
wrote the word, you know, "whoever stands in the well of
the courtroom, it doesn't matter who that person is;
that person represents the sovereign." That's the only
constitutional way. If it's viewed that way, it's
barred by the plea agreement. If it's not viewed that
way, as the lower court construed the local statute to
permit, then Gompers v. Buck's Stove does -- there is no
authority there to impose a criminal penalty. We would
ask the Court to reverse.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the case in the
