IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
CURTIS DARNELL JOHNSON, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-6925
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, October 6, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:07 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
LISA CALL, ESQ., Assistant Federal Public Defender,
Jacksonville, Fla.; on behalf of the Petitioner.
LEONDRA R. KRUGER, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
LISA CALL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
LEONDRA R. KRUGER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
LISA CALL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:07 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 08-6925, Johnson v. United States.
Ms. Call.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LISA CALL
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. CALL: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Mr. Johnson's conviction for battery in the
State of Florida can be sustained by the slightest
contact. Such a conviction does not qualify as a
violent felony under the Armed Career Criminal Act. A
violent felony means one that has as an element the use,
attempted use, or threatened use of physical force
against the person of another. Physical contact is not
the same as physical force.
Physical force in this context means
something more than a mere quantum of physical contact,
and it requires violent aggression that is likely to
cause physical injury. This conclusion is guided by the
rules of statutory construction in this Court's
precedents. The better-reasoned circuits have applied
these principles to find that physical force means
something more than de minimis contact.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that's -- you say
that's Federal law. Would it make a difference if,
contra what Florida held in the Hearns case, a State had
typed a battery statute as a crime of violence?
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor. If the State
statute required that the offender admit the use of
force as part of the elements of his prior offense --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No, no, no. It's exactly
the -- it's exactly the statute Florida has. And
somebody has a plea, and we don't know from the record
what the conduct was. But the State, unlike Florida,
says, our battery statute for our State law purposes is
a crime of violence; therefore, for our State law
enhancements the person who pleads guilty to a battery
offense will be deemed one who has committed a crime of
violence, if that's the State law.
MS. CALL: Then -- no, Your Honor, I'm
sorry. Then the mere fact that the State found that it
qualified under its own recidivist statute would not
bind the Federal court. Why we say that Hearns is
binding is the proposition that it found the elements of
a battery offense and the -- the ACC looks to those
elements to determine whether it is a violent felony.
Congress didn't say that it -- the offender had to have
conduct that involved the use of physical force, but a
prior that had as an element the use.
So the fact that the State statute may
qualify under its State recidivism wouldn't be the same
determination that it didn't have as an element the use
of force. Here --
JUSTICE BREYER: But what -- what -- before
we can even get into this, I think we have to decide if
those words "striking or touching" describe one crime or
two. And what we said in Chambers is that the nature of
the behavior that likely underlies a statutory phrase
matters in this respect. If you think of the seven
different things covered by one statute in James or
Chambers, two of them, failing to return from a furlough
and failing to return from work in day release, seem to
me quite possibly to describe one thing, not two.
Now, how do we know that striking or
touching describes two things? I couldn't find any
instance, and we had the library looking. I couldn't
find any instance in Florida where those two things have
ever been charged separately. And they looked at
hundreds.
So -- so why do we think it's two crimes,
rather than just one called "striking or touching"?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, two reasons. First,
the face of the statute itself has "or," so it doesn't
require --
JUSTICE BREYER: It does, too, in Chambers.
It's "not returning from furlough or not returning from
work release." You know, and I'd -- I would say the
behavior is the same. It's not like burglary of a
dwelling versus burglary of a boat. Those are two
separate things.
MS. CALL: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Here, why do you think they
are two separate things?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, because Hearns, the
Florida State Supreme Court decision, described them as
three separate offenses and spelled out that this
statute could be violated and it said by: First,
touching someone intentionally and against their will;
second, by striking; or third, by causing bodily harm.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. If they are separate
things, what is the evidence? There is a legal
question. You say the touching. Spitting, is that
enough to rise under the -- to fall within the Federal
statute? Suppose I agree with you on that; the answer's
How do I know whether touching as applied in
Florida as a separate matter in the mine run of cases,
involves spitting or involves something that causes far
more serious harm? How do I know?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, you would apply first
the plain language of the statute, and "to touch" means
the slightest contact, as the courts have held. At
pages 41 to 42 we spelled out the offenses of spitting,
making slight contact, that justified a battery
conviction. "Strike" obviously has to mean something
else or the legislature wouldn't have included both
types of conduct within the battery provision.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This -- this statute is a
misdemeanor statute, isn't it?
MS. CALL: For a first offense, yes, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yeah. And the only reason
what happened here was elevated to a felony was that he
had a prior offense.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So it's understandable that
the slightest touch could -- could constitute a
misdemeanor.
MS. CALL: Your Honor, the problem with
saying that just because it's a felony, therefore it
can't be considered is that the statute first describes
the prohibited conduct and says that the conduct is in
the first subparagraph, the penalty is in the second.
So the very same conduct is necessary for either a
felony or a misdemeanor, and essentially no force times
two is still zero.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, ACCA uses the words
"physical force," and any touching involves some
physical force. Now, how do we determine how much more
than the minimum physical force is necessary in order to
fall within the Federal statute?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, it is a qualitative
line that sentencing judges would have to make, like all
of the other difficult decisions that they're called on
to make in the sentencing guidelines in these 3553
factors. We've asserted as a proposed test that it be
conduct just like the Begay test, that it would be
physical force of a kind that is violent and aggressive
and likely to cause injury.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, there -- most -- this
statute actually, we looked into it and it seems to be
used, particularly the touching part, also to cover
unwelcome physical, sexual advances. And it's not hard
to consider such matters to have involved force of
exactly the kind that the Federal statute is aimed at.
And there was no striking, but there was in fact use of
harmful force, touching. That was serious.
Now, how do we know which is more normally
the case when this statute is used in its touching
respect?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, the government has
cited a footnote of 6,000 convictions, and there is no
way to know of those convictions whether they were
charged as to touch, to strike, or to cause bodily harm.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we don't have to know
what's more normal anyway, do we?
MS. CALL: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If -- if any conviction is
possible under the element of the crime to touch, when
there is simply slight physical force, your argument
still stands, right?
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: I would say that's
certainly wrong under our cases. I mean, I would have
thought that the reason that burglary, for example, is a
violent crime is not because in every instance there is
a risk of physical harm, because in the mine run of
instances there is a risk of physical harm, and I
thought we said that in at least three cases.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor, as to looking to
both the enumerated offenses and those that fall in the
otherwise. The first prong of the ACC, though, does not
talk about conduct and it does not refer to an ordinary
case. It says an offense that has as an element. And
therefore it is directed to looking at a particular
Florida State statute rather than a generic battery or
how battery might ordinarily --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, but an element --
you mean we should interpret "element" in the first part
of this in a radically different way than we have
interrupted equivalent words in the second part, and we
should say that burglary -- in other words, assault
or -- or -- in other words, unless in every case of
prosecution there is going to be force actually applied
or something like that, that it doesn't fall within one?
I'm surprised at it. I mean, I guess it's possible.
What would be the argument for doing that, which would
be totally different than we have handled the other one?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, the reason why is
that Congress was directing in the first prong those
crimes that were directed against persons and would be
defined by their elements. In the second prong Congress
did list out four enumerated offenses that they thought
were committed, A, by career criminals, and, B, that
created that substantial risk. In the first part it
does not talk about risk to others. It's that
offender's conduct and an elements-based test.
JUSTICE ALITO: If there were a State
statute that made it a battery to engage in offensive
and unwelcome sexual touching, your argument would be
that that would not fall within the first prong of ACCA,
because there is not a -- it's not likely to cause a
physical injury?
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that right?
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor. Because --
JUSTICE ALITO: If there was a statute that
said -- in the old days I'm told people used to throw
the contents of chamber pots out the window. If there
were a -- a State statute that said it is a crime to
dump the contents of a chamber pot on somebody's head,
you would say that's -- that doesn't fall within the
first prong of ACCA?
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor, I would say that
that does not qualify under the first prong.
JUSTICE ALITO: Even -- those are classic
batteries --
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- and the language of the
first prong of ACCA really tracks the language of the
common law crime of battery?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, it does because it
talks about in Florida the element is the slightest
contact. And we were not arguing that that offender who
spits or touches or does these other disrespectful acts
doesn't deserve to be charged and can't be charged with
battery under Florida's State law.
JUSTICE BREYER: So -- so what about an
assault? I guess, using a law school hypothetical, I
mean, a statute for assault -- I guess you could assault
somebody by threatening to throw a marshmallow at them.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, assault is out
of the statute.
MS. CALL: Your Honor, again, it depends on
each particular statute and its elements.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no. But I mean, on
your definition, as you and Justice Scalia were
suggesting, because it is conceivable that you could
assault somebody by threatening to throw a marshmallow,
that means assault is no longer a crime of violence, and
that can't be right.
MS. CALL: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, of course it's right.
You don't have to touch somebody for an assault.
MS. CALL: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You can just threaten
somebody.
MS. CALL: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not a crime of
violence.
Ms. Call: And that would be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course it's right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Assault is not a crime of
violence; it's not a use of force.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Certainly not.
MS. CALL: Two responses to that, Your
Honor. The first is, looking at the underlying facts
would violate the categorical approach of saying we're
not looking at what each offender might have done in any
particular case, but what are the elements that he
necessarily admitted. And under the Florida statute it
would qualify as a violent felony because the Florida
statute defines it as an offer to do violence coupled
with the --
JUSTICE BREYER: What about attempted
murder?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, yes, if it has as an
element the use of force. And that --
JUSTICE BREYER: But it didn't --
MS. CALL: Yes, but under the ACCA, which is
one of the phrases that the government elides out of its
analysis, it's not simply the actual use of force, but
an attempted or threatened use of force.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can I ask you something?
In your definition, you appear to hinge it on the fact
that the force used has to cause injury of some type,
that. That appears to be the only definition you can
give. But the use of physical force means just the use
of force, strong force, violent force, aggressive force,
but it doesn't mean that it necessarily has to cause
injury.
Would my rearing back and slapping you? In
those instances slapping doesn't cause physical injury
as that term is defined in the common law, which is an
injury of lasting effect. You may have some redness for
a second, but that's all. Would that qualify as a crime
of violence?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, some of these
questions will be difficult lines for the court -- a
sentencing court to draw. We have offered the
definition that violent felony, the word "violence"
encompasses sort of a rough use of force that could lead
to injury or is likely to lead to injury, not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but violence has a
broader meaning. It generally means a strong force or a
strong -- physical force generally has some relative
degree of -- of impact. I agree with you, the common
definition talks that way. Why should we read something
more into it, like physical injury?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, the Court wouldn't
have to, and part of where we drew this from is the
Court's language in Begay that indicated that crimes
within clause (1) of ACCA are those crimes which are
also likely to present a serious risk of potential
injury to others.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Many will, but don't --
serious use of force doesn't necessarily always.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor, and that's why
the qualitative line falls somewhere higher than mere
contact, which would simply be the standard for Florida
battery conviction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose we knew -- knew
what happened. It's the same statute, and it would be
possible to have a conviction for a rude touching under
it. But this man, instead of pleading guilty, in fact
went to trial, and we know that he beat somebody badly.
If -- if that were the case, if we knew what the facts
were, then would the ACCA enhancement be in order?
The statute covers the waterfront from a
rude touching to beating somebody to a bloody pulp. But
we know, because there's been a trial, exactly what this
person does, and what he does would fall under the
aggressive violence, capable of doing physical injury to
another.
MS. CALL: No, Your Honor. Knowing the
added fact of the actual conduct would not answer the
question because it is based on the elements. However,
if the prosecutor charged it as to strike, or there was
a division -- for example, at page 19 of our reply brief
we showed the Fifth Circuit case in Robledo. It tracked
the exact same Florida statute that is at issue here and
said the offender did touch or strike the victim, comma,
by striking him with a vehicle. And the Fifth Circuit
said under the modified categorical approach to look at
the charging document and the offender's necessary
admission shows that was, in fact, a crime of violence.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't there a separate -- a
separate battery crime, aggravated battery, in -- in
Florida, which --
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor. There are two
other felony battery statutes, apart from this one that
do --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, this isn't -- this
isn't a felony battery statute. This is a misdemeanor
battery statute, which has been elevated to a felony in
this case only because the fellow had a prior.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But, besides the
misdemeanor battery statute, there are two felony
battery statutes in Florida, right?
MS. CALL: There are. Two other separate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And how -- how are they
defined?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, they add the mens rea
of whether or not the battery was intended to cause
great bodily harm, permanent disfigurement, or permanent
disability; and the other says simply that you committed
a battery and did cause -- the higher standards. But --
and, in addition, the misdemeanor battery includes the
element of causing bodily harm, and offenders can be
charged simply with that provision.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Misdemeanor does?
MS. CALL: Yes. Yes, Your Honor. The
felony version is to cause great -- great bodily harm.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. CALL: And the misdemeanor is to cause
bodily harm, which Florida law defines as low as causing
a bruise or mark like that.
So, if someone were charged with, in State
court, a predicate that involved that kind of injury, a
prosecutor using his or her discretion could charge
under causing bodily harm and -- which showed facts that
could support the finding of a violent felony.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What -- what about
the government's argument that your interpretation would
dramatically limit the reach of this provision of ACCA
because of the number of States that define battery in
the same way Florida does?
MS. CALL: Your Honor, I think that the
government exaggerates the concerns of that because
there are statute that both require an admission of the
use of force or have that as an alternative that could
be prosecuted in the appropriate case.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yeah, but it's --
it's usually easier just to charge the lowest common
denominator, the battery that doesn't necessarily
require violent force, and the point -- this was the
argument that was accepted in -- in Hayes, that the
interpretation, say, advanced by the dissent in that
case, would mean that there be a vast number of States
that weren't covered.
I mean, presumably, Congress meant to cover
all the States.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor. However,
because the -- in Hayes, the Court was looking at the
"committed by" and whether that was the -- the necessary
part of the prior conviction.
Here, given the fact that the statute can be
charged both in Florida and many other statutes to be
included, shows that those cases would -- it would only
be a small number of cases that are likely to be
affected where --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you would have to
have other States which only have a battery statute that
is defined as broadly as this misdemeanor battery
statute in Florida.
If they have a higher degree of battery,
just as Florida does, which is a felony, then, if the --
if the prosecutor wants this fellow to be convicted of a
violent crime, he -- he could charge him with that --
with that higher degree.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are there any States that
have only this simple battery statute, which is -- which
is met by a simple touching?
MS. CALL: According to LaFave, only Florida
and I believe one other State has such a broad
definition --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No. No. You mistook my
question.
MS. CALL: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Are there any States in
which the only prosecution for battery that can be
brought is under a statute as broad as this one, which
is -- is covered by even a touching?
MS. CALL: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't all of the other
States that have a touching statute also have higher
degree of battery statutes?
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor, according to
LaFave, all States have aggravated battery statutes that
include either the use of a deadly weapon or --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I thought the
evidence was pretty clear that Congress was adopting the
common law definition of battery here, which doesn't
require that higher degree of force or violence.
MS. CALL: Your Honor, in the legislative
history, the only time that they talked about battery --
in one House report it references battery and assault,
simply by those descriptions.
Every other time, they talked about assault
and battery with a deadly weapon and something more than
a simple touching.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do they use battery in the
statute here? I am looking for it. I don't -- I don't
see the word "battery" at all.
MS. CALL: No, Your Honor. There is no
enumerated offenses in the first prong.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what worries me more
than -- than your application to battery is the
methodology, because, if it's true that in Section 1,
unlike Section 2, a single instance of where you could
commit the crime without using force is sufficient to
take it out of the statute, then, just looking through
this, generally, you would take out assault, probably
have to take out kidnapping. You would probably have to
take out domestic violence. You would have to take out
extortion, certainly, explosives laws.
I mean, the very -- laws that I would think
Congress certainly intended to include in that first
definition.
MS. CALL: Your Honor, when they --
JUSTICE BREYER: So that's very worrying,
and why I don't think it's the right methodology.
MS. CALL: Well, Your Honor, they did use
the word "element," and an element is a constituent --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but an element could
be an element that is a -- the word is "element," the
use or threatened use of physical force. Now, an
element, say like abduction, could be an element that
uses physical force if in the mine run of cases it uses
physical force, even though one can sometimes think of
an exception. That's how we have interpreted 2.
So if we interpret 1 a different way, we are going to
take outside the statute the very things that Congress
wanted inside; and, if we interpret it the same way, I
think we would get to the right result.
MS. CALL: Your Honor, I would have two
responses to that. The first is, in the second prong,
Congress used the word "conduct." And if they had meant
conduct to be included in 1 rather than the elemental
definition, that would have been a very easy definition.
Second, when they talked about the crimes
intended for category 1, they gave the examples of
someone with murder convictions, rape convictions, a
gangland enforcer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Rape can be convicted
without -- rape can be conducted without force.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So now rape is
out.
MS. CALL: Your Honor, it depends on the
element of the offense.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the element of rape
is not force; it's lack of consent.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. Under 1 it
depends upon the elements, but what about 2 and
especially the residual provision of 2, "any other
conduct that presents a serious potential risk of
physical injury to another"? I would think rape
qualifies under that.
MS. CALL: And, certainly, if the government
believes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And many of the other
crimes that Justice Breyer has been talking about.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor. I certainly
agree that -- -
JUSTICE BREYER: You do? You agree that,
then -- in other words, Section 2 is not about property
crimes that involve force, which is what Congress
happened to say nonstop in the legislative history,
which I know isn't read by everyone. But it seemed to
me reading that history, the first part is dealing with
those things that aren't property crimes. The second
part, like arson, extortion, which they had in mind of a
certain kind, and whatever, the explosives-related
things, were things that they thought didn't -- could be
property crimes that also involved harm to people.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor, and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, you can't say yes to
both of us.
MS. CALL: Well -- I agree with Your Honor
that the legislative history certainly indicates that 1
and 2 had different purposes, but this Court didn't find
Begay and Chambers on the easy test, to say simply that
DUI is not a property crime, therefore it doesn't
qualify. So I hesitate to offer that as a solution to
the Court, but keeping in mind that the government --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I dare say that the next
time somebody comes to argue before this Court that a
crime is not included within Section 2 because it's not
a property crime, I don't think that person is going to
get one vote.
JUSTICE BREYER: They wouldn't have to say
that. They would have to say that it is not a crime
like the three that are mentioned, which I can't
remember -- it's arson, extortion -- and what's the
third? Using explosives.
MS. CALL: It is burglary, arson, extortion,
and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, burglary, arson,
extortion -- all right. You would say it's not like
that. It's DUI; it was not like that.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And I get --
MS. CALL: But if the government failed to
prove that a predicate qualified under the first prong,
it could offer argument in evidence to the sentencing
judge to show that it met the Begay test and was, in
fact a serious risk of injury, that -- purposeful
violence, et cetera. It's simply not that battery by
touching qualifies.
And, Your Honor, if I may reserve the
remainder.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would you just clarify an
answer that you gave. You described Florida as unique,
but I thought there were many States that had a
codification of common law battery that would include
both touching and more aggressive behavior. I thought
Florida was not alone in having that kind of statute.
MS. CALL: There are other States, Your
Honor, that have the common law definition, but they
also have alternative versions. Many of the States also
have alternative versions that require either the use of
force or the aggravated if the underlying conduct or the
underlying charge was that serious matter of involving
physical force to qualify under a violent felony.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you said they all
had such -- such aggravated statutes in your answer to
me. Now you just said many of them do. Which is it?
MS. CALL: Well, many have alternative
versions that require admission of use of force, not
simply, say, touching or striking like Florida. But all
do have felony versions of aggravated felony.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Kruger.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LEONDRA R. KRUGER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. KRUGER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The primary definition of violent felony in
the Armed Career Criminal Act, as, Justice Alito, you
have noted and, Mr. Chief Justice, as you have noted,
almost precisely tracks the general definition of the
crime of battery; that is, the unlawful application of
physical force to the person of another.
Petitioner's primary submission --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then why
didn't they say -- why didn't they just say battery, if
that's what they meant? It's a lot simpler and also
clearer than to say physical force against the person.
MS. KRUGER: I think it's certainly true,
Mr. Chief Justice, that Congress could have defined the
category of predicates for the ACCA in that way by
listing certain offenses, which would then require the
courts to determine what the generic elements of those
offenses were, as this Court did with respect to
burglary in Taylor.
But Congress instead decided to list in its
primary definition of violent felony the common element
that it thought as a categorical matter indicated a
sufficient potential for harm that the crime ought to be
singled out as a predicate for ACCA enhancement. And
that single element was the use of physical force
against the person of another.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you -- you would
have us believe that by "violent felony" in this -- in
this statute, Congress meant the threat -- the threat?
It doesn't even have to be the act. You know, if you
don't shut up, I am going to come over and thwonk you on
your shoulder with my index finger. I'm going to
(snap). This is a violent felony under this statute
which gets him how many more years?
MS. KRUGER: It creates a mandatory minimum
of 15 years.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Fifteen years for (snap).
(Laughter.)
MS. KRUGER: Justice Scalia, I think that
there are a few responses to that question. The first
is that a threatened use of force is normally considered
and normally punished under the criminal law as a crime
of assault. And for the reasons that Justice Breyer has
noted already in the arguments, it seems awfully
unlikely, particularly in light of legislative history
of this provision for those Justices who consider such
considerations relevant, that Congress meant to exclude
the crime of assault.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's all he's
necessarily been convicted of. When a verdict is
brought in in Florida under this misdemeanor statute,
all you know for sure is that he threatened to go
(snap). That's all you know for sure that he has been
convicted of, and you are going to give him 15 years.
MS. KRUGER: And again, two responses: The
first is as a practical matter that is not a crime.
Normally the law of assault, in order to constitute a
criminal threat, there has to be more than simply the
use of words. There has to -- the defendant has to
manifest by conduct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there have been rude
touchings where there is no danger of physical injuries
to the person. There have been prosecutions in Florida,
I understand, for what would be considered a rude
touching as opposed to an aggressive use of force that
would risk physical injury.
MS. KRUGER: That's correct. There have
been a handful of cases, that are cited in Petitioner's
brief, in the -- in which the Florida statute has been
used to criminalize rude touchings. We think that those
rude touchings, as a matter of general usage in the
common law and in the general definition of battery, do
in fact have as an element the use of physical force.
That is a usage that has been in force in the majority
of States for quite some time. And we think that it
does no particular violence, if you will pardon the
expression, to the statute to interpret it to encompass
the full range of common law batteries, batteries as
they are prosecuted --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: How about pick pocketing,
would pick pocketing be a violent crime if it involves a
touching necessarily?
MS. KRUGER: Pick pocketing actually doesn't
involve a touching necessarily. Normally if you --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I guess a very good pick
pocket could get -- could get just the wallet and not
touch the person, I'm not sure.
MS. KRUGER: Well, pick pocketing, normally
as it is criminalized in most states, does not, in fact,
require as an element that the prosecution prove that
the -- the defendant touched the victim.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but you don't prosecute
them for pick pocketing. You have a clumsy pick pocket
and you prosecute him for battery, right? And he gets
years.
MS. KRUGER: Well, the clumsy pick pocket
would, in fact, be in most jurisdictions a robber. And
robbery is precisely the kind of offense that we know
that Congress was intending to cover in subsection 1 of
the ACCA. It was one of the first ACCA predicates, and
it remains, I think, a paradigmatic example of a crime
that has as an element the use of force and is,
therefore, covered under the plain statutory language.
But I think that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel -- I'm sorry.
Please finish and then I will --
MS. KRUGER: But I think that the essential
thrust of the argument so far has been that if it's
possible to commit battery under the common law under
the laws of 27 states, including Florida, under Federal
law in the way that individual instances doesn't seem to
present a serious risk of injury, then it can't possibly
be a violent felony. And I think that we know from the
way the Court has interpreted the statute to date that
that is simply not the case.
This Court addressed a very similar argument
in Taylor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, you see that
you don't have the inquiry. The issue is not whether it
causes serious injury or not, the issue is whether the
nature of the force used is physical force. And, so, if
you look at the common definition of "physical force" in
the dictionary, which your adversaries did very well in
their brief, physical force has in its ordinary meaning
the use of some strength, of some power, and generally
kissing doesn't require that strength or power, touching
someone on the shoulder, doesn't. All of these
activities are prohibited by this statute if they are
unwanted.
So the question is not whether or not they
present the risk of physical injury, the issue is
whether in all applications or in a substantial number
they don't require the use of strength to -- in its
application. That's a different question.
MS. KRUGER: Justice Sotomayor, I think that
you are exactly right, that the inquiry that is set out
in subsection 1 is simply, does this crime have as an
element the use of physical force?
Our submission is that every battery under
Florida law, under common law and under the laws of 27
states and the Federal Government does have an -- as an
element the use of physical force.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mainly because -- now we
are getting to Judge Easterbrook's argument about the
dime -- you know if I touch myself, I have now used
force.
MS. KRUGER: Right. There is some
suggestion in Judge Easterbrook's opinion that that
usage is somehow peculiar to Newtonian physics. The
fact of the matter is, it is actually a very common
usage in the criminal law. There are a number of
judicial opinions, for example, that we instead of using
the formulation that we see in Florida's battery
statute, instead use the formulation use of force of the
slightest degree.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Suppose we
interpret the statute, the act of the statute as
requiring more force than that, as requiring something
more than spitting. Now, suppose that sometimes, as
they have made a strong case, that touching is a
separate thing under this statute because that's what
the Florida Supreme Court said, and moreover, there are
prosecutions that seem not to fit within striking. How
do we know whether by and large this were a touching as
used in Florida, covers things with mostly minimal
touching, minimal force or enough force to get within
the statute?
MS. KRUGER: Well, Justice Breyer, I think
that's precisely the problem with the Petitioner's
submission. It creates a kind of required element under
the ACCA that has no clear parallels in the substantive
criminal law. And it would require Federal sentencing
courts to ask precisely the kinds of questions the law
of battery has historically thought to avoid, just how
much physical force is enough.
The reason why a statute like Florida has
reached the least touching of another in anger is as
Blackstone told us, that too is a form of violence. It
has so been considered for centuries.
And, Justice Ginsburg, to return to your
question earlier, Florida itself actually does classify
the crime of battery as defined under its statute as a
crime of violence for certain purposes. The ordinary
understanding of the crime of battery --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not for recidivism. Not
for recidivism purposes.
MS. KRUGER: It --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But are you saying that
suppose to Florida split this statute, and some states
do, so one crime is a rude touching crime, and the other
is the use of physical -- aggressive physical force that
endangers the physical safety of another. If you have
both of those statutes, I take it that you would say
either one of them would fit under ACCA as a crime that
has the use of physical force, because you are saying
the rude touching is physical force? Even if you split
off the touching from the striking, you would say that
the touching falls under ACCA?
MS. KRUGER: That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg. We think that both variants of that offense
in your hypothetical would have as an element the use of
physical force.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But only as a felony.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And what Congress was
trying to get at the worse of the worst in ACCA, the
Armed Career, whatever -- that they meant to get after
people who go around poking other people in a rude
manner?
MS. KRUGER: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
think, first of all, it would be a mistake to think that
Congress defines the range of ACCA predicate with
particular consideration to the ways that hypothetical
defendants might -- might commit even quintessentially
violent crimes in particular cases.
This Court, for example, considered in
Taylor v. United States a very similar argument, which
was that the statutory reference to burglary ought to be
interpreted in a way that would limit it to aggravated
burglaries of a certain sort, armed burglaries or
burglaries of occupied buildings, in order to make sure
that that reference to burglary better fit with
Congress's purposes in selecting the worst of the worst.
This Court declined that invitation because
it decided that Congress's unmodified views of the word
"burglary" indicated that Congress meant for that word
to take on its ordinary meaning as it was used in the
laws of the many states. It said that Congress would
have recognized that ordinary burglaries can be
committed in individual instances in ways that don't
seem particularly harmful, by unarmed defenders of
unoccupied buildings in remote locations, but that
Congress nevertheless made a categorical judgment that
burglaries as a whole present sufficient potential for
harm that they ought to be covered as ACCA predicates.
And I think a similar analysis applies here.
Congress probably wasn't focused on the least amount of
force that it takes to commit the crime of battery, but
it was entitled to make a judgment that any battery, any
unlawful use of force against another person,
categorically presents sufficient potential for harm
that --
JUSTICE BREYER: It might have, but battery
by touching does seem a separate category. And at that
point, you have to decide, is there an element there of
force? And I think it requires more force than just the
simplest touching.
Now, on Justice Scalia's approach, the fact
that there is one conviction for spitting is sufficient
to take it outside the statute. That's not my approach.
I would say, in the mind run of cases, does there have
to be more force than just spitting? And now I don't
know how it's prosecuted. So why don't I say in this
case, from my perspective, very well, I don't know. No
one knows. No one has told me. No one has looked into
it. It's very hard to look into, but not impossible.
It's the Government's job, faced with a
-year statute, to do the looking. They have the
resources. More than a defense attorney. Therefore,
uncertain as I am, I must decide this in favor of the
defendant. What's the response to that?
MS. KRUGER: Well, I think the response is,
first, we think that the proper approach is one that
pays respect to the words that Congress used to define
the crime. In ordinary criminal law, despite what some
intuitions seem to be, the least touching of another in
anger is a form of violence. It is a use of physical
force.
I think to the extent that, Your Honor, you
are inclined to look to the purposes of this statute,
what Congress would have thought the mind run of cases
that would fall under Subsection 1's use of force
provision would cover, I think there you look at the
reported cases in Florida, we see that the kinds of
crimes that are prosecuted under the touching or
striking prong of that statute are, in fact, quite
harmful. It's not at all difficult to see why Congress
would have been concerned about these types of crimes,
both because in many instances they involve conduct that
is probably better described as touching or striking but
it is -- nevertheless risks substantial harm to the
victim, like choking, like beating the victim's head
against the car window, to use an example from one of
those cases cited in our brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You know, I guess it comes
down to whether we think that in -- in B1, Congress was
using technical language or Congress was using simply
ordinary language, because you are quite right that the
definition of -- of battery covers even the slightest
touching. The use of physical force, which would
include the slightest touching.
But in using that definition to define the
term "violent felony," I find it hard to believe that
Congress was using the term in a technical sense, and
was not using the term "physical force," "the use of
physical force" to mean something more than a mere
touching.
But that's -- that's basically what we are
arguing, isn't it? Whether that -- whether that phrase
there, "threatened use of physical" -- "use or
threatened use of physical force," is technical language
which is the definition of battery, or rather more
common usage.
You -- you would acknowledge that, that in
more common usage, no one -- no one would think that if
you go over to somebody and point your finger at him on
his lapel and say, "Now, you listen to me," that that
would be considered the use or threatened use of
physical force?
MS. KRUGER: I think it probably is not the
way that we ordinarily talk in day-to-day conversation,
but it certainly is the way that the law has talked
about it for centuries, and I think there is a reason
that Congress had in mind the technical definition of
battery rather than ordinary parlance, if for no other
reason because it tracked so closely the general
definition, that technical definition of "battery," when
it defines "violent felony" in Subsection 1. And also
because now that the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask -- may I ask
this, following up on Justice Scalia's point? Are there
any other crimes other than battery that -- that create
the same situation where in the first time it is
committed it's a misdemeanor, but then it becomes a
felony because it's committed twice? So what we have
here is conduct that first time is misdemeanor, second
time is a felony. Are there any other examples of
crimes that fit that category that come within
Subparagraph 1?
MS. KRUGER: I am not sure of the answer to
that, Justice Stevens. I do think that one reason why
the misdemeanor versus felony distinction is somewhat
unimportant to the interpretation of the "use of
physical force" language in this case is that if the
same language was deployed first in the "crime of
violence" definition of 18 U.S.C. 16, which by its
terms, applies to both misdemeanors and felonies, and
Congress has of course subsequently used that very same
language to define a class of misdemeanor crimes of
domestic violence in Section 922(g)(9), we think to the
extent that this Court is inclined to interpret the
extent of the similar language in the similar statutes
in a similar manner, the use of physical force language
should remain consistent across them.
One of the principal vices of Petitioner's
arguments is also that it would leave the Federal
domestic violence provisions like Section 922(g)(9) with
relatively patchwork and haphazard application, which is
precisely one of the considerations that motivated this
Court's decision just last term in the United States v.
Hayes. Whether the Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there are no
provisions that would include domestic violence and the
gun possession provision.
MS. KRUGER: There are -- the range of
predicate offenses that can be used for the Section
2(g)(9) domestic gun violence prohibition, ordinarily,
as this Court recognized in Hayes, encompasses the
general assault and battery statutes of the United
States. Twenty-seven of these states define battery in
more or less the way that Florida does, to include a
range of uses of physical force from the least degree of
physical force to very severe beatings, so under
Petitioner's reading, it would be impossible to say for
sure in more than half of the country that a domestic
violence conviction, even a battery conviction that is
specifically denominated as a domestic violence battery
conviction in many a state, would qualify under Section
2(g)(9).
It seems unlikely that Congress, in enacting
that statute, which was designed to create a nationwide
solution to the nationwide problem of the combination of
guns and domestic strife, would have intended for that
statute to have such a haphazard impact. And yet that
is precisely what the effect of Petitioner's reading
would be.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is the provision?
2(g)(9), is that in your brief somewhere?
MS. KRUGER: It is. It's in the statutory
appendix to the gray brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I am looking for it. I
don't see it. 922(g)(9).
MS. KRUGER: The --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I hate people talking about
statutes that I don't have in front of me.
MS. KRUGER: It's on page 3(a) of the
statutory appendix.
JUSTICE SCALIA: 3(a).
MS. KRUGER: It contains Section
1(a)(33)(a), which provides the definition of
"misdemeanor crime of domestic violence."
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you said 922.
That's what I thought you said.
MS. KRUGER: That's correct. The
substantive prohibition is in Section 922(g)(9), and the
definitional provision is reprinted on page 3(a).
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's really a question for
Petitioner's counsel, and I didn't have time to ask as
your white light goes on. I take it your position is
that if you do not prevail on your argument, that this
is under Roman -- small Roman 1, that if -- you have to
remand for small Roman 2?
MS. KRUGER: That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is there an argument that
you anticipate objecting to that remand? Or is this
absolutely clear-cut that we must remand?
MS. KRUGER: I think it's within the Court's
discretion to decide how to dispose properly of the
case. I think that the Section -- the Subsection 2
issue was preserved in the courts below. The district
court rested its decision on both Subsections 1 and 2,
and the court of appeals addressed only Subsection 1.
We think that if the Court decides that the
court of appeals is wrong in its interpretation of
Subsection 1, then the appropriate thing in order to
determine what Petitioner's correct sentencing should be
would be to remand to allow the court of appeals to
address the alternative argument about Subsection 2.
But the reason why the Subsection 1 inquiry is so --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How -- I'm sorry.
Before you go on, your adversary claims you waived by
not raising this as an -- as an alternative in the sorts
stage. Could you fold that into your continuation of
this answer?
MS. KRUGER: Certainly. I think that rule
.2 of the rules of this Court requires us in a brief
in opposition to raise any material matters that relate
to the question presented.
The question presented in this case concerns
just the basis for the court of appeals decision in this
case which was subsection (1) of the statute. We think
it's not at all unusual for this Court to decide that a
court of appeals judgment is in error and then remand to
allow the court of appeals to address --
JUSTICE BREYER: Hear what they said, what
the Eleventh Circuit said, it said that if battery under
Florida law fits within the description of (1), then it
is a violent crime for ACCA purposes. And then it says
if not, then not. And as long as the issue was in front
of them I would think that those last four words are a
holding.
MS. KRUGER: I think it's difficult to read
those four words in that manner, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why?
MS. KRUGER: If for no reason because the
court of appeals didn't so much as acknowledge the
existence --
JUSTICE BREYER: Was it argued?
MS. KRUGER: It was argued. It was -- it
was briefed in the court of appeals, and the court of
appeals --
JUSTICE BREYER: It is pretty hard to see it
given Begay, how this is like arson or, you know, the
other three there, burglary, arson --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Explosives.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- explosives.
MS. KRUGER: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, I mean, I don't know.
Maybe the court of appeals felt -- what they said was,
"if not, then not." And it was raised in argument.
MS. KRUGER: Well, I think it's -- again,
it's difficult to read that piece of loose language in
the Court's opinion as a direct holding, particularly
considering that the court of appeals didn't so much as
cite the language or even the code provision that
relates to the argument. But I think to the extent that
the Court questions whether it would qualify under
subsection (2), I think the answer is yes. Battery
is -- qualifies under this Court's interpretations of
that subsection in Chambers and Begay and James. It is
a crime that is typically purposeful, violent and
aggressive.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yeah, but I -- I thought --
you know, it's -- it's like the other four listed out.
MS. KRUGER: Well, it is like them in that
it poses risks that are similar in --
JUSTICE BREYER: But then we are rereading
these three other examples out because then "other"
covers any crime that poses a risk of violence, or
whatever the words are there -- I forget the words.
Poses a risk.
MS. KRUGER: No, I think it would still be
consistent with this Court's analysis of subsection (2)
in Begay in that battery by touching, if you consider it
to be a separate crime, which again I think is a highly
contested --
JUSTICE BREYER: And you think drunk driving
doesn't present a serious potential risk of physical
injury?
MS. KRUGER: No, but what this Court said in
Begay was that it doesn't present risks that are similar
in degree and kind to the risks that are presented by
the enumerated offenses. And battery, including battery
by touching or striking under Florida law, presents
risks that are quite similar in degree and kind to the
enumerated offenses, particularly burglary. It is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Wait, I don't follow
that at all. I mean, I understand your argument that
physical force means the slightest touching, but I don't
understand the argument that the slightest touching
presents a serious risk of potential physical injury.
MS. KRUGER: Well, I think -- first of all,
to clear up a misconception, simply because the
statutory text covers the slightest touching doesn't
mean that it covers only the slightest touching. It
covers a wide range of degrees of physical force
beginning with the slightest touching and including --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yeah, but your
argument is to try -- is asserting that the slightest
physical touching is covered by the statute.
MS. KRUGER: Right. And the question before
the Court in this case concerns only that question. It
concerns the proper interpretation of subsection (1).
Whether the crime is one that has as an element the use
of physical force.
JUSTICE STEVENS: The district court thought
that the two were related. The district court, if it
thought a slightest touching was qualified under (1) it
was not unreasonable to say that it would also qualify
under (2). But if that argue ment is rejected under
(1), it seems to me it would follow necessarily that it
would also be rejected under (2).
MS. KRUGER: I'm not entirely sure why that
would be true. But I do think that it's right as a
descriptive matter that most of the crimes that are
encompassed by subsection (1) would also qualify under
subsection (2).
JUSTICE SCALIA: But (2) -- (2) looks to the
conduct, it doesn't look to the element of the crime.
So you could actually look to the conduct of which the
person was convicted, no?
MS. KRUGER: Well, you have to look at the
contact that the person was convicted of with respect to
the elements of the crime, that is the nature of the
category --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no, no. You look to
the crime -- under (1), you look to the crime he was
convicted of, and if -- if -- if none of its elements
require serious physical force, you can say it doesn't
qualify under (1), but under (2) if in fact you see the
misdemeanor he was convicted of was really whacking
somebody really hard, then -- then it could possibly
come within -- come under (2).
MS. KRUGER: With respect, Justice Scalia, I
think that is incorrect. This Court has made clear that
subsection (2) like subsection (1) proceeds by looking
at the elements of the offense --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Just at the elements.
MS. KRUGER: Just at the elements of the
offense of which the defendant was convicted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I ask you about --
about 922? You point to the -- the definition there,
the definition in 921. But that is a definition of the
term, misdemeanor crime of domestic violence. And in
the context of defining that term, I'm perfectly willing
to believe that the use or attempted use of physical
force means even the slightest touching, as -- as
battery does. You are talking about a misdemeanor crime
of domestic violence.
But what we have before us here is a term --
a different term that is being defined and that term is
violent felony. And I find it a lot harder to swallow
that -- that that definition embraces merely the
slightest touching.
MS. KRUGER: Well, Justice Scalia, I would
certainly be inclined to agree with you but it's
particularly clear given the text and context of the
purposes of section 922(g)(9) that battery ought to be
covered by that definition, misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence. But we think that the reason why it
is also clear under subsection (1) of the ACCA is that
the use of force element of the definitional provision
is separate from the degree of seriousness with which
the State chooses to treat the crime, yet the crime is
punished as a felony, and if has as an element the use
of physical force, then it qualifies as a violent felony
under the ACCA, just as if it is punished as a
misdemeanor, it qualifies as a misdemeanor crime of
domestic violence under section 922(g)(9).
JUSTICE SCALIA: I dare say that Congress in
my view probably didn't even contemplate that something
which is a misdemeanor could become a violent felony if
you did it the second time.
MS. KRUGER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Have we ever approved that,
by the way, kicking it up to the felony category simply
because of recidivism?
MS. KRUGER: Well, the Court in United
States v. Rodriguez in analyzing the coordinate
provision of the ACCA that covers serious drug offenses
said that the felony aspect of that definition is
satisfied by a recidivist enhancement. And we think
that the conclusion in that case, and it is not disputed
among the parties, applies with equal force in this case
to the proper interpretation of violent felony.
But it was certainly true by the time that
Congress enacted the ACCA, which the legislative history
indicates Congress understood would cover assault
crimes, for example, that there were certain kinds of
batteries and assaults that, although otherwise may be
punished as simple batteries and assaults, as
misdemeanors, could be elevated to a felony if for
example they were committed against a law enforcement
officer.
It simply was not unheard of for simple
battery to be elevated to a felony under certain
circumstances in 1986 Congress enacted the present
version of ACCA. At the end of the day, we think that
Congress -- every indication that we have in both the
text, the context, the purpose of the statute and its
background suggests that Congress was in fact
deliberately tracking the definition of battery when it
enacted the primary definition of violent felony in
subsection (1).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, every
indication except for the fact that they didn't use the
word battery.
MS. KRUGER: Aside from the fact that they
didn't use the word battery. Instead they chose to
incorporate the general definition of the crime of
battery; that is correct, Mr. Chief Justice.
We think that to the extent that the Court
is inclined to restrict the terms of -- that Congress
chose to use itself to physical force as only exceeding
a certain threshold, to include some batteries and not
other batteries, the Court would be setting up a very
difficult test for Federal sentencing courts to apply in
the real world. Essentially --
JUSTICE SCALIA: States do it all the time
when they have different degrees of battery.
Misdemeanor -- felony battery -- they do it all the
time.
MS. KRUGER: Well, as the Chief Justice has
noted, States don't have quite the same compulsion to
sort different factual offenses into different boxes.
Prosecutors, as the prosecutor did in this case, can use
either of the two alternative prongs of Florida's
battery definition to punish what is essentially the
same offense, which is the crime of battery, that
deserves the same punishment regardless of which prong
the prosecutor proceeds under, whether the bodily injury
prong or the touching or striking prong.
And Petitioner's concession that at least
Federal sentencing courts could draw distinctions
between touches and strikes, may have some resonance in
the State of Florida, but has resonance for the rest of
the country. Most State assault and battery statutes
don't contain explicit references to striking, but
subsume striking within the range of conduct prescribed
by their offensive touching prong.
So it simply wouldn't be possible, in most
cases, for a court to look at the cold record of the
underlying State conviction and try to discern exactly
how much force was involved in the offense and whether
that force satisfied the Petitioner's proposed
threshold, whatever it means.
At the end of the day, the principal
question before the court is one that is, primarily,
relevant to the Section 922(g)(9) provision and other
federal misdemeanor domestic violence provisions and one
that we think, in considering the purposes of those
statutes and the very serious dangers that they address,
the Court ought to interpret the plain text of the
statutes in light of their plain meaning.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Ms. Call, you have four minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF LISA CALL
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. CALL: Thank you, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I don't want to waste
too much of your time on the remand, but I can't really
fault the government for waiving a right to raise a
claim under Clause 2, which is your second reason for
not -- not remanding, and it -- it does seem, to, me
that the Eleventh Circuit -- one permissible reading was
that they were just looking at 1, so that we would have
to remand.
MS. CALL: Justice Kennedy, I would have to
disagree with that because it was fully briefed, fully
argued --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I understand that.
MS. CALL: And I take the -- the provision
that when they indicated that the test was exclusively
under the first prong.
Second, Your Honor, I believe it would
simply be a waste of judicial resources if the Court
finds that this battery by touching doesn't have, as an
element, the use of force, the test would be to remand
it to decide whether it meets the Begay standard, which
is purposeful, violent, aggressive, and all of those
tests.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes. Except in this area,
I am a little reluctant when it hasn't been argued
before as to make a definitive holding, but I will look
at the Eleventh Circuit opinion again.
MS. CALL: Yes, Your Honor, and the other
note I would make is, factually, at page 40 of the joint
appendix, they indicated there were no other Shepard
documents to offer to the Court, so the entire record is
available for reconsideration and is available to this
Court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Thank you.
MS. CALL: And, Your Honor, I wanted to note
this is not just an academic exercise on noticing what
physical force means. Absent this one finding of
Mr. Johnson's prior conviction was a violent felony, it
raised his guideline range, from 27 to 33 months, to a
mandatory minimum sentence of 15 years.
So the danger of including this crime, when
the art or criminal act was not designed to include all
crimes or all offenders, means that it took all
discretion away from the sentencing judge.
In ACCA, Congress set a superior high
standard requiring three priors on three -- that
occurred on three separate occasions, and so looking at
this decision, when Mr. Johnson was put inside the box,
that tied the judge's hands.
If this were not considered a violent
felony, the sentencing judge could consider that under
the guidelines in the 3553 factors. But to read
physical force so broadly is to, in essence, collapse
the distinction between those violent offenses that are
meant to be included in the Armed Career Criminal Act
and those that are not.
Your Honors, I would also note one matter,
that physical contact is used in the assault statutes
under the Federal Code, so there is a different
provision -- a different meaning to physical contact
than to physical force, and the physical force, in this
definition, is looking at what level and what sort of
force Congress intended to require to impose this very
high sentencing standard.
And this Court had rejected, in Shepard, the
government's same happenstance argument that
prosecutions would depend on recordkeeping and charging
decisions, and so, for all the reasons argued,
Mr. Johnson would ask that this Court vacate the lower
decision and remand for resentencing.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the case in the
