OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPT
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE
UNITED STATES
CAPTION: TERRANCE JAMAR GRAHAM, Petitioner, v. FLORIDA
CASE NO: No. 08-7412
PLACE: Washington, D.C.
DATE: Monday, November 9, 2009
PAGES: 1-56
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
55 CONNECTICUT AVE., NW
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036
(202) 289-2260
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
TERRANCE JAMAR GRAHAM, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-7412
FLORIDA. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 9, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
BRYAN S. GOWDY, ESQ., Jacksonville, Fla.; on behalf of
the Petitioner. Appointed by this Court.
SCOTT D. MAKAR, ESQ., Solicitor General, Tallahassee,
Fla.; on behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
BRYAN S. GOWDY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
SCOTT D. MAKAR, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
BRYAN S. GOWDY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:01 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-7412,
Graham v. Florida.
Mr. Gowdy.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN S. GOWDY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. GOWDY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Sentencing an adolescent to life without any
possibility of parole condemns him to die in prison and
rejects any hope that he will change for the better.
This sentence, like the death penalty, cruelly ignores
the inherent qualities of youth and the differences
between adolescents and adults. At --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you urging that in
all cases, including homicide cases? Or are you drawing
the line at homicide?
MR. GOWDY: We are -- we are drawing the
line, Your Honor, at -- at non-homicide cases because we
recognize under the Eighth Amendment that we must look
at societal consensus, and society has said that murder
is different and has said that in the sentencing
practices, as demonstrated by the fact that outside of
Florida judges and juries have imposed this sentence on
just 30 non-homicide offenders in just 6 States.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thirty-eight States
allow this sentence, though, don't they?
MR. GOWDY: Thirty --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thirty-eight, 39. I
know you have a little dispute, but the vast majority of
States allow the imposition of this sentence.
MR. GOWDY: The vast majority allow it and
they have for some time, and we believe that the fact
that it has been allowed for so long and imposed so
rarely, as the States themselves have admitted, is -- is
strong evidence of societal consensus.
JUSTICE ALITO: You’re making a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I would have thought
that would be strong evidence that they appreciate the
gravity of the sentence in the particular circumstances
of juveniles and therefore only impose it rarely.
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, I would -- I would
disagree. I would -- if -- if there's 30 -- 31 States
that have allowed it and have never imposed it, in -- in
our judgment, that -- that's evidence that it's very
unusual, and you couple that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No sentence can be -- can
be imposed rarely?
MR. GOWDY: No, Your Honor, it has to –-
JUSTICE SCALIA: When a sentence is imposed
rarely, it becomes unconstitutional?
MR. GOWDY: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not your position?
What --
MR. GOWDY: Our position is that you are
looking at two things. One, is it cruel? It's cruel
because life without parole is unique, is particularly
cruel to adolescents because it -- it gives up on the
adolescent and determines that he is forever unfit to
live in civil society.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't make it crueler
to him. I don't see why it's any crueler to an
adolescent than it is to -- what -- where do you draw
the line? At 21?
MR. GOWDY: We draw the line at 18, the same
line that the Court drew in Roper. And it's cruel
because of the inherent -- the inherent qualities of
youth.
JUSTICE ALITO: And you are making a per se
argument, no? You can imagine someone who is a month
short of his 18th birthday, and you are saying that, no
matter what this person does, commits the most horrible
series of non-homicide offenses that you can imagine, a
whole series of brutal rapes, assaults that render
the -- the victim paraplegic but not dead, no matter
what, the person is sentenced shows no remorse
whatsoever, the worst case you can possibly imagine,
cannot -- that person must at some point be made
eligible for parole. That's your argument?
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, that's -- that's
correct. The life -- yes. A life with parole sentence
would be constitutional, and that may mean that person
you describe still spends his entire life in prison, but
life with parole gives some hope to the adolescent who
has an inherent capacity to change. It gives him some
hope that later in time he may be released.
JUSTICE ALITO: If we agree with you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And so if it’s --
JUSTICE ALITO: If we agree with you, at
what point must the parole consideration be given?
There is a suggestion in your brief that maybe the
Colorado statute, which says that a person can get
parole consideration after 40 years, would be
constitutional. Is that your position?
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, our position is that
it should be left up to the States to decide. We think
that the -- the Colorado provision would probably be
constitutional. We will have to see what different
States do. I mean, but -- but, yes, even that long
amount of time would give at least some hope to the
adolescent offender.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about -- what
if it's the -- pursuant to the usual State parole
system, and it turns out that grants parole to 1 out of
applicants?
MR. GOWDY: I think all that would have to
be required, Your Honor -- I think that would be
sufficient. All that would have to be required is a
meaningful opportunity to the adolescent offender to
demonstrate that he has in fact changed, reformed, and
is now fit to live in society. It -- that's all.
That's all we are asking for.
We are not asking that it be automatic right
to get back out. If Terrance Graham or Joe Sullivan --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me that
your -- your argument suggests that you are, quite
rightly, focusing on the particular facts that have life
without parole. But if you concede that it's all right
to have a sentence of 50 years and then a consideration
where 1 out of 20 people are granted parole, I think it
suggests that the line you would draw is -- is pretty
artificial -- or certainly suggests that the next case
we will get is somebody with life with parole after
years.
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, first, I’m -- I’m
not conceding that with 50. The question was asked
about 40. But I understand --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are you saying there
is something in the Eighth Amendment that draws a
distinction between 40 and 50 in that case?
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, I'm saying that this
sentence that we are here today before is unequivocally,
unmistakably a condemnation that you will never be
released from prison, and so this sentence clearly falls
on the line of being cruel because it tells an
adolescent, for an adolescent mistake, you can never
live in civil society.
There will be other sentences that people
will argue are the equivalent of this sentence, and --
and people may argue that with a 50-year sentence. But
this sentence here is unequivocal, and there is no
question that it’s cruel because of -- of the fact that
it rejects any hope that the adolescent can be changed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is it a fact that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I’m interested in -- in
two different things and you can address them during the
course of your argument. One is the assumption of the
argument seems to be that there are in place parole --
throughout all the States -- parole systems which are
effective, which are operating, and that they have the
capacity to make accurate judgments about
rehabilitation. What can I read -- what -- what studies
do you have to -- that -- that comment on that?
Secondly, unrelated, at some point I think
you ought to talk about the procedural bar, which is
something you go over very, very, very -- let's see --
that's Sullivan.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That’s the other case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Pardon me. That's
Sullivan, yes.
MR. GOWDY: With leave, I will let
Mr. Stevenson answer about the procedural bar.
But on the first question, Your Honor, I
would point you to the amicus brief filed by the various
correctional officers that talk about the types of
programs that can be done. I think that that has -- is
very thorough and -- and would answer it far better than
I can in a couple minutes up here.
But, yes, to answer short, we -- we believe
that -- that the parole systems in place can be
effective to do this, and in all seven States where
there are currently non-homicide juvenile offenders,
they all have functioning parole systems.
Even Florida has it. Even though it -- it
abolished parole in 1983, Florida still has 6,000
parole-eligible inmates and last year they heard over --
they made over 1,700 parole determinations. So the --
the administrative burden to the State of adding these
–-
JUSTICE ALITO: But Florida has abolished
parole, has it not, going forward?
MR. GOWDY: Going forward, it has abolished
parole --
JUSTICE ALITO: So eventually, if things are
allowed to take their course, the Florida parole board
will go out of business.
MR. GOWDY: And Florida could choose to make
that sentence and instead impose a sentence, as its
prosecutor recommended here, a 30-year determinant
sentence, if Florida doesn't want to reinstitute parole.
We are not saying it has to do parole. That’s just one
of several constitutional options.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What -- what would you do
if there were a crime spree and there were different
jurisdictions? One jurisdiction imposes for 35 years,
the next jurisdiction for another 35 years, to be served
consecutively.
MR. GOWDY: Well, Your -- Your Honor, I -- I
think that the -- that you would get into the question
about whether that sentence is the equivalent of life
without parole, and there could be an argument made that
if you -- obviously, if you sentence someone to 150,
0 years, there’s no conceivable hope of ever release,
0 years without parole.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So the second jurisdiction
has the obligation, but not the first? Is that the way
it works?
MR. GOWDY: I would think that the -- if you
had that -- I would think that the -- that the judge
making that sentence would have to take that into
consideration, that this sentence is going to -- based
on all adolescent conduct -- it has to be all adolescent
conduct, not if some of the conduct is post-juvenile.
But, yes, I would think that the -- that the second
sentencing judge would need to take that into
consideration.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So he -- he could sentence
up to 1 year before the life expectancy of the -- of
the person in prison? That -- that would be okay?
MR. GOWDY: I -- I wouldn't say that would
be okay, Your Honor. I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, what's he supposed to
do? How many years can he give --
MR. GOWDY: I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- consecutive?
MR. GOWDY: I think there has to be some --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There obviously does. What
do you propose? I propose, you know, 1 year before
his life expectancy.
MR. GOWDY: Your -- Your Honor, I think that
would be coming so close to the -- the constitutional
line, it would be -- it would be difficult to see that
as constitutional, but -- but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, 1 year before life is
also unconstitutional?
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, I'm --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Two years before life?
MR. GOWDY: Your -- Your Honor, there would
definitely be a -- a difficult line to draw at that
case. Life without parole, though, is unequivocal. And
even that sentence that you are describing, there is
some difference between it and life without parole,
because only life without parole makes the unequivocal
assessment that the adolescent cannot be returned to
civil society.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We have -- you are
arguing for a categorical rule.
MR. GOWDY: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your friend on the
other side is arguing for a categorical rule, always
permissible. But we have a precedent that suggests in
-- in an individual case, you assess the proportionality
of the sentence to the crime.
Now, we know from Roper that death is
different, and we know from Roper that juveniles are
different. Wouldn't it make sense to incorporate the
consideration of the juvenile status into the
proportionality review? So that if you do have a case
where it's the 17-year-old who is 1 week shy of his
th birthday and it is the most grievous crime
spree you can imagine, you can determine that in that
case life without parole may not be disproportionate.
But if it's -- and I know you would argue
that these are the facts here -- if it's a less grievous
crime and there is, for example, a younger defendant
involved, then in that case maybe it is
disproportionate.
Why -- why doesn't that seem more sensitive?
And it avoids all of the line-drawing problems we have
been discussing.
MR. GOWDY: Well, two things: First, Your
Honor, Roper states, and the science -- states it based
on the science, that at that age we cannot make a
determination about whether or not the adolescent will
or will not reform. Even an expert psychologist,
psychiatrist cannot do it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, I understand.
But I don't think they'll say that we can't make that
determination at 17 years 51 months, but we can make
that determination at 18 years 1 month.
MR. GOWDY: Well, anywhere you draw the
line, Your Honor, you're going to come up with an
example where you are 1 day before or 1 day after, and
the Court in Roper struggled with where to draw the line
between maturity and immaturity, and it concluded,
rightly so, to draw the line at 18 based on both the
science and the legislative determinations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that is because,
as they told us, death is different. And you do -- once
you decide that, you do have to draw a line somewhere.
I'm just wondering why we have to go all the way in with
you or all the way with your opponent when our precedent
allows us to consider an issue of this sort on a case-
by-case basis.
MR. GOWDY: I think it's because adolescents
are different. Adolescents are different in that we
can't tell at this age whether they are going to reform
or not. And all we are proposing is that an adolescent
not necessarily be released, but that he be given a
later opportunity. And it boils -- it just comes down
to adolescents are different, Your Honor, and the
determination can't be made at age 17 even for the most
heinous crimes that are committed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there any difference
in the terms of incarceration making this harsher than
otherwise? I think you suggested in -- in your brief
that educational and vocational training is not given to
people who are in for life without parole because they
will never be out on the street so they don't need to be
transitioned back.
MR. GOWDY: If I understand your question,
would it be different if those type of programs are made
available to life-without- --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: My question is, first,
you say that they are not available.
MR. GOWDY: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that -- that’s so?
MR. GOWDY: Yes, that is generally true.
And the -- and the very website that the State of
Florida cites makes a point of saying that the programs
are for the purpose of reentry into society, and so
those are obviously the opposite of what life
without parole is. You are never going to reenter
society. And it's generally true that those programs
are not available to offenders who get life without
parole, and that's what makes the sentence so
particularly cruel, to give up on a kid at that point in
his life.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So what are the terms of
incarceration? They just stay in their cells and –-
MR. GOWDY: Well, Your Honor, I think it
varies obviously by facility by facility. But the
sentence means you are going to stay in your cell and
die there. You are going to stay in your cell for 60 or
years, whenever you reach your natural death, and die
there.
You know, they -- they do have some limited
freedoms, as the State of Florida has pointed out, the
same types of freedoms that people on death row have.
But ultimately both sentences mean that you are going to
die in a State-controlled institution. And they are
very hopeless --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think -- the same
kind of freedom that people on death row have? I --
MR. GOWDY: Well, the State makes the point
in their brief, Your Honor, that you have the right to
exercise your religion, you have the -- you have the
right to petition the courts.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Aren't they released into
the general population for exercise, for -- which I
don't think death row inmates are.
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, I -- obviously
everything varies facility by facility, but it’s --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I doubt whether this
varies. I -- I don't know of any principle where if you
are in for life, you are in solitary.
MR. GOWDY: Well, I’m not -- I’m not -- you
are correct. I'm not suggesting they are in solitary
confinement. But they are locked up for the rest of
their life, and they're not allowed to rejoin civil
society even if, as some of the former juvenile
offenders who filed a brief in this case, can
demonstrate that they have become model citizens.
JUSTICE ALITO: And why isn't the -- the
most sensible way to deal with the problem that you are
raising, the one that the Chief Justice suggested, to
permit as-applied proportionality challenges that take
into account the particular circumstances of the
juvenile in question, rather than this per se rule that
you are advocating, which would deprive the State of
Florida from reaching the judgment that there are some
-- there are some juveniles, some individuals who are
short of their 18th birthday, who cannot -- who deserve
imprisonment in -- life imprisonment without parole?
Some of the actual cases that -- in which
this sentence has been imposed in Florida involve
factual situations that are so horrible that I couldn't
have imagined them if I hadn't actually seen them.
Raping an 8-year-old girl and burying her alive. Are
you familiar with that case?
MR. GOWDY: I am not familiar with that
particular case. No.
JUSTICE ALITO: Raping a woman in front of
her 12-year-old son and then forcing the son to engage
in sexual conduct with the mother. Are you familiar
with that case?
MR. GOWDY: Yes, Your Honor, I am familiar
with that case.
Your Honor, the reason, first of all, the
Court has said and said so clearly in Kennedy that
murder is different. In the Kennedy decision, you also
said: Horrible facts, someone who raped their
stepdaughter. But yet this Court drew a line and
exempted from capital punishment adult defendants who
commit horrible crimes.
But to get to the core of your question as
to why not do it on a case-by-case basis, because you
can only make the determination about the adolescent
--
later in life. And I -- we would agree that there
should be a case-by-case determination as to -- as to
whether or not that offender should spend his whole life
in prison, but we say it needs to happen later, once he
has matured, once he's reached past adulthood, because
when you’re --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You assume -- doesn't your
argument assume that the only purpose of punishment is
deterrence in the sense of protecting society from this
person in the future, so that, you know, once that's no
longer a problem, we should let this person out. But
that isn't the only purpose of punishment that we've
acknowledged. One of the purposes is retribution,
punishment for just perfectly horrible actions. And I
don't know why that value of retribution diminishes to
the point of zero when it's a person who's, you know,
years 9 months old.
MR. GOWDY: We are not suggesting that it
goes to the point of zero. We’re not -- and we concede
the State has a right to -- to exact retribution from
the juvenile offender. And in this case, 30 years would
have been a lot of retribution for Terrance Graham, both
JUSTICE SCALIA: Most States didn’t -- don't
think so, or many States don't think so.
MR. GOWDY: Well, Your Honor, we -- but a
Juvenile is -- not only does he have an inherent
capacity to grow; he is less culpable. And so to exact
the most -- for a non-homicide crime whether you are
adult or juvenile, this is the most severe punishment
you can receive, and to exact that most severe
punishment for a less culpable offender that the Court
has recognized is a less culpable offender doesn't -- is
too much retribution. We are not saying the State can't
exercise retribution, but that life without parole is --
is too much for those types of crimes.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Mr. Gowdy, can I ask this
question?
MR. GOWDY: Yes, Justice.
JUSTICE STEVENS: If your client in this
case had been processed in the juvenile system instead
of the adult system, what would the maximum penalty he
could have received been?
MR. GOWDY: He would have had to have been
released when he was 22 years.
JUSTICE STEVENS: So the choice is between
that short a term and an indefinite term?
MR. GOWDY: No, no, Your Honor. We -- we
concede that the State of Florida may continue to
prosecute juveniles in adult court and that makes sense
in order to get a term of years that is longer than you
can get in juvenile court. And in this case, if the
judge had gone along with the prosecutor's
recommendation, it would have meant a 30-year sentence
for my client, which would have been far longer than he
could have gotten in the juvenile court. Worse --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The logic in Roper
was very straightforward. It says, "Death is reserved
for the worst of the worst." I think that was the
quote. We know that juveniles are not the worst of
the worst, for the reasons you have articulated, that
they are not fully developed, don't have moral sense to
the same extent as an adult. But life without parole is
not reserved for the worst of the worst, and so it seems
to me that the logic of our precedent suggests that you
can't necessarily rely on the juvenile status to exempt
them from a penalty that is not reserved for the worst
of the worst, but perhaps it makes sense to consider in
a particular instance whether the penalty is
disproportionate, given the juvenile's characteristics
that you suggest.
MR. GOWDY: Well, I guess we will come back
to the point that I think life with parole would be a
long sentence, and I don't -- I don't see how you can do
it on a case-by-case basis at age 17. You can certainly
do it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there -- is there
disproportionality review generally in Florida and
particularly for juvenile offenders?
MR. GOWDY: There is no -- no. Under
Florida law, there is no basis to challenge a sentence
as being excessive or disproportionate as long as it's
at the statutory maximum.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, there wasn't
prior to our death penalty jurisprudence, either. And I
thought we reviewed proportionality as a matter of
Federal law in the Solem case.
MR. GOWDY: Right. I guess I understood
Justice Ginsburg's question as if under Florida law.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. GOWDY: Can you --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, so did I, but
we are talking about constitutionality under the Eighth
Amendment --
MR. GOWDY: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- which is Federal
law.
MR. GOWDY: I guess a -- I know under
Federal -- under Federal sentencing law, statutory law,
there's a reasonableness review. And I was -- I guess
I was trying to draw a comparison with, and maybe I'm
not answering the question correctly, that we don't have
that in Florida.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, that's what I meant,
whether you'd have to create a -- a procedure that does
not exist in Florida for proportionality review.
MR. GOWDY: Well, there would -- it would
have to be strictly Federal law. It would have to be a
procedure on a -- if you do this case-by-case
suggestion, it would -- it would have to be strictly
based on Federal constitutional law, because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, sure, but you can make
that claim in Florida courts, can't you?
MR. GOWDY: You can --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can't you argue in Florida
courts that this sentence is disproportionate and
violates the Eighth Amendment, whereupon the Florida
courts would have to decide? Wouldn't they have to
decide that question?
MR. GOWDY: You -- you could make that
argument. And we do -- we do -- I should point out to
the Court that we do have a fallback position in our
papers based on Mr. Graham's offense of armed burglary
and -- and the fact that in only two States could Mr.
Graham have gotten this sentence and that the only State
that has actually imposed it for a first-time armed
burglary is Florida. And it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there is a problem
with that argument in this case, because the sentencing
judge made it quite plain that he was treating Graham as
a recidivist, not as a first-time offender. He said --
Graham got a very light sentence, just 12 months in
detention and then 3 years' probation, and the judge
said: Now, you better toe the line or else you could be
put away for a long time.
And then he committed -- it really was –-
the sentence was for the later activities, even though
they weren't proved beyond a reasonable doubt. I think
that Graham admitted to a couple of -- to more armed
robberies. Isn't that so?
MR. GOWDY: He -- he admitted to the police,
and I don't want to get too much into the facts, but
that -- but even if Your Honor concedes that he was
convicted of all those crimes, which he was not
convicted of, but the judge, as you say, correctly
relied upon for this sentence, then we only have two
States that we know of that have imposed life without
parole for a recidivist robbery or burglary crime, and
that's California and Florida.
And we -- we've set forth that argument to
give the Court that option, but we believe our primary
argument, the categorical rule, is more logical because
of the fact that you can't do a case-by-case
determination of an adolescent at the time -- based on
his juvenile offense. And maybe, in these horrible
crimes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you haven't answered
Justice Alito's point, which is: What's the difference
a month before he's 18 and a month after? What
makes us more capable at the 18th birthday to --
MR. GOWDY: Well, you --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- to affirm a judgment
that someone can't be -- can't be -- can’t be
rehabilitated?
MR. GOWDY: There is not much difference,
Your Honor, but the line has to be drawn somewhere. And
society, as this Court recognized in Roper, has
generally drawn that line at 18 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well --
MR. GOWDY: -- as between the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A line has to be drawn
somewhere only if we accept your approach that there has
to be a categorical exemption. A line does not have to
be drawn somewhere if you adopt the approach of, case by
case, decide whether this is proportional, given how old
the individual was, given the nature of the crimes, and
all of the other factors. You don't have to draw a line
then, and that's the attraction of that approach.
MR. GOWDY: You -- I -- I think that the --
-- based on -- I would just ask to conclude and then I
will sit down.
Based on the -- on what scientists have told
us, the categorical approach is the most logical
approach because we can't tell which adolescents are
going to change and which aren't.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Gowdy.
Mr. Makar.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SCOTT D. MAKAR
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. MAKAR: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The categorical rule that Petitioner seeks
here would undermine what Florida and other States have
adopted in terms of juvenile justice. And in
particular, it would go against three major trends, that
being strong punishment for serious violent crimes by
juveniles; second trend, transfer laws allowing
juveniles to be treated as adults; those laws have been
enacted in the last 15 years --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I didn't -- I didn't hear
the second.
MR. GOWDY: I'm sorry.
The three trends are: The strong punishment
for juveniles that States have enacted over the last 15-
years; the various transfer and waiver laws that
States have enacted over the last 10, 15, 20 years
allowing juveniles to be transferred into adult court;
and then finally, what is really at issue is parole.
Parole has been eliminated in many States. Fifteen
States have totally eliminated it in the last 10, 15
years. So what they are seeking is a categorical rule
that goes against the national consensus and the
national trend.
The concession here was that Graham's
sentence could be even up to life as long as there is
the possibility of parole. We believe that’s very
telling. In their brief, they point out that Graham
could have been sentenced to something just short of his
actuarial life. His actuarial life is around 64 years
old, which means just about a 46-year sentence.
And the standard that we suggest here is
that there cannot be any categorical rule, for the
reasons Justice Alito pointed out. We have --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but you are
arguing for a categorical rule of your own. You are
saying that under a -- under -- juveniles under the age
of 18, what, it's never -- it can be never determinative
that they are juvenile in setting the sentence as a
matter of Federal law?
MR. MAKAR: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, we do
agree in Florida and other States as well that age does
matter, and we ask that there be three things that the
Court look at.
First, look at the legislative structure.
Florida structure doesn't -- Florida structure is a very
balanced, thoughtful approach, in waiving children into
the adult court only when it's a violent crime and only
under certain -- when certain ages are in play. Look at
the age. It does play a role. The judicial discretion
plays a role. The trial judge --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this: Is there
a minimum age when a juvenile can be transferred to --
to adult procedures?
MR. MAKAR: It's a three-tiered system,
Justice Stevens. And let me --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Well, I'm just interested
in one. Is there a minimum?
MR. MAKAR: Yes. The way in which --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Is that an arbitrary line,
or how do you -- how do we know it shouldn't be higher
or lower than the line?
MR. MAKAR: Well, the legislature has set
the line at 14-15 for certain crimes and 16-17 for
others. And then for indictment, where it goes to a
grand jury, there is no age limitation. That has been
on our books for the better part of 50, 60 years,
allowing indictment -- allowing the grand jury to make a
decision about whether the particular juvenile shall be
brought into the adult court. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But then the -- what
is your objection to an approach that when you are
dealing with life without parole, for the reasons that
your brother has articulated, you must as a matter of
Federal law consider the juvenile status of the
defendant before that sentence is imposed?
MR. MAKAR: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words, not
a -- not a categorical rule that it automatically makes
a difference, but not a categorical rule that it can
never make a difference?
MR. MAKAR: Well, sure. And as I say,
there's the three factors I would ask the Court to look
First, the structure that we have here in
Florida, which many States have, that deal with the age.
Age does matter. Ninety-nine out of 100 juvenile
offenders in our system do not go into adult court, and
an even smaller percentage of that ultimately get into
the adult sanctions.
The trial judges in Florida, unless --
unless it’s a very violent crime, have some discretion
to sentence as to age. If you look at the transcript
here in the joint appendix, the trial judge here
struggled with this, struggled with age, and said:
Juvenile sanctions are inappropriate; youthful offenders
-- youthful offender sanctions are inappropriate; I'm
going to sentence you to -- to adult.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes, but could I interrupt
with one question? Isn't it correct that the age is
relevant on whether or not to transfer the person to the
adult system, but once he's in the adult system, age is
entirely immaterial?
MR. MAKAR: That's not accurate, Justice
Stevens. Under the statute 985.226, 227, and 225, we
have a system in which the grounds are set for when
juveniles can be either mandatorily or discretionarily
brought into the adult system.
And then under the statute 985, the
punishment is graduated. In other words, for the lower
offenses, the juvenile sanctions must be considered and
the youthful offender sanctions must be considered.
It's only in certain limited instances, like indictment,
where it's a life offense, where the juvenile has been
indicted for life, that the trial judge is forced to do
adult sanctions.
In this case, Graham was under the
discretionary direct -- direct file, meaning that the
prosecutor had discretion whether to bring the case or
not. He brought it into the adult system. Graham
accepted being processed as an adult. He was put on
probation, and then --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I still don't understand.
Just to make sure I get the point correct: After the
decision has been made to have them prosecuted in the
adult system, at that -- after that decision has been
made, is the age of the defendant a relevant factor in
sentencing?
MR. MAKAR: The age -- they get a
presentence report. The age is woven in --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I understand, but
statutorily? As a matter --
MR. MAKAR: Well, the statute doesn't
--
specifically say the trial judge --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The answer is no. It's --
under the statutes, it's totally irrelevant after he has
been transferred to the adult stage. Is that correct?
MR. MAKAR: Not exactly, because the range
of remedies the trial judge can impose is based upon
what method by which the juvenile was transferred or
waived into the adult court. In Graham's case, he was
allowed to have juvenile and youthful offender sanctions
considered because of his age. I mean, that's the way
JUSTICE SCALIA: You mean the trial judge
under Florida law does not have discretion to choose a
lower sentence because of the -- of tender years of the
defendant?
MR. MAKAR: Well, absolutely, the trial
judge does. And you can see the trial judge here
grappling with that.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But the statute doesn't
draw any distinctions once he is in -- in the adult --
MR. MAKAR: I guess the answer to your
question is there is no specific statute that says the
trial judge shall consider age specifically.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And -- and
there's -- well, I guess that answers my question. He
is not required to as a matter of Federal law. He can
say: I am not considering the fact that this is a
juvenile because I think his crime should be treated as
an adult crime.
MR. MAKAR: No -- I mean, certainly not
under any Federal constitutional principle I am aware
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's what we
are arguing about.
MR. MAKAR: Right, right. Well, certainly
here, I mean, what we would say, assuming there is no
categorical rule and the Court decides to go into the
proportionality balance here, we think that certainly
Graham's offense certainly is off the scales and would
be grossly -- probably be -- it would be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's -- that's one of
the problems, is the individual sentencing judge might
think that Graham is a very bad individual, but the
prosecutor had a different judgment of it. And Florida
doesn't have any kind of proportionality review, doesn't
have any review -- appellate review of the sentences.
MR. MAKAR: Well --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This judge, I think,
surprised everyone in the courtroom with the -- with the
sentence. Certainly it was far beyond what the
prosecutor recommended.
MR. MAKAR: Well, the prosecutor recommended
years, that's correct, and the judge here entered
life. As I say, that translates into -- essentially a
-year actuarial life sentence. That was within the
trial judge's discretion, and particularly given the
seriousness of the offenses that Graham committed. We
are talking about violence.
And violence does matter. This Court has
said -- and certainly in oral argument in Solem and
others, the -- violence versus non-violent acts plays a
major role in sentencing, and it should play a major
role as well when it comes to juveniles.
I don't read Roper to say that it takes off
the table lengthy sentences for violent crimes by
juveniles.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
MR. MAKAR: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do you think
that it categorically violates the Eighth Amendment for
a 10-year-old to be sentenced to life without parole?
MR. MAKAR: Well, the answer to that is it
certainly raises a concern about the age. Age does
matter. And as the age goes down, it does.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So once it matters, the
question for me is -- help me draw the line -- if 10 is
in my judgment too early, why isn't 14, 16, or 18?
Meaning why should a -- someone below the age of 14 be
sentenced to life without parole? That's the -- that's
the Sullivan case --
MR. MAKAR: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- but it begs the
question, which is age is -- matters a lot. And so,
take on your adversary's argument that it matters a lot
because this is a less culpable person.
MR. MAKAR: Sure. It matters -- I think it
does matter and it certainly matters from a legislative
perspective, from a judicial perspective, and from an
Eighth Amendment perspective.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about historical
perspective? I mean, you might appeal to the fact that
at common law, which was in effect when the Cruel and
Unusual Punishments Clause was adopted, 12 years was --
was viewed as the year when a -- when a person reaches
the age of reason. And -- and the death penalty could
not be inflicted on anyone --
MR. MAKAR: Well, certainly that historical
perspective has --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- and all felonies were
the death penalty.
MR. MAKAR: Sure. And it has importance.
To some extent, the States have displaced the common law
with their juvenile justice systems. And we -- as I
say, I believe Florida’s is -- is very balanced.
Going back to your question, Justice
Sotomayor, I think that the way age plays a role is that
we -- in our system in Florida, we have no one under the
age of 13. And that's sort of provides us --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You have no one? What
was your answer?
MR. MAKAR: I'm sorry. No -- no one in our
system is under the age of 13 with life without parole.
You know, there are very --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is that because judges
haven't chosen to impose it or because your legal system
doesn't permit it?
MR. MAKAR: No, the legal system permits it.
I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How young could the
youngest person in Florida be to be prosecuted as an
adult and be eligible for life --
MR. MAKAR: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- without parole?
MR. MAKAR: Under the indictment statute,
there is no age limitation. So, theoretically –-
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So a 5-year-old could be
put away for life?
MR. MAKAR: That is theoretically. We would
hope that the system would not allow that to occur. And
that that would be certainly violative of the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In -- in your
earlier response to Justice Sotomayor's question, you
said age certainly matters. As -- as a -- as a matter
of what law?
In other words, I understood your submission
to be that there was nothing in Federal law that
requires different consideration of age. So when you
say age matters, why?
MR. MAKAR: Well, we suggest that it may
matter in a particular case, and when you get to the
gross disproportionality --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Under the authority
of what law? Age matters in a particular case because
of --
MR. MAKAR: Well, I -- I -- I think our --
country's traditions recognize it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Because of the
Eighth Amendment?
MR. MAKAR: Well, I believe it could be
certainly a part of the Eighth Amendment analysis. I
think just -- certainly age matters in the legislative
branch, judicial branch, executive branch. It matters
that we look at the age and make considerations about it
when Florida has made those considered judgments.
What we are saying is that if the Court
decides to go down the path that's perhaps fraught with
more line-drawing than one can imagine and decides that
age will be a part of the proportionality, it creates
serious problems. But here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. Why is
that? If you go down on a case-by-case basis, there are
no line-drawing problems. You just simply say age has
to be considered as a matter of the Eighth Amendment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And then we apply a
totality of the circumstances test --
MR. MAKAR: Well -- well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- which means whatever
seems -- seems like a good idea.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, we apply the
proportionality review that we articulated in Harmelin,
and Solem and Ewing.
MR. MAKAR: Well, of course --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's already there.
MR. MAKAR: Well, if that's applied, and
even if you consider age in these cases that are before
the Court, they are on the violent side of the line.
They are out in the tail of the distribution in terms of
seriousness of the offense. So it would be the same
result in either case. I think perhaps --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You are not seriously
suggesting that the crimes at issue here are comparable
to a rape or a permanent infliction of serious
disability or any of those other very violent crimes
that are close to homicide that Justice Alito spoke
about? There is a quantitative and qualitative
difference between those, isn't there?
MR. MAKAR: There is, but the legislatures
make the judgment about how they are going to punish
those. And in Florida, we have --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, if we -- if we
have already said that you can't impose death on an
adult who hasn't committed a homicide, an intentional
death, and so for an adult the most serious sentence
that we can give them is life without parole, why should
that same sentence be given to a juvenile who we have
recognized as being less capable than an adult? And why
should we permit it for a crime that's not comparable to
a homicide and/or something akin in seriousness to that?
MR. MAKAR: Because it is still a very
serious, violent crime. We are talking about weapons
and guns and people's lives at risk. And the
legislature has made the judgment in Florida and other
States to say that that type of crime --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But isn't it true -- and
I think one of my colleagues already questioned you --
that the prosecutor didn't think that this merited life
without parole. Didn't the parole supervisor say that
this young man, Mr. Graham, was compliant with other
conditions of his probation? He went to school. He did
other things. It does suggest some hope for him.
MR. MAKAR: Well, I think the prosecutor
certainly offered up to 30 years. And the trial judge
who, as you can tell from the transcript, was familiar
that there were these home invasions going on around our
county, that there had been a task force established,
and so forth, the -- the trial judge was aware of that
and the seriousness of it. In one instance, one of
Graham's codefendants actually killed someone as a part
of a home invasion. These were serious problems
afflicting our community in Jacksonville.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do we know why the
co-perpetrators got so -- their sentences were
dramatically lower. Do we know why that was so?
MR. MAKAR: Is this as to the home invasion
or the armed –-
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. MAKAR: The home invasion -- there was
an 11-year sentence for the codefendant.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. MAKAR: He helped -- helped and
testified and basically assisted the prosecution, so I
believe he got a lower sentence.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because he assisted the
prosecutor.
MR. MAKAR: Right. The third one is in
jail, life without parole on a murder charge, life
without parole on the same charge Graham has for another
home invasion, and then has the other serious sentences.
So he -- for his home invasions, he is -- he is life
without prison --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I didn't think he --
MR. MAKAR: I mean, life without parole.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: For this very offense,
this home invasion, I didn't think that anyone other
than Graham had gotten life without parole.
MR. MAKAR: Well -- well, Graham got life
without parole, and it relates back to his armed
burglary with assault and battery. He got the life
sentence under that charge, which is then all part and
parcel of the violation-of-probation hearing. There
were these secondary -- these second incidences of home
invasions where Meigo Bailey was the codefendant who got
life for murder and also for armed burglary as a part of
one of the home invasions. So they -- you know, they
got serious punishment. This is a serious punishment
that was meted out to them.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did he -- how do you
answer the argument that unlike an adult, because of the
immaturity, you can't really judge a person -- judge a
teenager at the point of sentencing? That it's only
after a period of time has gone by, and you see, has
this person overcome those youthful disabilities?
That's why a proportionality review on the spot doesn't
accommodate the -- what is the driving force of the --
your -- the Petitioner's argument is that you can't make
a judgment until years later to see how that person has
-- has done.
MR. MAKAR: Well, Justice Ginsburg, we
respect that, and certainly in Roper that was the
linchpin to the decision. Here we are in a different
context that deals with these -- these terms of years,
and there -- there’s no constitutional right to parole.
And certainly that is a purely legislative decision to
be made, and States have said we are not going to have
parole.
--
JUSTICE SCALIA: I suppose you could say the
same thing of -- of adults, of somebody over 18. You
really can't tell how redeemable this individual is
until he is in prison for some time; and, therefore, you
should not give anybody life without parole. They --
they may all be savable. So we should defer -- defer.
We shouldn't have any non-parole sentences. Everybody
should be evaluated, which was indeed the approach that
-- that many jurisdictions used to take. Wasn't that so
MR. MAKAR: True.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- when there was parole
for everybody?
MR. MAKAR: And it --- and it goes to the
core of the State's sovereignty to decide what laws to
enact.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But Florida does -- and
every State -- recognize the difference between an adult
and a minor. And you have to make the line. We have it
at 18. But think of the teenager can't drink, can't
drive, can't marry. There are so many limitations on
children just because they are children.
MR. MAKAR: And, Justice Ginsburg, we ask
that the same respect for our juvenile justice system be
given to those laws enacted in Florida that protect the
-- the juveniles. It is the legislature on the ground
there and seeing what’s going on in our State that makes
these decisions about who can drive, who gets the right
to have a tattoo, or who gets --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But they don't make it on
a case-by-case basis. They say no juvenile can drink --
no juvenile.
MR. MAKAR: That's true but at the same --
by the same token, the juvenile justice system in
Florida -- and keep in mind we had a juvenile justice
division -- department established in 1994 because of
the severe problems as we outlined in our brief -- that
Florida has a -- has committed resources and -- and
programs and so forth to the juvenile justice system.
So given all of that, that what the Court -- I am sorry
-- what the State has done as -- as to age, that's why
we say that it matters.
What we are concerned about is that to
pursue the categorical rule that they seek, the Court
would have to, of course, abandon the various firewalls
that would stand between terms of years and also the
death penalty.
But, in addition, if the Court decides to go
down the proportionality route, my concern is the five
principles in the Harmelin concurrence about the States
having the ability to have diverse juvenile justice
programs and not have the -- sort of a lawnmower coming
through and making them all uniform. The Harmelin
concurrence, Justice Kennedy, talked about the deference
in structuring these. And there’s going to be
differences. Some States are going to have the most
harsh laws. The Eighth Amendment doesn't dictate any
particular penological theory. There’s great -- and it
-- it would turn the Eighth Amendment analysis on its
head to first allow this diversity among the States and
allow strong medicine for certain types of violent
crimes and then to kind of compare them and say, well,
gosh, Florida is unusual; it's different; and that
shouldn't be the case whatsoever.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If we look just at
deterrence, my initial instinct is that the difference
in life and life without -- life with parole and life
without parole is just not a factor in deterrence. I --
I don't know how I'd confirm that one way or the other,
but let's -- let's assume that there is some basis for
that intuition.
Then, insofar as the deterrence prong is
concerned, since it's not a deterrent, and if you assume
that there is rehabilitation, what is the State's
interest in keeping the accused, the –- the
defendant in custody for the rest of his life if he has
been rehabilitated and is no longer a real danger?
What's the State's interest?
MR. MAKAR: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And you could say
retribution, but then you have judges on a case-by-case
basis deciding when there should be retribution.
MR. MAKAR: Well, I think certainly the
State of Florida's interest as among other States is
first of all to punish. Certainly I think deterrence
plays a role. We recognize that deterrence may have
less impact on some juveniles, but it doesn't have -- it
doesn't have zero impact. It does have some impact --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it seems to me the
deterrence interest is quite minimal if you assume
rehabilitation or strong evidence of rehabilitation.
MR. MAKAR: Well, but the deterrence goes to
those who would commit the same act. Rather than
deterring this particular individual, it goes to others
who --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the question
is: Will the difference between life with parole and
life without parole deter anybody? I mean any -- that
-- that's what we are talking about. And I don't think
you really were urging that that difference will deter
the teenager so he might think, oh, if I commit this
violent crime, then I will have life without parole.
MR. MAKAR: Well, I don't -- I have not seen
empiricism on this at all to say, you know, what -- does
it really matter or not. I think that as a matter of on
the street people do talk about these things. I mean,
would they --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess there’s also no
empiricism on whether the committed juvenile feels a lot
better knowing that he will get out when he is 75 years
old than he would feel knowing that he was there for
life.
MR. MAKAR: Well, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do we have empirical
studies about how much that improves the spirits of the
committed juvenile?
MR. MAKAR: I -- I have seen none, and it --
it goes to the question here, which is that Graham will
be serving a lengthy prison term. And what he is
seeking is essentially the right to get out at some
point in the future and even saying that 40 years would
be --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this question?
There are an awful lot of amicus briefs in this case,
and I haven't been able to read them all by any means.
Do any of the briefs or any of the materials with which
you are familiar discuss the rate of -- the difference
between the danger of recidivism of a young offender and
one who is, say, 40 or 50 years old?
MR. MAKAR: I -- I don't have that at my
grasp, but --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But it seems to me sort of
-- as a matter of intuition, Justice Kennedy made the
same sort of point. It seems to me that the older
people are less likely to be recidivists than the
younger ones, but is -- is there any empirical evidence
that says that’s an incorrect or correct judgment?
MR. MAKAR: Well, in terms of recidivism, I
think, number one, violence matters. I think there are
studies -- I can't quite put my finger on -- that
says that the violent offenders tend to recidivate more
than the non-violent. And that as one ages -- I think
Judge Posner has written a book called "Aging and Old
Age" that talks about -- in one of its chapters about
how age matters, and that crime rates go down as -- as
the population ages. So I mean there are those sorts of
things out there that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, along those
lines -- and, again, maybe this was in the amicus
briefs. Do you have a study about what age cohort is
responsible for most violent crime?
MR. MAKAR: There are -- there are studies
everywhere, and I have looked at many of them, and it
appears that it certainly increases from age 13, and it
goes up to 14. And it keeps going up until about 16,
, and 18. It peaks. It depends on the crime, and it
depends upon what jurisdiction, and so forth. But it
tends to peak in the early 20s, the late teens or early
s. So that's -- that's -- I think that's typical.
One thing I would point out that I haven't
had a chance to say: The empirical question in this
case, I think, is very important because they are asking
that a constitutional rule be established on studies
that have just been generated literally over this summer
and have not been subject to meaningful review.
We have a concern with that. We think that
the definitional questions that they have raised, you
know, about the offenses and what is life -- is life --
the studies tend to focus on life. But what is life?
Well, in Florida we have some juveniles who are serving
prison terms that have 50-, 60-, 70-, 80-year sentences,
but they are not included within that study.
We also have in this case, for example,
Graham, he had a -- let's say that the judge decided to
give him 30 years for the main offense and 15 for the
second and made them consecutive. That's 45 years.
Graham's actuarial life --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, we are not sure that
those 70-year sentences are any good, either, because
your -- your friend on the other side, you know, is not
willing to -- to pick a number at which the sentence
amounts to life without parole. Maybe a 70-year
sentence does.
MR. MAKAR: Well, they’ve conceded, in their
brief, that what this all boils down to is that if
Graham wins and he gets to go back and be resentenced,
that either the Florida legislature has to pass a law to
reinstitute parole for this category of offenders, or
the trial judge could say, okay, the actuarial table
says you are going to live to be 64.2, we're going to --
I'm going to sentence you to something less --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that there was
a parole system still functioning, so -- although it
will be phased out over time, but for people who
were incarcerated under the old regime -- and I think
the suggestion was that that system would take care of
the handful of people, not more than that, that this
decision would involve.
MR. MAKAR: There is still a parole board.
Its functions have been minimized greatly. It has not
been applicable to anyone since 1983. It would take a
legislative act or perhaps even an executive act of some
sort to reinstitute that board and to take account of
these cases.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can you tell us just a
little bit about the Florida correctional systems, the
policies with respect to rehabilitation programs? If
they don't have parole, then you might say, well, they
don't need rehabilitation programs or that they might
need them more.
Had the rehabilitation programs been
increased or decreased since the phasing out of parole?
Or is it about the same? Or are they -- are they
non-existent?
MR. MAKAR: No, no. They are in existence.
I cannot specifically answer that, Justice Kennedy,
because I don't know all the different programs that are
available. There's the various programs that deal with
drug offenses and alcoholism and so forth.
And there -- there are certain educational
programs. For example, when Graham was in the county
jail -- that was the county versus the State -- he was
able to go to school.
I don't believe there is anywhere near sort
of the total absence and deprivation, sort of a Weems
case, sort of we put you in a cell and you rot there for
the rest of your life, at all in our system. There’s
all these various rights that we pointed out in our
brief that are -- enable -- they are able to have
familial relationships. They can have the Maslow's
hierarchy. I mean, they -- physiological needs and
emotional needs and so forth are still available to be
met in prison.
So I can't give you specific programs,
Justice Kennedy, but in Florida’s system, they do
exist.
If there's no further questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Makar.
Mr. Gowdy, you have 4 minutes remaining.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why does a juvenile have a
constitutional right to hope, but an adult does not?
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN S. GOWDY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. GOWDY: Because the juvenile is
different than an adult. A juvenile is less culpable.
He's -- we know over time he will change and -- and
potentially reform, as opposed to an adult. Once you
are fully formed, you are more culpable and you don't
have that same inherent capacity to change.
JUSTICE ALITO: But do you know anybody who
is willing to say that, as a categorical matter, that --
you know, the 18th birthday is the magical date for
every single person?
MR. GOWDY: No, Your Honor, and nobody was
willing to say that in Roper, but, yet, the Court still
drew the line at 18 for the death penalty in Roper.
JUSTICE ALITO: Because the Court, up to
this point, has said that death is different, and the
rules -- the Eighth Amendment rules in capital cases are
entirely different from the Eighth Amendment rules in --
in all other cases.
MR. GOWDY: We are not -- we were not --
JUSTICE ALITO: If we -- you know, if we
abandon that, then one of two things has to happen,
either the rules for noncapital cases have to change
dramatically, or the rules for capital cases have to
change dramatically, unless death is different, in fact.
MR. GOWDY: Well, I -- first, we -- we are
not asking that the procedural rules in the intricate
individualized death penalty sentencing scheme be
transported or moved over to the noncapital cases.
JUSTICE ALITO: I know you are not
asking for that, but that -- isn't that where this,
logically, is going? If death is not different, then
there should be uniform rules across the board.
MR. GOWDY: Absolutely not, Your Honor,
because those rules make no sense when you are talking
about adolescents, who are different, because those --
which a Court recognized in Roper, that those rules
can't be applied to adolescents because we -- you can't,
as a sentencer, predict the future.
And so, though death is different, it's not
different in any critical respects here because the
punishment, life without parole, just like death, says
that the offender is forever irredeemable, is forever
unfit to live in society, and must die in prison.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why does it say that? Why
doesn't it just say that, in this particular case, what
this individual has done is so bad that, even if this
person can be rehabilitated and would not present a
danger to -- to society at age 60 or 70, that this
person is -- should be sentenced to life without parole?
That's -- that's what it means for an adult offender.
MR. GOWDY: Your -- Your Honor, I think the
only difference here is -- between life without parole
and life with parole, is that there will be a
determination later, at age 30 or 40 or sometime
thereafter, as to whether that is the right sentence.
And the -- the parole official, just like
the judge, can consider the offense as the offender, as
a juvenile. We're just saying that you can't make that
complete determination at such a young age, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One reason States --
MR. GOWDY: -- and you will have a more
accurate determination later.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One reason States
and the Federal government moved to abolish parole in --
in recent decades was, with depressing regularity,
prisoners released on parole committed crimes again.
And I'm just -- is there any empirical
evidence that tells us how often people, say, from 17 --
-year-olds, when released, commit crimes again, as
opposed to 18- to 20-year-olds?
MR. GOWDY: Your Honor, as my brother noted,
I think that the evidence shows that, as people get
older, they are less likely to recommit crimes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But isn't that -- I
remember some of those studies that -- I mean, the
cutoff, there’s sort of a magic age at some point,
where people over the age of 35, or whatever, typically
don't engage in violent activity.
MR. GOWDY: It -- it decreases over time,
undoubtedly, and that’s -- that supports, I think, our
argument here, that the -- that Terrance Graham, at age
, will not be the person he was at age 17.
I see my time is up. I’ll sit down.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 10:59 a.m., the case in the
