OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPT
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE
UNITED STATES
CAPTION: JOE HARRIS SULLIVAN, Petitioner, v. FLORIDA
CASE NO: No. 08-7621
PLACE: Washington, D.C.
DATE: Monday, November 9, 2009
PAGES: 1-51
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
55 CONNECTICUT AVE., NW
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20036
(202) 289-2260
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JOE HARRIS SULLIVAN, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 08-7621
FLORIDA. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 9, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
BRYAN STEVENSON, ESQ., Jacksonville, Fla.; on behalf of
the Petitioner.
SCOTT D. MAKAR, ESQ., Solicitor General, Tallahassee,
Fla.; on behalf of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
BRYAN STEVENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
SCOTT D. MAKAR, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
BRYAN STEVENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 46
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:01 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 08-7621, Sullivan v. Florida.
Mr. Stevenson.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN STEVENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. STEVENSON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Joe Sullivan was 13 years of age when he was
arrested with two older boys, one 15 and one 17, charged
with sexual assault, ultimately convicted, and sentenced
to life without parole.
Joe is one of only two children this age who
have ever been sentenced to life without parole for a
non-homicide, and no child has received this sentence
for non-homicide in the last 18 years.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Stevenson, there’s a
serious question before we get to the particulars of
this case. Justice Kennedy suggested it in the last
argument. This -- the time ran out for postconviction
relief in 1993, and this petition is brought in 2007.
There’s a 2-year statute of limitations. Florida
said there’s a procedural bar; we don't get to the
merits of this case.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, there are two
responses. I mean, first of all, with regard to
challenges to sentences, Florida law, under Rule 3.850,
makes it very clear that a challenge to a sentence can
be brought at any time. What the trial court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: They said there's a
question whether that means an illegal sentence, like
the judge gave more than the maximum punishment. Do you
have any indication in Florida law that correcting a
sentence any time overtakes the limitation on
postconviction relief?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, we cite in our brief
Summers v. State, which is an example of someone
challenging their sentence after this Court's decision
in Apprendi long after the time would have run.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Except the court there
applied 39(a) and said: Yes, it's a change in law, but
it hasn't been made retroactive.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's correct. But
the propriety of that determination is exactly what can
be -- is engaged in by the State courts, and that’s
what we simply sought here.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But isn't that what the
court said here? It said, first of all, Roper doesn't
command the results you are seeking; and, second, it
didn't make its application retroactive. So wasn't it
really consistent with 39(a), the Florida court?
MR. STEVENSON: No, Justice Sotomayor. The
only thing the judge said here was that I don't
think the reasoning of Roper can be applied to someone
serving life in prison without parole.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, that's an unfair
characterization. What the judge said was Roper didn't
say that it applied to life without parole. That's a
very -- vastly different thing than saying that the
reasoning shouldn't be applied. It said that we are not
choosing to, but that's not what Roper said.
MR. STEVENSON: But our argument -- and I
accept that. Our argument was we recognized that Roper
dealt with the death penalty as opposed to life without
parole, but our argument was that the reasoning of Roper
is similarly applicable to someone sentenced to life
imprisonment without parole.
The trial judge could not evaluate the
procedural question without analyzing Roper, and that's
what the trial court did. The trial court conceded that
if Roper applies, Joe Sullivan is entitled to review.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But Roper was decided under
a regime, which I -- I think still exists, that death is
different. How could it possibly be thought to apply to
this case, which is not a death case?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, because -- because
what the Court said in Roper categorically for the first
time is that kids are different, and in this context we
were arguing --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It said kids are different
for purposes of the death penalty, which is different.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think our argument
was that they are different for the purposes of
sentencing. And what triggered this -- and this is why
this is relevant to this procedural question -- was that
the State of Florida did apply Roper to juveniles who
had been sentenced to death after this Court's decision.
And the case we cited to the Florida appeals
court, Bonifay v. Florida -- it's on page 38 of our
joint appendix -- was a case where Florida implemented
that law, and the law under Florida was that death row
prisoners sentenced at the time of Joe Sullivan --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Let me -- let me --
MR. STEVENSON: -- had their sentences
reduced to life in prison with parole.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But this judge said:
Yes, there’s a Federal question in this case: Does
Roper render unconstitutional life without parole for
juveniles? He answered that question: no. And then he
said: There is no other Federal question in the case; I
do not reach the question that you are raising, that is,
life without parole being cruel and unusual. All -- the
only Federal question that, under our rules, I reach is,
does Roper cover this case? No. Anything else is
procedurally barred.
What was wrong with that?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, because under your
precedent, if the question -- if the judgment of
procedural default is dependent on an analysis, an
assessment of Federal law, in any context, then it is
not an independent and adequate State ground, and that's
the basis on which we --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, suppose arguendo we
assume that the judge is right, that Roper did not
establish a rule that applies in this case. Then what
position are you in with reference to the procedural
bar? Do you have any other arguments that overcome the
procedural bar?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, that is the rule would
still allow us to challenge the sentence under the no-
time restriction as it relates to the sentence --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no. The only Federal
question in the case now -- or at least the preliminary
Federal question, the threshold Federal question, is
simply whether the State court was right about what
Roper did. And if we agree with the State court about
what Roper did, then the State's bar automatically
applies and that's the end of the case.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, yes, but if you agree
with the State court about Roper did, then we don't --
we are not entitled to relief under -- under either
theory, under a merits theory or a default theory, but
the point is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I don't -- I don't know
about that. We -- is the argument here that, unless
Roper mandates this result, you don't urge that the
Constitution requires it? I don't think so.
MR. STEVENSON: No. Our argument simply is
that the question that the trial judge dealt with here
was, in part, dependent on an assessment of the Federal
Constitution, whether the Eighth Amendment does
constrain a sentence like this. We relied on Roper.
The court found that Roper was not available
to Mr. Sullivan when his case was on appeal, prior to
93. Based on that determination, the court then
engaged in an analysis. And, again, what triggered
this -- and I just want to make this really clear, that
death row prisoners after Roper in Florida got a better
sentence than Joe Sullivan.
They got life with parole eligibility after
years. The argument was that that established a
reasonable basis for Joe Sullivan –-
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought -- I thought
Simmons got life without parole. I thought that
Simmons's sentence was life without parole.
MR. STEVENSON: Simmons did, Your Honor, in
Missouri. But in Florida, at the point at which these
sentences were being imposed, there was no life without
parole for capital murder. People convicted of capital
murder could -- could only be sentenced to life in
prison, with parole eligibility after 25 years.
And so the question was generated by this
Court's decision in Roper, how is it constitutional
under the Eighth Amendment for the death sentence
prisoner to get life with parole after 25 years, and Joe
Sullivan at 13, convicted of a non-homicide --
JUSTICE ALITO: Your argument is that
because the -- the State judge had to decide whether
Roper dictated or required the result that you were
asking for, that -- that it's not an independent State
ground. That's the argument?
MR. STEVENSON: My argument is that if Roper
applied -- if Roper is relevant -- because what the
State courts of Florida have said is that when you are
looking at this question there are three things. One,
is it a rule from the Florida Supreme Court or United
States Supreme Court?
Two, is it a rule of constitutional -- of a
constitutional nature? Which, obviously, this would be.
Three, is it a rule of fundamental significance? That's
all. We don't have to establish that --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, but I'm -- I'm
interested in how we decide whether it's independent.
If you had cited -- if you said Marbury v. Madison
dictates this result, well, the judge would have to
decide what Marbury v. Madison required. That’s a
Federal -- that can be characterized as a Federal
question. That would make the -- that would make it --
the State law ground not an independent ground?
MR. STEVENSON: No, Your Honor. I mean, we
could say that -- that some rule that has to do with
antitrust applies, but the judge wouldn't have to
consider that, wouldn't have to evaluate that; it
wouldn't be determinative. Here, the judge could not
reject our claim without an analysis of Roper.
The judge engaged in that, and let -- let
me just point out, this is not a case of procedural
default, State court ruling, we are now in Federal
habeas. This is a question about jurisdiction.
The question that the State is raising is:
Does this Court have jurisdiction to review the Federal
question that was presented below, when the trial court
itself engaged in an analysis of Roper? This Court
doesn't lose its jurisdiction to deal with a Federal
question when the State court analyzed that question to
reach its --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's true, but once
we analyze the question, if we decide, as the trial
court decided, that in fact Roper does not demand the
result in this case and, therefore, there is no
exception to the procedural bar of Florida, which makes
an exception where the fundamental constitutional right
asserted was not established within the period provided
for, once we decide that in fact Roper didn't establish
it, you're out of court, it seems to me.
Then -- then, automatically, the -- the
procedural bar of Florida applies.
MR. STEVENSON: No, Justice Scalia. The
other provision of 3.850 would still allow us to
challenge this sentence because it is a challenge to a
sentence, and Florida says that there is no time
limitation on the challenge of a sentence.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then that would
completely overtake the specific provision. I mean, if
you say the catchall illegal sentence, open to
challenge at any time, then there’s nothing left to
the specific provision that says 2-year statute of
limitations, unless three things.
MR. STEVENSON: That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg. Florida applies the provision, the construct
that, with regard to challenges to sentences, at least,
there is no time limitation.
We contend that the more relevant challenge
is generated by this Court's decision in Roper. But,
even without that, we are entitled to merits review, and
no one has argued against that.
I mean, it's worth stating here that there
was no responsive pleading filed by the State in the
trial court. There was no responsive pleading. No one
asserted an affirmative defense arguing that these
procedural defaults be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And you say the -- under
Florida law, the question is not whether the right was,
to use the phrase, "clearly established"?
MR. STEVENSON: That's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the right is whether
or not -- it had -- what was your phrase? "A
significant bearing"?
MR. STEVENSON: That's right. That comes
from Summers v. State, which is cited in our brief,
Justice Kennedy, where the court has made it clear,
because they have to sometimes engage in these questions
about what's retroactive, how does it apply?
They have done that with regard to Apprendi.
They have done that with regard to some of this Court's
other decisions in a vast array of areas. Eighth
Amendment questions come up all the time before the
Florida Supreme Court under that analysis. And with
that in context, I don't think there is any real
question that this Court has jurisdiction, and that’s
the issue here: Do you have jurisdiction to review the
Federal question that was considered below?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did -- did you raise below
your assertion that the exception -- that there is an
exception for challenging -- for vacating sentences,
that there is -- that that is an exception to the normal
rule of 2 years’ limitation? Did you make that
argument below?
MR. STEVENSON: No, because at no point did
the State make any argument that we were barred or
precluded in any way. On appeal, we did reference the
provision in the -- in Bonifay v. State, which was a
case that talked about how these provisions can be
challenged, how these sentences can be challenged at any
time.
That was the way the case was presented,
Justice Scalia, because at no point did the State ever
argue an affirmative defense of procedural default. And
that's how the case gets here. It gets here in the
posture of a very rare sentence.
And I do want to respond to the notion that
we are uncertain about what will happen. There’s no
uncertainty about what will happen to Joe Sullivan if
this Court rules in his favor. Florida law clearly
states what the next sentencing option is. He could
only be sentenced to 40 years in prison with good time
and credits available. That's what Florida law says.
Under 775.082, anyone not sentenced to life in prison
can only receive a maximum sentence of 40 years. And
that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why won't the next
case we get be an argument that for a juvenile,
particularly one as young as -- as your client, 40 years
is too long; 40 years doesn't recognize his capacity for
moral development within a reasonable period?
MR. STEVENSON: Mr. Chief Justice, you may
get that case and this Court will have to evaluate that.
But I think here what we haven't resolved, which I think
we have to resolve, is the question of whether life
without parole is unconstitutional, whether that's
excessive. And I think there’s a great deal of
evidence to support that this Court should make that
finding, in part because of its lack of consensus.
There are only nine kids in the entire
country that have been sentenced to life without parole
for any crime.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, but -- I mean,
you look at the Federal Government allows this sentence,
right? Thirty-eight States allow this sentence. I just
don't understand how you can say there is a consensus --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- that this type of
sentence is unconstitutional.
MR. STEVENSON: I think with regard to very
young kids, I -- I don't think we can say that the
States have adopted or considered or approached this
kind of sentence, in part because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: All you have established is
that there is a consensus that that sentence should be
rare, not a consensus that that sentence should not be
available, because most States make it available.
MR. STEVENSON: I -- I think, Your Honor,
that -- that the judgment that they have made it
available in some conscious way can't really be
defended, because no one who has set the minimum age for
imposing a sentence of life without parole has set it as
young as -- as 13. When States have taken up this
question, they have never said that a child of 13 should
be subject to life without parole. What they said is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it would be -- it
would be reasonable under your approach to have
a different result in these two cases? A difference in
terms of consensus or when sentencing is allowed would
result in a different result in your case than in
Mr. Graham's case?
MR. STEVENSON: It would be conceivable. It
wouldn't be desirable. I'll concede that. But, yes,
it's conceivable only in the sense that we know that
States like Florida that have created no minimum age for
trying children as adults, but have created life without
parole for these adult sentencers have created this
world where these things are possible.
But if you accept that Florida has adopted
life without parole for a child of 13, you also have to
accept that they have adopted it for a child of 6 or 5,
because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me, once
-- excuse me.
MR. STEVENSON: Sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me that
one way to take that into effect is through our normal
proportionality review and in a case by case. Your –-
your client -- his crime is horrendously violent. At
the same time, he is much younger than in the typical
case. And it seems to me that requiring under the
Eighth Amendment consideration of his age, as I said
earlier, I guess, avoids all these line-drawing problems
which seem -- the arbitrariness of the line-drawing
seems inconsistent with the notion of the Eighth
Amendment.
MR. STEVENSON: I understand your point,
Mr. Chief Justice, but I don't think that’s the way the
Court should proceed, for two reasons: One -- one is
that that kind of case by case analysis hasn't worked
well for children. It is in part because these kids are
so vulnerable, are so at risk in this system, that
they end up --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I thought -- I
would have thought your argument that this is so rare
suggests that maybe that analysis, to the extent it’s
permitted under State law, has worked well for children.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, but -- but I -- I
think in many ways it -- it hasn't. I mean, Joe
Sullivan never had his case reviewed, never had his
sentence reviewed. The lawyer filed an Anders brief on
direct appeal. He's been in prison for 20 years and
wouldn't be in this Court but for this Court's decision
in Roper that created some new categorical exemptions.
And I think the problem with the
individualized review, as Justice Kennedy wrote actually
in Roper, is that in this context, age can actually be
an aggravating factor. I mean, the Court could have
said in the death penalty context, let's deal with this
on a case-by-case basis. We actually have a
proportionality review that's enshrined in our capital
jurisprudence. States have to do that.
But we didn't, because we recognize that
there are distinctions between kids and adults that have
to be respected by our Constitution, that have to be
reflected in our constitutional norms. And I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's because
death is different, is what we said, and because death
is reserved, as this Court said in Roper, for the worst
of the worst. And we know that life without parole is
not reserved for the worst of the worst.
MR. STEVENSON: But I think it is, Your
Honor, for -- for -- for the kinds of crimes that we are
talking -- for non-homicides, life without parole is
reserved for the worst of the worst. That's what this
Court effectively created with its decision in Kennedy.
And in that context, the same difference
that can be made between kids and adults in the death
penalty context, we believe, needs to be made here. To
equate the crime of a 13-year-old with a 25- or a
-year-old, particularly one like Joe Sullivan --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There are a lot of
murderers who get life without parole. Not every
murderer gets -- gets executed. So how can you say that
these are worst of the worst? Murderers are the worst
of the worst, and they get life without parole.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, they do,
Justice Scalia. But my point is that, with regard to
non-homicides, life without parole occupies the same
kind of end-of-the-line status that the death penalty
does with homicide. And to fail to make a distinction
between --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Call them the "worse of the
worse" maybe, but they are not the worst of the worst.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, that's one way of
characterizing it. I think, though, whatever we say
about children and adults, we know that there are
distinctions, and those distinctions that were
articulated in Roper are applicable here.
JUSTICE ALITO: What is the categorical rule
that you would like us to adopt?
MR. STEVENSON: I would like you to adopt
a rule that bans life without parole for any child
under the age of 14. And I think that would be
supported by the judgment -- that ruling wouldn't
actually invalidate a single State law.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that would leave out
Graham, then? Your rule, you say under the age of 14,
so you are distinguishing your case from Graham's? You
are not saying all juveniles, just -- you are setting
the line at 14?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I support -- my client
is 13, and there are differences between kids who are 14
and younger and kids who are older. But I support a
line that actual draws the line at 18. I think that
that distinction can and should be made.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why not Thompson, where
the line was 16?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I mean, the difficulty
of course, is that -- and Thompson was a plurality
opinion. We don't -- you could draw the line anywhere.
And we briefed our case recognizing that this Court has
discretion. There could be distinctions that could be
made between younger kids and older kids, but we
certainly support a judgment that all children should be
shielded from this age difference.
The reason why we make that distinction is
because that there are legal distinctions. There are
States that have set the minimum age for trying kids or
imposing these sentences of life without parole at 16 or
. We do recognize long traditions on the age of 14.
In the Court's opinion in Stanford v.
Kentucky authored by Justice Scalia -- you referenced
this earlier -- at common law we recognize that there
was a rebuttable presumption that children 14 and
younger could not be tried for felonies, that they were
incapable. And so, we are just arguing that these
distinctions can be made.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What -- what about a
homicide, a 13-year-old?
MR. STEVENSON: It’s our position that,
based on the incidence of these sentences, that even
between non-homicide and homicide, no child of 13
should be sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.
That is, only -- in 44 States, no child for any kind of
crime has received that kind of sentence. And this
notion that we -- we have to think about who children
are in the context of this -- for the crime of rape, the
median sentence in this country is 10 years.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you -- you are
differentiating your position based on young age from
Graham's counsel, who said for murder, even in the case
of a youthful offender, life without parole is an
appropriate -- is an available sentence?
MR. STEVENSON: That's -- that's right, Your
Honor. That -- that is, we think that the data, that is
the consensus, would support both from an age
perspective and from a consensus perspective an absolute
ban on life without parole for any child of 13. It --
it has been rejected by virtually every State in terms
of its application. It has been rejected by many States
in terms of its even concept. I mean, there are a lot
of States in this country where you can't get any kind
of adult sentence for a crime at 13. We don't --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your line is 13,
and for obvious reasons. Another line is going to be 16
for obvious reasons. When the 15-year-old comes in, he
is going to say 15, the 17-year-old -- and that it seems
to me is why drawing the line on the basis of the Eighth
Amendment -- there’s certainly nothing in the Eighth
Amendment that suggests there is a difference between 16
and 17. Everybody with a different client is going to
have a different line, which suggests to me that it
ought to be considered in each individual case.
MR. STEVENSON: I guess we make these
categorical distinctions in lots of contexts, not just
in the death penalty context. We appended to our brief
hundreds of laws that draw lines, that say if you are 14
you can't drive, you can't enter into a contract.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that's
because that's a policy judgment by the legislature.
Here we are talking about the dictates of the Eighth
Amendment. And the idea that the Eighth Amendment draws
those kinds of arbitrary distinctions is one that I
don't understand.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, it is this Court's
history. That is, in Thompson you drew a line between
and those who are younger. In -- in -- in Roper you
have drawn the line at 18 and 17. In other contexts, we
wrestle with this all the time. In Atkins, you had to
draw a line of defining mental retardation in some
sphere.
What we are ultimately arguing is that there
are people who are vulnerable, that there are people who
need protection, and children are some of those people.
Their diminished capacity, their diminished culpability,
their inability to be responsible, their vulnerability
to negative peer pressures, and their capacity to change
and reform is what we think generates this question, and
we think it's an honest question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It depends on how horrible
the crime is that they've committed, doesn't it? But
you say it doesn't. It doesn't depend upon how horrible
it is and how much retribution society demands.
MR. STEVENSON: I think for -- for a child
of 13 with regard to a sentence of life imprisonment
without parole, that is correct, Justice Scalia.
I think in our construct, where we don't
always impose these sentences even for those horrible
offenders, to not recognize the difference between a
child and an adult is cruel and unusual. To say to the
-year-old in this case that you get life without
parole, but to the 17-year-old you get 4 years and
you are released in 6 months, or to the 15-year-old
you get juvenile treatment, speaks to the kind of
difficulty we have with the absence of a categorical
ban.
We make these bans all the time. And I
think that the States are capable of implementing them.
We cite Gerstein v. Pugh as an example where this Court
found time between arrest and presentation to be
violative of constitutional norms, and the States were
empowered to implement that.
With regard to Joe Sullivan, we don't have
to speculate. We know what the sentence will be. If he
is returned and resentenced, he will be sentenced up to
years, or actually the points that were applied to
him would recommend a sentence between 27 years and
years. And we don't contend that that would be
violative of the Constitution, because there is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you go back
through the statistics for me? For children under 14,
how many are in prison for life without parole for
homicide and non-homicide cases?
MR. STEVENSON: There are 73 children 14 and
younger who have been imprisoned for life without
parole. They can be found in only 18 States. For the
age of 13 and younger, there are only nine kids, and
that's including both kids convicted of homicide and
non-homicide.
For non-homicide, there are only two. They
are both in Florida, and Joe Sullivan is one of them.
So the universe of children under 14 and younger is
very, very small, smaller than what this Court was
dealing with in Roper in terms of the number of death
sentences, smaller than what this Court was likely
dealing with in Atkins. It's what this Court has looked
at generally to find consensus. And here, where only 18
States have imposed these sentences, a judgment that
--
this is rejected, this is outside the norms, would be
consistent with this Court's precedents in Roper and
Atkins and Coker and Kennedy and the other cases.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can you do what you have
just done with the category non-homicide cases?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Life without parole?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Under the age of 18 when
committed?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. That would be 111.
JUSTICE BREYER: One hundred and eleven. Of
those 111, how many are in Florida?
MR. STEVENSON: Seventy-seven.
JUSTICE BREYER: Seventy-seven. And of the
remaining, how many States are they in?
MR. STEVENSON: Six.
JUSTICE BREYER: Six.
MR. STEVENSON: And with regard to children
younger, we're also talking about just the universe of
six, 14 and younger, all in Florida. And so it is this
absence --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is non-homicide. Six
MR. STEVENSON: Non-homicide, yes, sir.
Yes, sir. And so it is this absence of a categorical
rule that has created some of these results. There are
some other arbitrary features about this population that
we've raised in our brief that are concerning. They are
disproportionately kids of color --
JUSTICE ALITO: What is your response to the
State's argument that these statistics are not
peer-reviewed? And these are statistics, am I right,
that you generated yourself?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, these statistics come
from the States’ Departments of Corrections, Your Honor.
I mean, we -- we gave the State -- the State doesn't
contest our data, at least in their pleading, and we
don't control these numbers. The Departments of
Corrections control these numbers, and where these data
are within their power of the State to present, we
don't think there’s any real question about the
reliability of the data that we are relying on.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There’s a certain
number of States that didn't respond at all.
MR. STEVENSON: There are very few. In one
study, there were only two States. In the report that
we generated, we got the information from all States.
I see my white light is on. I’d like to
reserve the rest of my time for rebuttal.
--
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Stevenson.
Mr. Makar.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SCOTT D. MAKAR
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. MAKAR: May it please the Court:
As to the data, in our view, the data is
unreliable. The data -- unlike the death penalty
context, where there is a rich literature of data that's
been generated over years on mitigating factors and so
forth and there's full regard, the data here is suspect
JUSTICE BREYER: You say it's suspect. What
is your opinion, so far as you can do it, following
category: Non-homicide, life without parole, under the
age of 18 when committed?
MR. MAKAR: Justice Breyer, we have no data
on --
JUSTICE BREYER: Not in your own system?
MR. MAKAR: Oh, I’m sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: You don't know how many
people in Florida --
MR. MAKAR: I'm sorry, let me -- in Florida,
it was the non-homicide. We --
JUSTICE BREYER: Non-homicide, life without
parole, under the age of 18 when committed.
MR. MAKAR: One hundred and fifty.
JUSTICE BREYER: And they say 77?
MR. MAKAR: They say 77. That's correct.
The reason being is that the study they're relying upon,
which was generated this summer while this case was
pending –-
JUSTICE BREYER: What? Sorry.
MR. MAKAR: I'm sorry. The reason it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You are speaking too fast.
I can't understand you.
MR. MAKAR: I apologize, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Maybe if you raise the --
raise the lectern a bit -- no, the other way.
MR. MAKAR: The reason why is that the
Annino study upon which they rely, which was generated
just this past summer, doesn't count a non-homicide
offense that happens to also be bundled with a homicide
offense.
So, for example, if someone went down the
street, committed an armed burglary as Graham did, but
then they went across the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Let's -- let's count
it their way. Let's say that a -- non-homicide --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. I -- I don't
understand what he's saying. Can I understand this
first? He's there for the homicide offense or for the
non-homicide offense?
MR. MAKAR: This is an individual that they
don't count.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. MAKAR: And this is a person who
committed, for example, an armed burglary.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. MAKAR: And then -- and put in jail and
sentenced to life without parole.
JUSTICE SCALIA: For the burglary, not for
the --
MR. MAKAR: Right, non-homicide. But they
happened, as the course of a crime spree, to commit a
homicide offense down the road at a different location.
They don't count that sentence for the non-homicide
offense in their data. They undercount the data
dramatically.
And in addition, the States -- this is not
an easy issue. The States have primary offenses and
secondary offenses.
JUSTICE BREYER: So -- so in your example,
Mr. Smith was sentenced to life without parole for a
robbery. Then you said Mr. Smith also killed someone.
Now, was he convicted of killing someone?
MR. MAKAR: Yes, and he was --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Okay. And so did the
judge have in front of him the conviction for the
killing of the person as well as for the burglary or
whatever?
MR. MAKAR: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Okay. So I think I
could count that as a homicide offense. I understand
your point.
Now, let's suppose that we take those out of
it; in other words, for argument's purpose, concede
that where there is also a homicide offense, it counts
as homicide, not in the set I am asking you about.
I’m asking you about the set of those
non-homicide offenses, life without parole, and they
were under the age of 18 when committed. How
many in Florida?
MR. MAKAR: By our number, it's 150. They
say 77.
JUSTICE BREYER: Even though you gave --
said that the reason for the difference was a set of
instances that I just asked you to put to the side.
MR. MAKAR: Well, okay. If you are asking
me to accept their number, if they use that definition,
that is correct. It would be 77 individuals that would
be life without parole. That's correct. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Which of these cases
is worse? A 16-year-old committing the crimes that
Graham committed; a 13-year-old committing the crimes
that Sullivan committed?
MR. MAKAR: Well, worse in which sense? I
mean, under the Eighth Amendment, which would be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: My point is, if you
had to consider youth as one of the factors that we
consider under proportionality analysis, how do you come
out?
MR. MAKAR: Well, I think certainly in this
case we are at the far extreme. We’re off the charts.
This is one of those unfathomable --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Off the charts on
age or off the charts on violence?
MR. MAKAR: Violence, I'm sorry. The
violence meaning that this is one of the most severe
violent acts that any human being could perpetuate upon
anyone else. It was done twice; there was two counts.
So in that regard --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm sorry, which one?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What do you mean it was
done twice? I thought he raped only one person.
MR. MAKAR: Two different -- the woman --
there was two counts of -- of sexual battery in the --
he committed the offense in two different ways upon this
woman, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So your adversary
provided statistics to show that other people who have
committed rapes have gotten much smaller terms of
imprisonment, the average being, I think we were told,
years.
So explain to me why someone who commits a
rape is getting 10 years and this 13-year-old -- it’s
the most heinous crime for a 13-year-old that justifies
life without parole.
MR. MAKAR: Well, when we look at the data
for sexual battery, there’s a distribution, and there’s
all kinds of factors underlying each of those
sentences, and we have hundreds of sexual battery
sentences in Florida. Each one is unique, and each one
is presented to the trial judge who makes the
determination about the sentence.
And there are very harsh sentences,
certainly, for some offenses and not for others. But to
take the notion that one could average them together and
walk into court and say, I'm way above the average, I
should somehow get an Eighth Amendment remedy, we
believe is just the wrong methodology.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: My --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, what is the right -- go
ahead.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, I think if you want
to address it, that the basic argument here is we want a
bright line. And the justification for the bright line
is (a) it's pretty unusual to have this. So that is
one part of the clause. And in respect to it being
cruel, you go back to what is supposed to be some kind
of rough, basic connection between criminal law and
generally accepted principles of morality.
And the confusion and uncertainty about
the moral responsibility of a 13-year-old is such that
it is not -- it is a cruel thing to do to remove from
that individual his entire life. You say we’re at the
extreme. Now that's roughly what’s
perking around in my mind, and I would like you to reply
to that.
MR. MAKAR: Well, certainly -- and I've got,
Mr. Chief Justice, questions about how does age play a
role in proportionality and so forth. And I think here
that a 13-year-old can commit the most heinous of
crimes.
JUSTICE BREYER: That wasn't my point. I
guess I wasn't clear. My point was, of course, there
can be cases in any set which go in all kinds of
different directions. But, as a general matter, human
beings are uncertain about how much moral responsibility
to assign to individuals in a particular category, and
that category roughly corresponds with an age of
maturity.
So you get into arguments when you get to
, no; 11, no; 17, yes maybe; 16, yes maybe. But
as long as we are around 3 years old, 5, 7,
, 12, and they want to say certainly 14, we are in
that area of ambiguity. And not just we, people all
over America, some thinking one way, some thinking
another. And that's enough to cut the connection with
morality, a strong enough connection that could justify
taking the person's entire life away.
You see, I'm trying to make a general
argument, and maybe I haven't stated it perfectly. But
if you can get the drift of what I'm talking about, I
would like to hear your reply.
MR. MAKAR: Sure. Well, I think what you
are getting to, Justice Breyer, is that --- two things:
One is that the distribution as a function of age. We
know that at younger ages the crime occurrence, the
incidence, goes down. And that goes to the second
point, which is that this is a good thing. It's -- it's
a lawful sentence that can be imposed, but it's rare.
And we are -- we should be proud of that, that it
doesn't occur with a -- with a great regularity. It's
an unfortunate thing that it happens, that we have these
gross acts of depravity that would justify it even for
someone that’s very young.
Sullivan is not here to tell the Court: I
should not be punished. He has told the Court: I can
be in jail for the rest of my life. All he is asking
for is this opportunity to get out, this parole
opportunity. That's what -- what we are talking about.
And this issue that he has presented obviously was not
one the Florida trial court could have addressed
whatsoever.
Justice Ginsburg, you hit the nail on the
head. To interpret the rules the way they are
interpreting our rules in Florida would swallow the
.850(b)(2) exception that says --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you tell -- tell us
something about that catchall that says an illegal
sentence can be reopened at any time, illegal
sentence? What -- Mr. Stevenson said that is not
limited to just -- the maximum is 15 years and the
defendant got 20.
MR. MAKAR: Well, that's incorrect. The two
rules he is citing to at this point -- one raised in the
reply brief -- deal with motions to correct a sentence
that exceeds limits provided by law -- that exceeds
the limits provided by law. And the Florida courts have
held that this is -- in these situations, it’s the law
in effect at the time of the sentencing. In other
words, if -- and -- and then there’s the exception
under 3.850(b)(2) that says --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That wouldn't apply to the
Eighth Amendment?
MR. MAKAR: No, because 3.850(b)(2) -- well,
I think if, for example, at the time of sentencing --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: We’re talking about the
first sentence of (B), I take it?
MR. MAKAR: Right. That's the one they’re
relying upon: A motion to vacate a sentence that
exceeds the time limits provided by law may be filed at
any time. That has been interpreted in the Florida
courts not to allow a new constitutional right that has
been applied retroactively to be raised. It’s applied
to say: At the time of your sentencing, on the face of
it, can -- was there an error that was made?
Okay. And -- and to interpret it their way
would swallow the exception. Florida is entitled, like
every other State, to create a limited exception under
its postconviction rules to say: We are only going to
consider new fundamental constitutional rights that are
applied retroactively.
I think, simply put, the Florida trial court
couldn't answer the question they want this Court to now
answer. It was beyond the trial court's jurisdiction.
The court below couldn't create a new right, extend one,
or make it retroactive. The trial court did what we
would expect the trial court to do here, is
take a quick look: What are you asking me to do? Do
you want me to apply Roper in a context that it doesn't
state? I can't do that. The rule 3.850(b)(2) says I
can't do that.
And the judge said it on the record here,
Joint Appendix 56, 57, and 58: The claim does not fit
into the limited category of claims allowed to be
brought after the expiration of the 2-year period.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Now, what -- during the
-- during the time, the postconviction period, would he
-- he had an appointed lawyer at trial. Then we know
that he has a lawyer in 2007. In between, was counsel
available to Sullivan?
MR. MAKAR: Not as a matter of right, and he
did file, I believe, a habeas --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No, I mean -- I mean, he
does -- he had representation in 2007. He didn't for
his first postconviction motion. I'm not asking as a
matter of right, but did he, in fact, have counsel
during this stage, this --
MR. MAKAR: Not -- not that I am aware of,
Justice Ginsburg. I mean, he did file a pro se State
postconviction challenging the -- the failure to have a
semen sample taken and the failure to examine one of his
-- his codefendants at trial. And that was a pro se
pleading. I have looked at it, and it -- it is
actually not bad. It was one, I guess, that was
probably done while -- along the -- in the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What age was he at that
point?
MR. MAKAR: He would have been
approximately, I think, 16, somewhere late teens,
I believe; it was a few years after, '89, or '90. It
was about 4, so he was about 17, I think, or
thereabouts.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you want to comment on
the district court, the -- the -- what -- what the --
your opponent says is that this Florida rule is a rule
as the district court applied it that said the
following: You have to file a challenge within 2
years. There are three exceptions to that. One and
three clearly don't apply. And as to two, Roper isn't
clear enough to make it apply.
Their response to that is there is no
Florida law that says you have to challenge a sentence
within 2 years. That Florida courts -- and then they
have, like, 14 cases listed here. And the Supreme Court
of Florida has said that when you are trying to correct
an illegal sentence, that whole part of the statute does
not apply. Okay? What's the response to that?
MR. MAKAR: That's not what those cases
stand for.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So what I should do
is go look up and see what those cases hold, and -- and
you said to the lower court or the court of appeals --
you said their argument is wrong. The 2-year statute
does apply. The 2-year statute does apply. There are
three exceptions, and you do not fit within section (B)
because. Where did you say that?
MR. MAKAR: I don't believe there was any
State brief filed in opposition to his appeal. That the
first district PCA --
JUSTICE BREYER: So the State didn't even
deny what he was saying?
MR. MAKAR: Didn't deny -- I’m sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: So the State -- he says
that whole section doesn't apply. There is no 2-year
statute. And you say Florida did not reply in a brief
to that argument?
MR. MAKAR: No, because I think it was so
obvious from the trial judge's order that he was relying
on the procedural bar of 3.850(b)(2). The trial court
had no -- the trial court couldn't do anything. The
trial court couldn't say --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MR. MAKAR: -- I think -- I think Roper
applies. And he said it just doesn't apply here. It's
barred. I -- I can't do anything more with it. So --
and I think the fact that he took a quick look at the
Roper decision and made that determination under Florida
law -- this Court said in footnote 10 in Harris v. Reed
that the trial court shouldn't be fearful of looking at
the Federal issue for -- for fear of having it come up
as being a -- establishing Federal jurisdiction. And
then in Tyler v. Cain, this Court had a retroactivity
issue presented to it as well.
JUSTICE BREYER: In any case, there is a
circularity point here, I guess. If we were to say in
our opinion -- if we were to say that Roper does hold
that there is a fundamental constitutional right which
we extend to this case and it applies here, and it
applies to the -- retroactively to those whose --
certainly those who are raising the issue, then we would
send it back and Florida now would not bar it under this
statute, because it would fall squarely within the
exception. Is that right?
MR. MAKAR: That's exactly right, Justice
Breyer. If in the Graham case you have a categorical
rule that says 18 and under, then prospectively that
line is established, and Sullivan could file a
postconviction motion under 3.850(b)(2) and pursue it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You did say in -- in your
brief that if Graham should prevail in his petition,
that Sullivan would get the benefit of that decision.
How, if we -- if we say -- just say there was an
adequate independent State ground and we have no
authority to do anything more, how would -- how would
Sullivan get the benefit of the --
MR. MAKAR: Well, he could file -- the next
day he could file a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: A new -- a new
postconviction motion?
MR. MAKAR: Absolutely. Absolutely. And
that the Florida court would have jurisdiction under the
exception to consider, given that it would
establish a fundamental constitutional right that’s
retroactive in application to his situation. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Would -- would
the standards applied in that situation be any different
than the standards that would apply if you prevailed on
his reading of the procedural bar?
MR. MAKAR: I'm –-
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm just trying to
see if this jurisdictional issue makes any difference.
If you are saying -- it sounds to me like you're saying,
well, if he wins, he wins, and, if he loses, he loses.
I don't think he cares whether it's under the procedural
bar or some other basis.
MR. MAKAR: Well, I think that -- but his
winning would be hinging upon Graham, rather than
winning in this forum today, on a new claim, that the
trial court had no jurisdiction to consider in the first
instance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If I understand you
correctly, you are saying he could lose here on the
procedural bar, and then win later in the State courts.
Is that right?
MR. MAKAR: But that's premised upon this
Court establishing a new fundamental right in Graham, a
categorical rule, that would apply to him in his case,
retroactive application. That's -- that's possible, and
we -- we acknowledge that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What did the Florida --
what do the Florida courts do with that series of cases
in your footnote, in the yellow brief, where it did
apply Apprendi after? Did it rule that it wasn't
retroactive? What did it do in those cases --
MR. MAKAR: Well, my --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- to consider the
Apprendi challenges?
MR. MAKAR: My recollection is
that the retroactivity was there, so that they would
apply it, but, frankly, I cannot, as I stand here, I
can't tell you all -- what all the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If you are wrong and
they did do exactly what your adversary said and
considered the issue of the legality of the sentence
under Apprendi, does that vitiate your argument here?
Is your -- does that make your adversary's argument
correct?
MR. MAKAR: Well, I don't think that a court
here or there that may deviate from the rule would
establish the precedent. I think they -- they’ve cited,
in their -- in their brief, the -- the decision of
Carter v. State of the Florida Supreme Court, which I
think has a pretty good recitation of how the rule
operates.
And it may be that there’s a Fifth District
case they rely upon, where the -- the language is a
little squishy, but those are -- those are anomalies,
and they are not the rule in Florida.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, if it's not
consistently applied, then it's not an adequate ground.
If so -- if the citations are correct and Florida
sometimes treats it as rigid and sometimes doesn't,
then it's not a consistently applied -- not an adequate
State ground.
MR. MAKAR: Well, there is no question that
.850(b)(2) is consistently and regularly applied.
These other rules, I would submit, are consistently and
regularly applied.
The one -- the two Fifth District opinions
they cite -- I have looked at them and the language
there, it's ambiguous, it's not exactly clear, but I
don't think that the lower court, the lower appellate
court's rulings would override the Florida Supreme Court
who controls the rules. They set the rules in Florida.
They have rulemaking authority. That, somehow, that
would throw out the adequacy of the -- of the State law
ground.
In conclusion, if there are no other
questions, we ask that the Court dismiss this on
jurisdictional grounds. Alternatively, we ask, as to
this case and the others, that -- that the questions
presented should be addressed and answered, which is
whether there’s a categorical ban and -- that they do
not -- a categorical ban does not exist. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Makar.
Mr. Stevenson, you have 4 minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN STEVENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. STEVENSON: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice.
Justice Sotomayor, the case is
Hughes v. State. It is cited. It is an application of
Apprendi, where the defendant does not prevail but,
nonetheless, is entitled to that review. And I don't
think there’s any question in this case that, if a
death row prisoner who was a juvenile was still on
death row in Florida, had not sought the relief and
obtained the relief that he is entitled to under Roper,
he would be barred from such relief because he did not
file within the 2 years.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You are missing the
point. What Florida says and what your adversary is
saying is -- you’re absolutely right, if you win under
Graham, you could go under 39.a -- if you win under
Graham, and Graham makes its rule retroactive, that fits
right into (b)(2) directly, and so those cases you have
no problems with.
What he is saying, however, is you can't go
in to Florida and ask them to announce the
constitutional rule under a case where it hasn't been
already held.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I -- and that's what I
disagree with, Your Honor. That's exactly what the
court is doing in Hughes. That's exactly what the court
is doing in these other cases. Otherwise, a lot of this
Court's rules don't have clear and direct categorical
lines.
You have to apply them. You have to apply
them in context. And it would mean that people whose
sentences are now illegal under the law, only when
applied, would be so banned, and that's what I don't
think the Florida legislature or the Florida courts are
saying.
JUSTICE ALITO: And you address this in
footnote 35 of your reply brief, and it would have been
a little bit helpful if you had raised it initially, so
that the State would have had an opportunity to reply,
but you introduced the citation there with “for
example,” and then you cite some cases. Are there
others?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes -- yes, there are,
Justice Alito, and -- and, again, I just want to
contextualize why this is the way it is. At no point
did the State make any of these arguments in the lower
courts. They did make it at trial. They did not make
it on appeal. This issue was raised for the first time
in this Court.
JUSTICE ALITO: There are -- there are other
cases in which the lower Florida courts have used --
have said that this particular subsection is appropriate
for raising a constitutional challenge.
MR. STEVENSON: That's correct. There are
other situations where they have made Eighth Amendment
claims and analyses, and sometimes the petitioners
lose; sometimes they prevail. They have done it in
other contexts. And so I do think that it’s quite
clear, from the way Florida applies these cases, that
this Court has jurisdiction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that in your
cert petition, which I don't have with me, you raised
the question of the adequate State ground in the second
question.
MR. STEVENSON: We did -- well, what we
raised was that, without this Court intervening, that
people like Joe Sullivan would likely never get review.
Our point was that, without an intervention from this
Court, people like Joe Sullivan -- there hasn't been a
sentence like --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there was a question
that you raised, and then your opening brief doesn't
discuss it at all. Your reply brief responds to the
State and then brings up something in a footnote that
the State doesn't have a chance to answer.
That doesn't seem, to me, a very sound way
to approach a question that you, yourself, raised.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. Justice Ginsburg, we
read that second question to be should this Court take
an interest in a case? Should this Court be barred?
Should this Court intervene where a child of 13 has been
sentenced to life without parole, and there may never be
another example? He can't go to Federal habeas corpus
because he is time-barred from that. So this Court's
opportunity to review the case is critical. That's what
we thought we were raising in the second question.
Frankly, we thought that the jurisdictional
question was a question that was pretty clear -- plain
on its face because the trial court's disposition of the
this case was completely dependent on its interpretation
of Roper, and I think that's what gives this Court
jurisdiction.
You have said, repeatedly, in
Ohio v. Reiner, in Ake v. Oklahoma, when the analysis of
a State procedural rule does depend on an assessment of
the Federal law, you have jurisdiction.
And I think that jurisdiction should be
exercised in this case to declare that this sentence is
unconstitutional. It is unquestionably unusual to
have -- no child of 13 in this country sentenced to life
without parole in 44 States makes it clear that this is
an unusual sentence.
But we also contend to say to any child of
that you are only fit to die in prison is cruel. It
can't be reconciled with what we know about the nature
of children, about the character of children. It cannot
be reconciled with our standards of decency, and we
believe that the Constitution obligates us to enforce
those standards and reverse this judgment.
My time is up. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Stevenson, Mr. Makar.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the case in the
