FREE ENTERPRISE FUND AND :
BECKSTEAD AND WATTS, LLP, :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 08-861
PUBLIC COMPANY :
ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT :
BOARD. :
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, December 7, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MICHAEL A. CARVIN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Petitioners.
GEN. ELENA KAGAN, ESQ., Solicitor General, Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of the
Respondent United States.
JEFFREY A. LAMKEN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Respondents Public Company Accounting Board, et
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MICHAEL A. CARVIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
GEN. ELENA KAGAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent United States 31
JEFFREY A. LAMKEN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board, et al. 54
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL A. CARVIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 66
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 08-861, Free
Enterprise Fund and Beckstead and Watts v. The Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board.
Mr. Carvin.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL A. CARVIN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. CARVIN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The board is unique among Federal regulatory
agencies in that the President can neither appoint nor
remove its members, nor does he have any ability to
designate the chairman or review the work product, so he
is stripped of the traditional means of control that he
has over the traditional independent agencies.
On the other side of the balancing test,
Congress provided no reason for stripping him of these
traditional means of control.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why do you call it an
independent regulatory agency? I mean, Congress wanted
it to be independent of the profession. That much is
clear. It didn't want it to be independent of the SEC,
so why are you characterizing it as an independent
regulatory agency?
MR. CARVIN: Justice Ginsburg, by making it
public, it made it free of the accounting profession.
So then the next question is: Why didn't they have the
same relationship between this agency and the President
that the FCC and SEC have?
And, in those instances, the President can
appoint and remove the members. Now, why didn't they do
that here?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the --
MR. CARVIN: There was --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The SEC doesn't have
another overseer. I mean, the SEC is set up like the
FCC, the other independent regulatory commissions, but
this is a board that has a relationship with the SEC,
where it can't do anything that doesn't have the SEC's
approval.
MR. CARVIN: There is a buffer between the
President and the board, and that's called the SEC, and
the board can do many things without the approval of the
SEC. Most notably, it can conduct inspections and
investigations. There is no statutory --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It can't even issue a
subpoena without the SEC's approval.
MR. CARVIN: It actually can collect
information from anyone associated with the people they
regulate, the auditing committees. If it seeks to get a
subpoena from someone outside -- if it seeks information
from someone outside --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So the SEC really could
stop anything?
MR. CARVIN: It cannot, for example, stop
what happened to the Petitioners here. There is no
mechanism in the statute, in any way, shape, or form,
for the SEC to stop an inspection or investigation as it
is ongoing.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What happened to the
Petitioners here? I think, if you were challenging what
happened to the Petitioners here, certainly it would be
a question of how you would have to do that. You
ordinarily go through the internal proceedings. But
here you are bringing a facial challenge and you say,
never mind any particular proceedings; the whole thing
is no good.
MR. CARVIN: No, no, and I'm dealing with
the inspections issue at large, not for -- for
Petitioner or for anyone else, there is no mechanism --
no existing mechanism for the SEC, in any way, to say
stop the investigation. Equally important --
JUSTICE SCALIA: When you say "no existing
mechanism," could the SEC adopt a rule that would give
the SEC authority to -- to stop it?
MR. CARVIN: No, it couldn't, and -- but I
think the main point is, Your Honor, it hasn't, and
since it hasn't, it doesn't have that authority now.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I’m --
MR. CARVIN: But I can tell you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure that's the
main point. I think the main -- the main point is
whether the FCC could stop it -- the SEC could stop it
if it wanted to.
MR. CARVIN: Yes, and right now it cannot,
and that's because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Never mind "Right now, it
cannot." If it issued a rule that said you need our
approval --
MR. CARVIN: Yes, it cannot issue such a
rule.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It cannot issue such a
rule?
MR. CARVIN: Absolutely not.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why not?
MR. CARVIN: Well, the provision they point
to, 7217(d)(1), says it can relieve the board of
responsibility, but there is nothing in the statute that
gives the SEC to conduct the board's statutory duties.
For example, it couldn't say, we will now
collect the fees that are going to the board, we will
now conduct the registration that’s going to the board.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, why -- why isn't this
simply relieving the board of responsibility, saying,
you no longer have responsibility for -- for
investigation and inspection in these areas?
MR. CARVIN: But that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They could do that,
couldn't they?
MR. CARVIN: No, it can't. But even if it
could, my major point is it can’t --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, let's talk about
whether it can't or not. Why can't it?
MR. CARVIN: All right. If you turn to 39
and 40a of the board's appendix, at the back of the red
brief, the board's brief, it walks you through the
statutes we have been talking about.
And at the bottom of 39a, that's 7217(d)(1),
and that’s where it says it can relieve the board of
responsibilities. And I have two points on that.
One is there’s nothing in here that gives
the SEC the power to assume the responsibility. It
simply says the board need not comply with that
obligation.
My second point is: This doesn't stop the
board from doing something. If I relieve my associate
of the responsibility to give me a brief tomorrow, I
haven't told him he can't do it. If I want to impose a
limitation on him, if I want to say stop, I have to
enclose a limitation. And if you will turn to the very
next page --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't -- don't you think
that's what it means, though, realistically?
MR. CARVIN: You know, Your Honor, I think
that would be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: When you no longer have
responsibility to perform a government -- governmental
act, you no longer have authority to perform it.
MR. CARVIN: If you viewed it in isolation,
that would be an arguable principle. But if you turn to
the next page, 40a, you see a very specific provision in
the statute that talks about how they can impose
limitations on the board.
And this is when they want to censure --
impose limitations upon the activities, functions, and
operations of the board. And what do they need to do?
They have to have a hearing that the board has violated
or is unable to comply with any provision of this Act or
without reasonable justification or excuse.
So Congress has established very serious
barriers to the SEC even limiting the board's
responsibilities.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, they don't have to --
they can't issue a subpoena without the board's
approval, I take it -- the commission's approval.
MR. CARVIN: They have very serious
information-gathering powers totally distinct from the
board.
JUSTICE BREYER: What?
MR. CARVIN: Any -- any person who is a
registered association or anyone who is associated with
them has to provide documents, witness testimony, wholly
apart from a subpoena, so anyone who is within the
regulatory --
JUSTICE BREYER: Or what?
MR. CARVIN: Or they will suffer the
sanctions that are listed in the statute.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the commission can't
change the sanctions?
MR. CARVIN: Well, not -- obviously the
commission can review the sanctions. But the --
JUSTICE BREYER: And it can't -- it can't
pass a rule saying, we don't want you to do that?
MR. CARVIN: Well, sanctions of course are
done with order. They get to review the sanctions
after the board has done it. I'm talk about the
prosecutorial, investigative techniques --
JUSTICE BREYER: So as far as -- if the
company was ever certain it was right and that the
Accounting Board was out of control, completely wrong,
the company would just say: I'm not complying --
MR. CARVIN: Well -- but --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- fine, do what you want.
MR. CARVIN: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: And then at that moment,
the group that would decide whether they were right or
the board was right would be the commission; is that
right?
MR. CARVIN: Well, I don't think there ever
would be a dispute about whether or not they would have
access to their documents and their testimony, because
it's written right in the statute --
JUSTICE BREYER: It says you don’t -- you
can get it even without a subpoena?
MR. CARVIN: Yes, absolutely.
JUSTICE BREYER: Where does it say that? Or
I'll take your word for it. I’ll look it up.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What happens --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't want to delay you,
so forget it. I’ll look it up later.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What happens to the
information that the board obtains? Can the board go
public with that --
MR. CARVIN: I think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- or is it all
confidential?
MR. CARVIN: I think there are
certain confidentiality restrictions as part of their
investigative and inspection thing. It's -- it’s the
normal kind of inspection, where you go through the
investigation and they would review the various
documents.
And my -- but my basic point is that that is
a very serious burden on American citizens. That is
something that is totally outside the SEC's control.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The -- the burden of time
of compliance?
MR. CARVIN: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The burden is because it's
difficult and expensive to comply?
MR. CARVIN: That would be one. Number two
-- and I think probably more important -- since the SEC
doesn't review it, this board was created to make sure
that there was no more Enrons. So let's look at it from
the other perspective. Let's say the board was
negligent or sloppy in ferreting out the kind of
auditing standards and abuses that the statute was
enacted to do. The SEC would have no way of knowing
that, no way of --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No -- but I'm -- I’m
talking about the harm to your client and to the --
those similarly situated.
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There’s the cost of
compliance. What other harms or dangers or risks are
inherent in the power of the board unmonitored,
unchecked by the SEC, to investigate?
MR. CARVIN: You’re right, Your Honor. The
burden here is the burden that Mr. Olson suffered in
Morrison v. Olson. He was never indicted. There was
never any sanctions subject to review. But he was
subject to a burdensome investigation and that is the
burden that affects American citizens that is beyond the
review of the SEC.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I've got one thing on
my list. I'm looking to what they control, can't
control -- the commission. And so far I've written that
in your view the commission can investigate people
without subpoenas, and the commission can do nothing
about it, okay? That's one.
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, what's two?
MR. CARVIN: Well, I think that that is the
main point.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So we only have one
on our list.
MR. CARVIN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. CARVIN: But I do want to emphasize that
–-
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not saying it's good or
bad. I just want to be sure I have a complete list.
MR. CARVIN: If I might elaborate slightly,
Justice Breyer, I think it's important to understand
that they have the ability to inspect foreign auditing
firms, and the Cato Institute filed a brief that
described the adverse reaction of the 27 countries where
they are currently exercising this inspection power
abroad. That is totally beyond the control of the
President, obviously, as well as the SEC, to say how
these -- how these inspections and investigations are
going. The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They can't pass rules?
MR. CARVIN: Again, they can pass rules, but
the Attorney General --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What -- what is the
difference between what you are talking about and an
employer who says: Look, I can't stick my nose in every
bit of business that goes on in my office because that's
impossible; otherwise I’d be doing all the work and
I just humanly can't. I'm delegating to you the
responsibility to do X, Y, and Z according to these
rules of conduct.
MR. CARVIN: There are three fundamental
differences, Justice --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What's the difference
between that and this scheme?
MR. CARVIN: In your hypothetical, the
principal has exactly the same powers as the
subordinate. Here the subordinate has statutory duties
and responsibilities totally distinct from what the SEC
can do. In addition to inspections, they can --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well -- let's break down
each part of your argument, please. You are suggesting
that Congress doesn't have the power to determine that a
particular principal or agent of the government doesn't
have certain responsibilities?
MR. CARVIN: No, obviously they do. And
what I’m -- you were asking for -- I'm now trying to
describe the relationship between the SEC and the board,
and the one difference between the normal employer-
employee relationship is that the board has statutory
authority wholly distinct from the principal.
Number two, if that subordinate didn't do
things the way the principal wanted in the employment
situation, the principal could fire the subordinate.
When can the SEC fire the board in these circumstances?
Only when they have committed gross abuses and after
notice and opportunity for a hearing.
JUSTICE BREYER: And if you have a statute
that says each Department -- Commerce, Justice -- the
Attorney General of the United States or the secretary
shall appoint an inspector general who will in fact
inspect and find ethics violations and that office -- he
cannot be removed from that office without cause. In
your view, that's all -- and it would be
unconstitutional.
MR. CARVIN: No, no. In the Interior
Department, those are of course the President's alter
egos --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Well, why? What's
the difference?
MR. CARVIN: Well, two differences. One is
the -- the Secretary of the Interior is the President's
alter ego, and so, therefore, the President --
JUSTICE BREYER: So you are saying that
the -- the chairman of the SEC does not under the
Constitution have the authority or the SEC does not have
the authority to appoint individuals who cannot be
removed without cause?
MR. CARVIN: Well, I think there is two
points.
JUSTICE BREYER: Or -- or you might
be saying they do not have the authority to appoint
inferior officers of the United States. I don't know
why they wouldn't have that authority if the Secretary
of the Interior has that authority.
MR. CARVIN: Well, because Freytag made it
clear that there’s a difference between an independent
agency, like the Tax Court.
JUSTICE BREYER: What's an independent
agency?
MR. CARVIN: Well, in that case was an
independent agency in the Executive Branch --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what is an
independent agency?
MR. CARVIN: One that is not subject to the
President's plenary control.
JUSTICE BREYER: But why isn't -- so why
aren't they subject to the President's plenary control?
MR. CARVIN: Because of Humphrey's Executor
and because of the removal provisions, which pose very
serious removal restrictions on the President's ability
to control the SEC.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you just --
JUSTICE BREYER: The SEC. What -- what
restrictions? Because, interestingly enough, my law
clerks have been unable to find any statutory provision
that says that the President of the United States can
remove an SEC commissioner only for cause.
MR. CARVIN: It is silent, and -- but it
still –-
JUSTICE BREYER: It's silent.
MR. CARVIN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYRE: Then, in other words --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think the
government will think it has achieved a great victory if
it comes out of this with the proposition that the SEC
is not an independent regulatory agency. And I don't
think the government is arguing that position.
MR. CARVIN: They have not taken that
position.
JUSTICE BREYER: But that was not what I
have asked.
MR. CARVIN: I know. They haven't taken --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know. I'm not interested
in that. I'm interested in an answer to my question.
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the answer to my -- my
question was --
MR. CARVIN: There is --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is there anything in the
law, as far as you know, any statute, that says that the
President cannot remove a commissioner or the chairman
of the SEC but for cause?
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: The answer is there is
something?
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Where -- where is that?
Would you refer me to that citation? Because we
couldn't find it.
MR. CARVIN: It’s -- they’re given 5-year
terms, so obviously if you have a term of 5 years, there
is no removal provision. Under this Court's precedent
in Wiener, if there is a term, you need to look at the
function of the agency. There was no removal
restriction in Wiener.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that both
sides --
MR. CARVIN: The Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that both sides
agreed that there is no statute, everybody agrees to
that. But I thought that the government, just as your
side, agreed that the President could dismiss an SEC
commissioner for cause.
MR. CARVIN: Yes, with -- pursuant -- yes,
for cause, but --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Even though there's no
statute that says anything either way.
MR. CARVIN: And the reason we --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: For cause would be short
of the 5-year term.
MR. CARVIN: The reason we infer "for cause"
is because it was modeled after the FTC, and under
Wiener, you need to look at function of the agency to
determine the President's removal authority, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: "For cause" doesn't mean
for failure to obey the President's instructions, does
MR. CARVIN: Not under Humphrey's Executor,
which made it quite clear that the President had no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's why it's called an
independent regulatory agency, because it's not subject
to presidential control.
MR. CARVIN: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't agree with that, but
I mean, you do agree. I thought an independent agency
is a function of a number of different things: where
it is on the chart, what people's customs have grown up
to, expectations about it --
MR. CARVIN: And I will --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- what the President might
expect he can do or not. But all those things are not
what I'd call hard law.
MR. CARVIN: It may not be hard law, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well but if it's not hard
law, then I wonder.
MR. CARVIN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, that's why I asked
the question. It's not what I have the answer to.
MR. CARVIN: Well, if Your Honor wants to
infer at-will removal of the SEC, that would be
effectively overruling Humphrey's Executor. And if you
want to make a --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? In Humphrey's
Executor there was no provision that said --
MR. CARVIN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: There was a provision,
which we know, that said the President cannot remove an
FTC commissioner but for cause. Have I been wrong on
that all those years?
MR. CARVIN: No, you've been entirely right,
but Humphrey's Executor didn’t focus on the removal
provision. It said that that removal provision was
constitutional, and the reason it was constitutional was
because you could make executive actors separate from
the chief executive. The SEC, like the FCC, has always
been lumped in with the FTC in terms of that. If this
Court wants to say that -- that those people are subject
to the President's plenary --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I’d love to say that.
That would be wonderful.
MR. CARVIN: I'm not going to stand in your
way, because that would obviously --
(Laughter.)
MR. CARVIN: That would obviously render the
board unconstitutional. I think the key point here –-
JUSTICE BREYER: It would render the board
unconstitutional?
MR. CARVIN: Yes, because --
JUSTICE BREYER: If an executive appointee
who is a superior officer of the United States appoints
an inferior officer, which inferior officer can be
removed only for cause -- I mean, my goodness -- I can
-- there are lots of shapes and sizes. I can't imagine
what would be unconstitutional about that. What?
MR. CARVIN: Well, Your Honor, if the
President called up the head of the SEC and said, I want
you to seek sanctions against the chairman of Exxon,
under the traditional understanding of Humphrey's
Executor the SEC commissioner would not be beholden to
follow the President's direction.
The same would be true if he called him up
and said, fire the chairman of the PCAOB. And if that
is so, then the President has no ability to remove
somebody exercising a very important executive function,
and unless we are going to rewrite what has been
generally understood as the independence of -- of
independent agencies, then there is a fundamental
difference between the President's ability to fire an
inferior officer at the Justice Department and fire an
inferior officer at the independent agency.
JUSTICE SCALIA: This is not an argument you
have made anyway. Can we go on to the arguments that
you’ve made?
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Thank you.
MR. CARVIN: And in terms of that basic
argument, he cannot control, for example, the
appointment of the board members, which he could with
respect to officers over whom he exercises. He can't
tell the SEC whom to appoint to the board.
And in terms of the question that Justice
Scalia asked earlier, I don't think it's a statutory
principle that you pretend --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is it unconstitutional
for the President not to be able to appoint an inferior
officer?
MR. CARVIN: Not an inferior officer. But,
of course, these are principal officers for three
reasons --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Assuming we don't accept
your characterization of them?
MR. CARVIN: Then I have two other
arguments, Your Honor.
One is: The SEC cannot be a department
under Freytag, because it is an independent agency
indistinguishable from the Tax Court. And -- and what
the Freytag majority opinion said was, if you are unlike
a cabinet department because you are not subject to
political oversight, then --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I hope your case doesn't
rest on Freytag.
(Laughter.)
MR. CARVIN: So do I. I want to take an
opportunity to focus on the real point of Freytag, which
was made very eloquently in the Freytag dissenting
opinion, which was --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And the brief.
(Laughter.)
MR. CARVIN: The Appointments Clause is
designed to achieve accountability, and even when you
are not talking about presidential advice and consent
positions, the way we achieve that accountability is by
vesting it, in the words of the dissenting opinion, in
“the President's direct lieutenant.” And that's very
important because it makes the President accountable for
those positions, and it also makes them able to resist
congressional encroachments.
And this scheme, besides, embodies precisely
the evil that was condemned by every member of the Court
in Freytag and in Edmond, which is it creates an
unaccountable system where a multi-member commission
beyond the President's political oversight and control
is making appointments. Not one elected representative,
in the President or the Senate, has any influence who --
over the people appointed to this board --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Does that mean, Mr.
Carvin, that the SEC cannot appoint heads of -- heads of
its divisions? I assume that they would fit within the
characterization "inferior officers."
MR. CARVIN: That would be true, and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So -- but if the SEC
can't appoint --
MR. CARVIN: No, they can't appoint inferior
officers. Now, the board with the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, so what are -- so
what are the heads of the various divisions of the SEC?
MR. CARVIN: The board and the SEC say they
are not inferior officers, because they do not under
Freytag have any specific statutory authorization. They
are not, in the words of the Appointments Clause,
"established by law." So if they are --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Aren't there -- aren't
there people within the independent regulatory
commissions that have jobs comparable to people who are
in the departments --
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- that the head of the
department can appoint? So who can appoint such people
in the FEC, the FTC, the FCC, and so on?
MR. CARVIN: There are two differences. One
is, for those lower-level people within the executive
departments, they have specific statutory creation of
those offices, the Solicitor General on down. There is
no statute saying that anybody below the commission
level at the SEC has any job.
That's totally up to the discretion of the
commission. They can vest them with whatever authority
they want or not.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but the question is
-- I assume it’s the follow-up question that Justice
Ginsburg is interested in -- under your view of the
case, why is that lawful?
MR. CARVIN: No, it would only be unlawful
if they were inferior officers. And if the board is
correct that they are not inferior officers, there would
be no constitutional problem at all with the SEC, for
example, appointing a general counsel. I should --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand that.
It's okay for them to appoint principal officers, but
not inferior officers?
MR. CARVIN: No, no. Employees, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh. Oh, I see.
MR. CARVIN: And the argument for them being
employees that the board has advanced is that they're --
that they're --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I wish you had said that.
You really had me scared there.
(Laughter.)
MR. CARVIN: If I am scaring you, I'm not
doing my job.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You’re saying they are not
inferior officers and also not principal officers, but
merely employees?
MR. CARVIN: Merely employees.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And who appoints -- who
appoints the inferior officers at the -- at the SEC?
MR. CARVIN: Well, that's my other point.
The chairman does, and so if you accept their view of
who the head of the department is, which is the
commission --
JUSTICE SCALIA: All those appointments are
presumably invalid.
MR. CARVIN: -- all those appointments are
unconstitutional, so under their theory --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That would be a shame.
MR. CARVIN: -- since the chairman didn't
appoint any -- the general counsel, the heads of any of
the departments, all of them are unconstitutional.
JUSTICE BREYER: Does the chairman serve as
a chairman for a fixed term?
MR. CARVIN: Not as chairman.
JUSTICE BREYER: No? Okay.
MR. CARVIN: He just has --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, therefore, what you had
said before would not apply to the chairman, that is
to say: The President can remove him at will --
MR. CARVIN: Not --
JUSTICE BREYER: There is no statute to the
contrary; he does not serve for a fixed term, and so you
cannot imply that. Since the chairman cannot --
MR. CARVIN: But this statute doesn't --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- can remove him at will
-- you do not have what you would call the gearing into
play, this somewhat mechanical jurisprudence, of what's
an independent agency.
MR. CARVIN: No, he can remove the chairman
at his pleasure, which -- but not a commissioner. And
that's our whole point. That's a very key point.
JUSTICE BREYER: So you are saying that the
chairman, not the commissioner, is the person who does
the appointing?
MR. CARVIN: We argue that. They argue the
opposite. Under the statute --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. CARVIN: -- the commissioner does the
appointing. And that's our key point. Because the
President exercises such extraordinary control over the
chairman and therefore is able to control the SEC staff,
Congress, in the statute, took away that traditional
enforcement mechanism.
All of the SEC staff you were referring to
earlier, Justice -- Justice Ginsburg, are the
chairman's alter egos. And since they are the
chairman's alter egos, they are completely
constitutional. And Congress, again, took away the
chairman's powers, which was a way of limiting the
President's ability to control the board.
And I think they -- but our basic
observation --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So this whole thing would
be constitutional if, instead of giving the appointing
power to the commission, they had given it to the
chairman?
MR. CARVIN: No, because we believe they are
principal officers for three reasons under Edmond: They
run their own shop; the commission has no control over
the officers on the board, since it can only remove them
in these extraordinarily narrow situations; and as we
have discussed at length before, it can only review part
of its work product, whereas the appeals court judges in
Edmond, all of their work product was subject to review.
And I think the removal provision is
particularly important here. The board can pursue
policies that the SEC absolutely abhors and thinks are
completely counterproductive, but under this
extraordinarily narrow removal provision --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Isn't that a highly
unlikely scenario? I mean, this thing won't work unless
these two are working in harmony.
MR. CARVIN: Well, it would work perfectly
if the board was an independent, autonomous entity that
was not subject to the plenary control of the SEC, and
that's exactly how the Senate report described it.
No, the New York Stock Exchange works
perfectly fine even though the SEC has oversight
responsibility over the New York Stock Exchange directly
analogous to the oversight responsibility it has over
the board. And so, no, it would work perfectly fine if
you followed the congressional scheme, which was an
agency with its own autonomy and power.
And since it is an agency that has its own
revenue sources, its own statutory authority, it has to
be an agency composed of principal officers. Elsewise
very powerful agencies, including the CIA, for example,
would be considered inferior officers simply because in
an organizational chain they report to some others.
And I would argue, to get back to my
original point, Justice Scalia, that that would
absolutely confound the accountability that the Framers
insisted upon, that either the President and the Senate
or a direct lieutenant of the President make the kinds
of appointments of inferior officers and that the
important officers go through the advice and consent
process.
If there are no further questions, I’d
like to reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Carvin.
MR. CARVIN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: General Kagan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GEN. ELENA KAGAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT UNITED STATES
GENERAL KAGAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Resolution of this case follows from a
simple syllogism, and it is this: The President has
constitutionally sufficient control over the SEC; the
SEC has comprehensive control over the Accounting Board;
therefore, the President has constitutionally sufficient
control over the Accounting Board.
Now, Mr. Carvin has suggested that there –-
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. The President
has adequate control over the SEC only because he can
dismiss the chairman of the SEC. But the activity here
is not governed by the chairman of the SEC. There’s no
role whatever for the chairmanship. The -- the
governance of this board is by the members of the SEC.
So that's quite different from saying -- you know, I --
I think your syllogism breaks down at that point.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I -- I think not,
Justice Scalia. Humphrey's Executor said 70 years ago
the President does have constitutionally sufficient
control over the SEC generally, including the chair.
Now, the SEC has constitutionally -- has
comprehensive control over the Accounting Board. There
is nothing that the Accounting --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The chairman, which is --
which is -- which is the -- what should I say -- the
knife that the President has into the SEC, has no role
in the control of this board.
GENERAL KAGAN: The -- the chair has the
same role that he has with respect to pretty much
everything else that the SEC does. The SEC --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. I thought the
employees were appointed by the chairman, not by the
commission.
GENERAL KAGAN: Subject to the control --
subject to the approval of the commission. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you think -- you
think a -- a veto power is the same as an original --
original power?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, in fact, the
commission could do the exact same thing in this case.
The commission could delegate its control over the
Accounting Board to the chair, subject to the control of
the commission again.
So I think that there is no difference with
respect to the SEC's supervision of the board than there
is with respect to the SEC's supervision of any of its
other functions or any --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, let's say --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- of its staff.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Let's say that
the -- let's say that the board issues -- demands
documents from a particular company. Can the SEC direct
them not to do that?
GENERAL KAGAN: The SEC has full control
over the investigative and inspection function of the
board. This was what Mr. Carvin -- was the one thing
that Mr. Carvin said the SEC lacked, but in fact it does
not, because the board's investigations and the board's
inspections are all done according to rule. And the SEC
in a number of ways can change those rules.
The SEC can reach out and abrogate any board
rules, including rules relating to inspections and
investigations. The SEC also has power to promulgate
its own rules, if --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me, but, you know,
Congress -- Congress can change the statutory authority
of any agency just like that. Does that mean that
Congress is controlling the agency?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, it's certainly part of
Congress's control mechanisms. And this, too, is part
of the SEC's control mechanisms with relation to the
Accounting Board. The Accounting Board can take no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure that -- that
the ability to take away responsibility for an agency --
from an agency is the same as controlling what
authority that agency does exercise. It seems to me
they are two different things.
GENERAL KAGAN: And I think that the SEC has
both. It certainly has the authority to take away
responsibility from the Accounting Board. The
rescission provision in 7217 makes that completely
clear. But it also has authority to set the ground
rules by which the Accounting Board does anything and
everything. It can say tomorrow -- it can promulgate a
rule and say all inspections have to be approved by us,
all investigations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Will that be
consistent -- do you think that will be consistent with
the intent of Congress in establishing the PCAOB?
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I do think it would be
consistent with the intent of Congress,
Mr. Chief Justice, because the intent of Congress was to
place the Accounting Board under the extremely close and
comprehensive supervision of the SEC. The references to
independence that one finds throughout the legislative
record here are almost all references to independence
from the accounting industry, not from the SEC.
Quite to the contrary, Congress made it
clear --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why did -- just out
of -- I guess maybe it's not important, but why did
the -- why did Congress set up a separate board if it's
going to be entirely controlled by the SEC?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think it is important,
Mr. Chief Justice, and I think that there were a few
reasons. First, Congress wanted to make sure that this
board did not compete with the SEC's own resources.
Members of Congress thought that the SEC had been
resource-strapped and wanted to create something with
its own separate funding stream, which it was able to do
by declaring this a kind of quasi-governmental agency.
Second, it wanted to get the board outside
of the normal civil service laws, because it wanted to
attract people that it thought it could not attract on
normal civil service salaries.
And third, I think history and tradition
have a great role in -- in the question that you are
answering, because what -- the history and tradition of
SEC regulation of the financial industry in general
is -- is -- in -- in some part through the SROs, the
self-regulatory organizations. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Before we get --
before you get too far into that, of those first two
things, is there any reason Congress couldn't have
achieved those same objectives by establishing the PCAOB
as a division within the SEC?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I -- I think so. I
think it would have been harder to establish a separate
funding stream to take the Accounting Board out of the
civil service when the rest of the SEC is subject to
normal congressional appropriations and is subject to
basic civil service laws regarding salary and so forth.
So, this was a way to -- to have both.
And it was also, I think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that's -- that's the
history and tradition of this board, which isn't very
long. But the history and tradition of boards like this
is that their investigative powers are independent.
Now, you say that there could be a rule, but that just
isn't the way it works. And if you refer us to history
and tradition for other purposes, we ought to look at
the operational principles, operational assumptions of
this board.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I -- I -- I do think,
Justice Kennedy, that -- that the way this board is set
up, the statutory scheme and structure, makes it clear
that the SEC has comprehensive authority not just over
the rulemaking, but over the investigative and
inspection activities of the board; that no -- no
sanction arising from an investigation can be issued
except if the board agrees; that no inspection report
can be issued except if the -- excuse me -- except if
the SEC agrees.
And further, as I said before, that the SEC
can reach further back into the process and say, not
only do we have this kind of veto authority over any
sanction that comes out of an investigation or over any
report that comes out of an inspection, but we can also
change the way those inspections and investigations are
conducted in the first place.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does it have
consequences for public companies subject to the board
if it refuses to turn over documents requested by
this -- this board?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, for -- for -- for
public companies for -- not for the accounting firms in
general, but for their public company clients, any
subpoena would have to come, as Justice Ginsburg rightly
said --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, I know, but
presumably you only get a subpoena when people don't
cooperate.
GENERAL KAGAN: That -- that's correct.
And -- and certainly public companies could cooperate,
and certainly public companies have cooperated with the
board.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And what happens if
they don't?
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I think that the board
would go to the -- to the SEC for a subpoena, ask the
SEC for a subpoena, and the SEC would choose whether to
grant that subpoena and whether to allow the kind of
investigation that the board wants.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are there any
other -- are there any consequences from the company's
refusal short of -- that would not require the board to
get a subpoena?
GENERAL KAGAN: Are there any other
consequences for the public company?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In the absence of
the subpoena, if nothing happens?
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I -- I believe that
that’s the case. I believe that it's the choice of the
public company whether to comply or not. If the public
company chooses not to comply, the board has to go to
the SEC and to get a subpoena.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is it -- does it
have a consequence as a practical matter for the company
if it doesn't comply with a request from this board?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, the board does not
regulate the public companies themselves. The board
only regulates the accounting firms.
Now, the accounting firms do, as a condition
of their registration, have to present any documents
that the -- the -- the board wants. And so the
accounting companies have a real reason to comply with
the board's requests.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So there are in fact
collateral consequences that take place without any
involvement by the SEC?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I -- I -- I think
again the SEC could change any of the rules that govern
inspections, any of the rules that govern
investigations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if you had a
statute here that said, look, if you don't comply with
the board's request for documents, your authorities will
be suspended, and if that were the statute, you would
say, well, that's okay, because the SEC can always
change that rule.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that -- that the
relationship between the SEC and the board has to be
looked at as a whole. And it's clear that the SEC has
control over everything that the board does or could
have control over everything the board does.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General Kagan, I thought
that -- the Chief asked a question, he posed a sanction,
and I thought that any sanction the board wants to
impose has to be approved by the SEC?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, that's exactly right.
Any sanction, any final inspection --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry, I asked
you whether there were any consequences from the failure
of the company to turn over documents; and is your
answer that there are no consequences whatever?
GENERAL KAGAN: There are no consequences
with respect to the failure of public companies -- not
the accounting firms, but public companies -- to turn
over documents absent a subpoena, which the SEC needs to
issue.
JUSTICE ALITO: As a practical matter, does
the President have any ability to control what the board
does?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think, Justice Alito, the
President has the exact same ability that the President
has with respect to every other aspect of the SEC's
operations. So, the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, that’s --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why is that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's not true. He
can remove -- he can remove the chairman of the SEC.
GENERAL KAGAN: And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And he cannot -- he cannot
remove the commissioners. And it's the commissioners
that govern the board, not the chairman.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, it's the commissioners
that govern all aspects of the SEC's operations. The
chair only does what is delegated to him by the
commission or -- either -- or through the reorganization
plans.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let me give you an
example. Suppose the President objects to the -- the
very large salaries that the members of the board
receive. What are their salaries?
GENERAL KAGAN: Excuse me. They are over
$500,000.
JUSTICE ALITO: And they -- did they decide
that themselves?
GENERAL KAGAN: Subject to the review of the
commission. And the commission has been active in this
area.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose the President reads
about this and he says: This is outrageous; I want to
change it. How can he do that? Remove --
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think he does --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- remove that -- remove the
SEC commissioners unless they take action against the
board?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think he does everything
that he would do with respect to any other SEC function,
is that he or some member of his staff would call the
chair or would call other commissioners and say: I have
a problem with this.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Would you please change it?
Right?
GENERAL KAGAN: Would you please change
it -- and -- and --
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: -- and with respect to that,
that's exactly what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I could do that.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Scalia, that's
Humphrey's Executor. Humphrey's Executor does indeed
say that the President can't order the SEC commissioners
in the same way that he might be able to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, yes.
GENERAL KAGAN: That's a 70-year-old
precedent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. That's
Humphrey's Executor. But you have to add to Humphrey's
Executor Perkins and Morrison. Humphrey's Executor says
you can limit the President's removal power. That
doesn't get you down to the board. You have to also say
the principal officers -- there can be limits on their
removal authority of the board members.
GENERAL KAGAN: I -- I understand the
temptation to say something like, well, we don't really
much like Humphrey's Executor, but we are stuck with it,
but not an inch further.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I didn't say
anything bad about Humphrey's Executor.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: But -- but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I did, I did.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL KAGAN: But this in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We did overrule it, by the
way, in -- in Morrison, didn't we?
GENERAL KAGAN: But two points. This in
fact does not go an inch further, and it doesn't go an
inch further because of the SEC's comprehensive control
over the board, which makes the board function --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What is -- I'm
sorry. What is the removal authority of the SEC with
respect to board officers?
GENERAL KAGAN: The removal authority of the
SEC with respect to -- with respect to board
officers is a for-cause removal limitation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All right. So there
is a limitation there. For cause does not include
failure to follow the policies of the President.
GENERAL KAGAN: Let's assume that that's
correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you need to rely
on Morrison to make the limitations on what the SEC can
do with respect to the board constitutional.
GENERAL KAGAN: I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And you need to rely
on Humphrey's Executor to make the limitations on what
the President can tell the SEC constitutional.
GENERAL KAGAN: Mr. Chief Justice, removal
is just a tool. Removal is not the ultimate
constitutional question. The ultimate constitutional
question is the level of presidential control, and the
presidential control here is exactly the same with
respect to the board's activities as it is with respect
to the SEC staff's activities.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, no, no, because
you have got an extra layer there. Let's say, I mean,
that you have to have two violations of the for-cause
provision. You have got to have -- you have to meet the
requirement in two places. When the SEC wants to remove
the board member, they can only do that for cause. And
if they decide, well, there isn't cause, I'm not going
to do it, then the President under your theory has to
remove the SEC commissioners, all of them, not just --
not just the chairman, and he can only do that for
cause.
So you have got "for cause" squared, and
that's -- that's a significant limitation that
Humphrey's Executor didn't recognize and Morrison didn't
recognize.
GENERAL KAGAN: But that for-cause provision
is surrounded by a panoply of other control mechanisms.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Which one are we
talking about, the first one or the second one?
GENERAL KAGAN: The -- the for-cause
provision on the board members is surrounded by a
panoply of other control mechanisms which function as a
complete substitute, which give the SEC --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, let's just
talk -- a practical example. The board says I want to
get the documents of company X. The SEC thinks they
shouldn't do that. Okay? Can they remove them for that
situation -- in that situation?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, they can pass a rule
that says no, you can't get the -- the documents of
company X, and then when the board members go ahead and
try to get the documents of company X --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can they say --
GENERAL KAGAN: -- they can remove them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- you are fired?
Can they say, you are fired because we have control over
what you do and we don't think you should do that?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that they
effectively can. They would have to do it by -- I think
that the easiest, quickest, most legally secure way
would be to -- to do it by -- by promulgating a rule
that says you can't do this. And then --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The easiest way to
do it is to pick up the phone, not by promulgating a
rule.
GENERAL KAGAN: I said the most legally
secure way to do it would be to do it that way. I think
that the fact that they have that formal mechanism means
that they could pick up the phone and accomplish the
exact same thing, because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can the President
pick up the phone and fire the SEC commissioners?
GENERAL KAGAN: The President can pick up
the phone and fire the SEC commissioners for cause,
however "cause" has been defined.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He thinks -- he
thinks they -- the board should be getting the documents
from the other company, and the SEC thinks they can't.
So the SEC tells the board, don't go after that company,
and because they do that the President fires the SEC.
Does that work under your theory?
GENERAL KAGAN: So now the SEC has given the
board one order and the President doesn't like the order
that the SEC has given to the board?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
GENERAL KAGAN: Again, the President has the
same level of control over the SEC as he has with
respect to anything else. That's just Humphrey's
Executor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm not worried if
it's the same. I'm worried if it's enough.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, but that's Humphrey's
Executor. Humphrey's Executor said it was enough.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. And then --
GENERAL KAGAN: And the question is whether
this goes any further.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It goes further
because you’ve got to rely on the SEC to get to the
board. So there you’ve got to rely on Perkins and
Morrison.
GENERAL KAGAN: You always have to rely on
the SEC to do anything, to supervise anybody in its
field of operations, whether it's the SEC's own staff or
whether it's the board members, who stand in essentially
the same relationship to the SEC commissioners as the
own SEC staff does.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, do you dispute the
proposition that the more layers of for-cause removal
you add, the -- the less control the President has?
Suppose there were five layers.
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Alito, I think it
all depends. I mean, we are not saying that a double
for-cause provision is always constitutional, just as we
are not saying that a single for-cause provision is
always constitutional.
The question is, in what context does that
for-cause provision operate? And where it operates in a
context like this one, where it is surrounded by a
panoply of alternative and -- and equally effective
control mechanisms, it simply should not matter that
there's another for-cause provision.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what do -- what do
you say in response to their formal argument that heads
of departments are those people whom the President has
at-will control over, like the Secretary of Defense, and
Freytag is support for that. And these aren't those
people, so the SEC’s members must be inferior officers,
and the Constitution says nothing about and implicitly
forbids inferior officers from appointing other inferior
officers beneath them.
All right, that's a formal argument, but I
got that out of their briefs, and I want to know what
you respond to it.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, Justice Scalia, who
doesn't much like Humphrey's Executor, nevertheless
wrote a brilliant opinion in Freytag saying that in fact
independent agencies were departments, and -- and -- and
so that commissioners of the SEC would be principal
officers, their appointees would be inferior officers,
if -- if those appointees were subject to the direction
and supervision of the principals in exactly the way
Justice Scalia said was necessary in the Edmond case.
He is --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. So I -- so we have to
take the dissent there as opposed to taking the
majority?
GENERAL KAGAN: No, no, no. Freytag --
Freytag reserves the question --
JUSTICE BREYER: I see.
GENERAL KAGAN: -- whether the independent
agencies were departments for purposes of the
Appointments Clause and, indeed, in reserving that
question, suggested that they thought that the
independent agencies, so-called, were a very different
kind of creature than the small, specialized units such
as the Tax Court. So I think that the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I want to ask -- I want to
ask one thing: You want us to imply or find -- or you
want us to infer from the statute that there's a power
in the President to remove SEC commissioners for cause?
You want us to find that that is implied in the statute?
GENERAL KAGAN: Justice Kennedy, the
conventional understanding, really, ever -- ever since
Humphrey's Executor, is that SEC commissioners are
subject to a for-cause removal provision. And the
government --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right. What is --
what is the authority for us to find that there is an
implication in the statute to remove just for cause?
There’s -- wouldn't that be unique in our precedents?
GENERAL KAGAN: I think that -- if I
understand the question correctly, I think that the --
the implication about --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, if there is a
removal power implied, why isn't it removal for all
purposes? How -- why can it be limited to just for
cause? What authority do we have to do that?
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think that the
understanding about the SEC commissioners is that the
SEC commissioners were, essentially, the same as the FTC
commissioners, which, under -- which, under Humphrey's,
were removable only for cause, and as I believe --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's because the
statute required it.
GENERAL KAGAN: Yes, but -- you’re exactly
right, and it's a -- it's a perplexity of this law, but
for many, many decades, everybody has assumed that the
SEC commissioners are subject to the same for-cause
removal provision, and the government has not contested
that in this case, nor has Mr. Carvin.
JUSTICE SCALIA: General Kagan, the
government argues here that the head of department is
all of the commissioners. Elsewhere, it is the chairman
of the SEC who -- who appoints inferior officers. Now,
which is it? Are all those appointments by the chairman
invalid?
GENERAL KAGAN: No, they're not, because all
those appointments are made subject to the approval of
the commission.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's something
quite different. He makes the appointments. They can
overturn it, but the appointment must be made by the
head of the department, and the appointments are not
made by the commissioners. They are made by the
chairman.
GENERAL KAGAN: Well, I think practice in
this regard has changed in different administrations,
but if you look at the amicus brief that was filed by
the former chairmen of the SEC, they make clear that in
fact the commission has ultimate authority over each and
every appointment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do they have to
say about the theory that the SEC commissioners can be
removed by the President?
GENERAL KAGAN: I believe,
Mr. Chief Justice, that nobody has contested that
question.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And you are not
contesting it?
GENERAL KAGAN: And we are not contesting
the question that the SEC commissioners, themselves, are
removed by the President for cause under, I would say, a
very broad for-cause provision, in the way that Bowsher
suggested, not something that’s niggling and technical.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
GENERAL KAGAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Lamken.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEFFREY A. LAMKEN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS PUBLIC
COMPANY ACCOUNTING OVERSIGHT BOARD, ET AL.
MR. LAMKEN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The SEC has pervasive authority over every
aspect of the board's operations. Board rules and
sanctions have no effect, except as the SEC allows, and
can be changed by the SEC at any time.
Board inspections and investigations are
subject to plenary SEC control. Not only are they
conducted under rules that the SEC must approve, but the
SEC can threaten or actually rescind the board's
enforcement authority any time it thinks that's
appropriate in the public interest.
It controls the board's budget and salaries,
and it can reassign matters to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought -- so you
disagree with General Kagan? I thought she said one of
the reasons for taking the board outside the SEC is that
they’d have an independent funding stream.
MR. LAMKEN: Independent of the
congressional appropriations process, not independent of
the SEC. Section 7219 is clear as water that the SEC
controls the board budget, and the SEC in fact has used
that control to regulate down to the level of the board
members' salaries.
In addition, the SEC can impose rules
requiring getting -- requiring the board, for example,
to get SEC pre-approval for particular steps or
particular actions.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you know any other
agency composed of inferior officers that has the power
to acquire its own budget, as this board does, by simply
assessing a tax upon the people that it regulates?
MR. LAMKEN: In fact, this board doesn't
have that power, because it can only do so as the SEC
allows. Here, as in all other contexts, it is the will
of the SEC that controls.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The SEC can overturn it,
but it's up to the board -- the board can do it. Do you
know of any parallel situation where there is a,
supposedly, agency composed of inferior officers who
have the power to tax the public unless it's overturned
by somebody else?
MR. LAMKEN: Well, there’s a bunch of other
similar entities, such as the SIPC and the like, that
assess fees, and many of their officers are appointed by
department heads, rather than the -- than the President.
And so, yes, I think that's actually not an
--
uncommon feature, but the most -- but the most critical
aspect of this is, here, as in every other context, it
is the judgment and the decision of the SEC that
controls.
The board can propose, but it's the SEC that
decides.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the board can
act, and the SEC can, I suppose, retroactively veto
their actions, but the SEC doesn't propose what actions
the board takes, actions that can have significant,
devastating consequences for the regulated bodies.
MR. LAMKEN: Well, precisely the opposite.
With respect to rules, the board's rules are ineffective
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm not talking
about rules. Agencies in the government do not act only
in implementing a particular rule. They have authority
to regulate.
And the board here, for example, can tell a
particular entity: You have to turn over these
documents. They don't have to have a rule that says,
this company must turn over the documents.
MR. LAMKEN: And the SEC staff can do
precisely the same thing. In fact, right now they can
issue subpoenas without asking the commission for
consent. And the -- and the answer is, if you don't
like it, you go to the principal officer, and you say,
rescind the board's authority -- threaten to rescind the
board's authority; this is out of line.
And the SEC has broad authority in
the public interest to rescind the -- the board's
authority to enforce the action, enforce the law in any
respect.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you can say the same
-- you can say the same thing about Congress. I
mean, this is not the kind of control that an executive
officer normally is supposed to have over inferior
officers; when they do something, you can take away
their authority. Congress can do that.
MR. LAMKEN: Well, Congress would have to do
that by legislation, subject to veto by the President,
and in fact this is precisely the type of control that
powerful executives regularly exercise. If they don't
like the way an inferior is doing something, they can
take away that authority, and they can take away their
salary as well, which is so close to being fired that I
can't see any light between them, frankly, Your Honor.
So the board -- the SEC controls whether --
what the scope of the board's authority is and its
salaries --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there any
other --
MR. LAMKEN: -- and it can issue rules
requiring start, stop, or obey my commands. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there any other
situation in the vast federal bureaucracy, where you
have this two-level situation that we have here?
MR. LAMKEN: Oh --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words, the
President can't remove the SEC commissioners at will.
They can't remove the PCAOB commissioners at will. Or
even if you look at it from the for-cause perspective,
there has to be two layers of “for cause.”
MR. LAMKEN: Mr. Chief Justice, of course,
we view rescinding an officer's authority and paycheck
as being exactly like rescinding the officer's position,
but if you are going to look at formal removal
authority, that exists throughout the United States
government. There are 1,100 administrative --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What -- well, give
me an example.
MR. LAMKEN: -- 1,100 administrative law
judges, right now, which are for-cause removed operating
in independent agencies with for-cause removal by the
President. There’s the Postal Service's IG’s office,
with 1,100 employees and 90 offices nationwide,
removable for cause by an entity that is removable for
cause.
We list --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But we are talking -- we
are talking about independent or quasi-independent
agencies, and I understood Solicitor General Kagan to
say that it's quite all right with an independent
agency for the President to phone them on an ongoing
basis and say, do this, and do that.
Do you agree that that's what a President
ought to do with an independent agency?
MR. LAMKEN: Well, Your Honor, I would
think that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Call them on a routine
basis, to supervise what they are doing?
MR. LAMKEN: If the -- if the response from
the agency falled out -- falled out -- fell outside the
range of reasonable policy responses the agency could
adopt, then that might amount to inefficiency, neglect,
or malfeasance. And the SEC works --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, they -- they -- this
board has authority to -- to tax those people it
regulates, to issue subpoenas, and so forth.
MR. LAMKEN: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But this isn't subject to
the operations of the President, if he has to go through
an independent agency. Are you encouraging the
President, on an ongoing, daily basis, to instruct an
independent agency what he wants done?
MR. LAMKEN: Your Honor, the President has
the same control over the SEC's supervision over the
board that he has over everything else that falls within
the SEC's jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Which is nothing, which is
nothing.
MR. LAMKEN: With --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- when I was OLC, I
would -- I advised the President, you can't interfere
with -- I think, if the President called up the FCC and
said, I want you to rule this way, I want this kind of a
rule from the FCC, I think there would be an impeachment
motion in Congress.
MR. LAMKEN: But that -- that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Congress set up that agency
to be independent from the President. That was the
whole purpose of it, wasn't it?
MR. LAMKEN: Which is what Humphrey's
-- Humphrey's Executor held up -- held up -- upheld
that. That is what Humphrey's Executor upheld, but this
adds nothing to Humphrey's Executor because the SEC --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no, Humphrey's --
Humphrey's Executor was not a specific issue. It was
just the general qualifications.
MR. LAMKEN: I'm sorry. I believe
Humphrey's Executor was that he couldn't remove the --
the officers --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I --
MR. LAMKEN: -- except for cause, and “for
cause” --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I understand that.
MR. LAMKEN: -- is traditionally understood
to be inefficiency, neglect, or malfeasance in office.
But this does not depart at all from that
standard, because the President has the same control
over the SEC that he has over any other independent
agency, and the SEC has pervasive control over the
board, and it simply makes no sense to say that Congress
can give the SEC or an independent agency --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The formulation --
MR. LAMKEN: -- regulatory authority, but
not the ability to choose its --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The formulation --
excuse me.
MR. LAMKEN: I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The formulation that
you use and your friend the Solicitor General have used
-- has used is that they have the same authority that
they have over every other independent agency, but I'm
-- it's very hard to find out exactly what that
authority is.
So what is your position about the authority
of the President? Is it more than for cause or only
for cause?
MR. LAMKEN: Our position is the same as the
Solicitor General's, because I represent inferior
officers whose positions are controlled by the SEC who
are principal officers, and their lawyer is the
Solicitor General. So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What do you
understand that position to be?
MR. LAMKEN: The position I understand the
Solicitor General to have is that the traditional
understanding of the SEC is that it is an independent
agency. But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So the President --
I guess I’m following up on Justice Kennedy's question
-- the President cannot call them and say, take this
particular action in this particular case.
MR. LAMKEN: I don't think he would be able
to enforce that in -- by removal, except --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it's okay for him to
ask them? It's okay for him to suggest to an
independent regulatory agency that this is how he wants
something done?
MR. LAMKEN: Justice Scalia, the Treasury
Department --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you know of any instance
where that has happened?
MR. LAMKEN: -- works closely with the SEC
and tells the SEC precisely what it thinks the SEC
should do on a regular basis, but the difference is the
SEC turns around and can tell the board exactly what it
wants the board to do and back it up by taking away
their salaries, threatening to rescind the enforcement
authority, announcing rules that say you may start,
stop, alter investigations upon our direction or the
direction of the chief accountant.
The control of the SEC over the board is
plenary. This Court vindicated --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But what does the Treasury
Department tell the SEC to do?
MR. LAMKEN: Well, it issues
recommendations, for example, on how it wants the SEC to
handle, for example, international aspects. One of the
issues brought up here was the SEC's handling of
international things, and that’s something that the SEC
-- its international bureau coordinates over --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It takes the initiative?
The SEC doesn't request that information?
MR. LAMKEN: Pardon.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The SEC does not request
that information; the Treasury Department just butts in?
Is that it?
MR. LAMKEN: It’s one -- this is one
Executive Branch, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand, but --
MR. LAMKEN: -- and they work closely
together --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand, but --
MR. LAMKEN: -- and I can't tell you exactly
how they work, but --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's one thing for the SEC
to ask the Treasury Department's view. It's another for
the Treasury Department to butt in. Does it butt in?
MR. LAMKEN: I -- I do believe that -- that
other agencies do butt in all the time, and the question
is --
JUSTICE BREYER: What’s the reason --
MR. LAMKEN: -- what’s the control?
JUSTICE BREYER: What is the reason for
this? Having read this enlightening opinion of Justice
Scalia in Freytag, which is enlightening to me if I've
read it correctly, I would say that the question --
there are two separate questions.
One question is: What is a department? And
this might well fit within that.
And the second question, which is separate
but mixed up in the cases, but not his, is: When is it
constitutional for Congress to limit the President in
his ability to dismiss a -- an officer of the United
States or -- inferior or superior -- for cause?
And -- and what's -- if you can answer it,
what are the justifications here for imposing that
requirement?
MR. LAMKEN: I think the first half is,
What's a department? And the answer --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not interested in that.
MR. LAMKEN: Okay.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm interested in -- I'm
developing --
MR. LAMKEN: The justifications for the
limitations on the removal of the officers of the board?
JUSTICE BREYER: That's right.
MR. LAMKEN: Right. And the answer to that
is that these are the standard limitations -- the
standard removal provisions that exist throughout the
financial area where the SEC has a subordinate entity
under its control, and Congress presumed that because
the SEC's -- the SEC's control was so pervasive, it
didn't need to go back and revisit those standard
removal provisions, because -- precisely because -- the
SEC has power to rescind the board's enforcement
authority, establish rules requiring it to obey
commands, disobedience of which would be grounds for
removal, to withdraw the salaries.
The control is so pervasive that these
removal provisions did not have to be reconsidered. And
from the board's perspective, they're just another means
of control, one that actually taints them, as Shurtleff
points out, with having committed misconduct.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Lamken.
Mr. Carvin, to keep the time even here, you
have 8 minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL A. CARVIN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. CARVIN: The first thing I’d like to
address is the Solicitor General's syllogism that
because the President can control the SEC, somehow he
can control those whom the SEC regulates.
Well, the New York Stock Exchange has
exactly the same relationship as the -- with the SEC as
does the board, and no one would argue, I don't think,
that he has any power -- the President, that is -- to
direct and supervise the New York Stock Exchange. In
response to your question, Justice Alito, he couldn't
complain about the excessive salary of Mr. Grasso at the
New York Stock Exchange.
I’d also like to knock down this myth --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there is -- there is
-- it was working okay with the Stock Exchange. It
wasn't working okay with the accountants.
And there’s a problem. There’s a problem
that Congress had to solve. It wanted to tighten the
oversight of the auditing function. And they wanted to
have people who were not beholden to the profession, but
who were knowledgeable and could command high salaries
to be doing this job.
MR. CARVIN: No, that's entirely true,
Justice Ginsburg, and the point is they could have
accomplished all that and made the board members
appointed and removable by the President, if -- if --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How about if they --
would it work if the board members were proposed by the
SEC, by SEC commissioners, subject to the approval
of the President? Would that be --
MR. CARVIN: Well, I -- no, because the word
"approval," as earlier colloquy has suggested, is --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the nominee would be
-- by a nomination. The names would be presented.
MR. CARVIN: The President needs the
unfettered ability to appoint principal officers, not to
have some subordinate agency tell him who he can
appoint. That would be a severe restriction, far
greater, for example, than was at issue in Public
Citizen. And that's essentially my point.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, you --
MR. CARVIN: They can't give you -- I'm
sorry.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You were -- I'm sorry,
then. I interrupted you, but I wanted you to give me
your full picture of how this could be done, how
Congress could accomplish its goal of having a strong,
effective oversight body?
MR. CARVIN: In the same way they have
strong, effective oversight of the communications
industry and what the FTC does and the SEC. Just follow
the model for independent agencies that has been used
for over a hundred years. You make them appointed by
the President, removable by the President, and the
President gets to designate the chairman. The --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So it would be totally
separate. Then you would -- you’d say it would have to
be a totally separate independent regulatory agency. It
could not be put under the wing of the SEC.
MR. CARVIN: You could have exactly the same
relationship between the SEC and this agency, which I
think is not under the wing of the SEC now. The only
difference is, instead of having the commissioners
appoint them and remove them, you'd have the President
appoint them and remove them.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I would have
-- Judge Kavanaugh has suggested there are two ways to
cure this problem: One, have the President appoint and
remove; and the other thing, make it truly subordinate
to the SEC. Now, I've heard the argument on the other
side, both from the government -- well, it's an issue
with the government -- the Solicitor General and the
board, that the agency, the board, is completely
subordinate to the SEC.
Well, if Congress -- Congress could fix this
problem by saying: The board is subordinate to the SEC.
MR. CARVIN: So why have they created any
independence if they really wanted them to be
subordinate? And I really want to deal with that.
This notion that they could pass rules to
govern the investigative activities of the board is a
myth. The attorney general in Morrison had the ability
to promulgate rules for prosecution, but he couldn't
tell Alexia Morrison how to proceed in that individual
case. He couldn't say: Anything she does with respect
to Mr. Olsen, I need to pre-approve.
Why? Because the independent counsel, under
that statute, had the prosecutorial authority. Under
this statute, the board has the prosecutorial authority,
and everyone knows you can't govern the kind of manifold
decisions that prosecutors need to make through some
kind of bulky notice-and-comment rulemaking. And that
is why it is utterly mythical to pretend that they have
this power.
Justice Scalia, we assume that people
exercise the powers they have, removal and the like. We
don't assume that they exercise powers that they don't
have simply because they can theoretically get it. What
if the statute said the SEC --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Say it again --
MR. CARVIN: Okay. Let’s --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't assume that they
–-
MR. CARVIN: That they have powers they
don't have simply because they can reach out and get it.
So let's assume the statute here said the
SEC could transfer the board's powers to the Treasury
instead of the SEC. Would we assume -- would we analyze
this case as if the Treasury was conducting the board's
powers simply because the SEC had the theoretical
ability to transfer it?
This Court has emphasized countless times
that you analyze separation of powers cases with respect
to the practical consequences, as Mistretta said it; as
Plaut said it, with respect to bright lines and high
walls; and as Airport Authority said it, with great
skepticism of Congress's subtle encroachments. You
don't create fictional realities which allow severe
usurpations of executive authority on the basis of
fictional --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We don't know -- we don't
know what's fictional and what is not here, because you
came in, and you don't have a particular case.
MR. CARVIN: I do have --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you have another
instance where Congress set up a scheme, and without
having a particular case of an individual who has been
hurt, you come in and say: We might sometime be hurt by
this, so we want the whole thing knocked down in the
absence of any concrete case.
MR. CARVIN: Justice Ginsburg, we know
exactly what the SEC and the Solicitor General think
about the interrelationship of the Constitution and the
statute, because they have expressed it in briefs from
the district court on up.
I am saying that even if you bend over
backwards to give them this power under the statute,
what you can't do is pretend that they have exercised
this power under the statute. The first might be a
doctrine of statutory construction. The second is
deciding separation of powers cases on the basis of
a fictional world that doesn't really exist.
And I would suggest that that would give
Congress an extraordinary blueprint for using the board
as a model for each and every executive department.
What would stop them from tomorrow; from transferring
the Transportation and Labor and Energy Departments to
a private corporation like the board, and creating some
bipartisan commission that’s going to oversee this
board with these fictional hypothetical realities?
If this Court endorses this scheme, they
have literally offered no limiting principle why that
couldn't be applied to each and every executive
function. To the contrary, they have emphasized that
there is no constitutional distinction between alter
egos and these independent commissions, and they have
sought to justify this scheme on the basis of cases
involving core executive functions, Perkins and
Morrison. So, again --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If we took away -- I
mean, one big point was the double for-cause. So let's
say we have said that the SEC could fire board members,
period. Then that would remove the double for-cause.
Would this statute then be constitutional?
MR. CARVIN: Well, I don't think you can
sever that provision from the statute, because I
don't -- I think you’d be rewriting the statute and
re-striking the balance that Congress did. Moreover, of
course, it wouldn't solve the Appointments Clause
problem because, again, these are principal officers not
appointed by the President, and even if they are
inferior officers, the SEC is not a department. So --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, it’s not the double
for -- the double for-cause isn't, in your judgment,
what sinks this statute?
MR. CARVIN: Well, no. It is a very
serious -- yes, it is on my view absolutely dispositive
of why the statute is no good. I'm saying merely fixing
that will not fix the entire statute, because in
addition to removal problems, we have very serious
appointment problems under the appointments clause --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask one -- one
narrow question? If we assume that the members of the
board are inferior officers, and if we -- do -- would
you agree that if the board had unrestricted power to
discharge them at will, the statute would be
constitutional?
MR. CARVIN: Your -- I'm -- I'm to assume
that the Appointments Clause problem -- if they are
inferior officers, again, I have an Appointments Clause
problem, because they are appointed by somebody who is
not department head, i.e., the SEC commissioner.
Do you want me to take that out and assume
that that's okay as well?
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes.
MR. CARVIN: Okay. So, if we are looking at
it strictly from a separation of powers perspective, it
is true that eliminating the for-cause removal provision
goes a long way towards fixing the problem, but it
doesn't go all the way and for one reason, which is we
think the SEC imposes -- is at the outermost limits of
constitutional acceptability. And so, unless the
President has the same control over the officers that he
has over the SEC, it would not be good.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But your answer to my
question is that even if they are inferior officers and
the other conditions have been met, if the Commission
had unrestricted power of removal, the statute would
still be unconstitutional.
MR. CARVIN: Principally because they are
not subject --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The answer is yes is what
I just --
MR. CARVIN: I'm sorry. Yes, Your Honor.
May I just --
JUSTICE STEVENS: Yes. Sure.
MR. CARVIN: They are not subject to the
chairman's control, unlike the SEC general counsel, and
they have statutory duties entirely distinct from the
commission. unlike the SEC general counsel.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the case in the
