IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JEFFREY A. BEARD, SECRETARY, :
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF :
CORRECTIONS, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 08-992
JOSEPH J. KINDLER. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 2, 2009
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 1:00 p.m.
APPEARANCES:
RONALD EISENBERG, ESQ., Deputy District Attorney,
Philadelphia, Pa.; on behalf of the Petitioners.
MATTHEW C. LAWRY, ESQ., Philadelphia, Pa.; on behalf
of the Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
RONALD EISENBERG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
MATTHEW C. LAWRY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 24
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
RONALD EISENBERG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(1:00 p.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument this afternoon in Case 08-992,
Beard v. Kindler.
Mr. Eisenberg.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RONALD EISENBERG
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. EISENBERG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Joseph Kindler, after attacking the judicial
process by murdering a witness against him, again
repudiated that process by breaking out of prison twice
and fleeing the country.
The court of appeals refused to honor the
resulting procedural default on the ground that it was
inadequate because discretionary. This Court should
clarify that the purpose of the adequate State grounds
doctrine isn't to strip State courts of their equitable
power to excuse procedural defaults, but simply to
ensure that they don't discriminate against Federal
claims under the guise of procedural ruling.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I didn't understand the
Third Circuit rule to equate discretion with inadequacy.
I thought their position was -- the assertion was that
the rule was mandatory; that is, if you are fugitives,
you are out forever.
But in fact, at the time that Kindler fled,
the rule was discretionary, so the mandatory rule hadn't
been firmly established. That's what I thought the
Third Circuit held. It did not equate discretion with
inadequacy.
MR. EISENBERG: That was the -- the argument
presented, but I think what the Third Circuit held was
simply to equate discretion with inadequacy. But in any
case, Justice Ginsburg --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is that? I mean, why
do we have to guess about it? Where -- where do you
find that in its opinion? Because I have -- I have the
same -- the same problem.
MR. EISENBERG: I don't think we really have
to guess, Your Honor. I think, looking, for example, in
the third appendix at the top of page 22, where the
Third Circuit is characterizing its prior law in this
question:
"After surveying decisions of the
Pennsylvania courts, we concluded that the Pennsylvania
courts had discretion to hear an appeal filed by a
fugitive who had been returned to custody before an
appeal was initiated and dismissed. Accordingly, the
fugitive-forfeiture rule was not firmly established and,
therefore, is not an independent and adequate procedural
rule."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the fugitive-
forfeiture rule that they were talking about was the --
the mandatory rule wasn't firmly established.
MR. EISENBERG: Well, I don't think that's a
fair reading of this language, in and of itself, Your
Honor. But it really doesn't matter for our position,
and that's because the rule that was applied to this
defendant was a discretionary rule.
The Pennsylvania -- the trial court in this
case exercised his discretion not to reinstate
post-verdict motions. The opinion that was written by
the trial court and is in the joint appendix at page --
I believe it's 69, Your Honor -- states that the
question was whether the trial judge abused his
discretion in declining to reinstate post-trial motions.
When the case that Your Honor's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I have a number of
problems with the Third Circuit's opinion, but the
question presented, it seems to me, is not really the
dispositive point of the opinion. I don't think the
question you presented is really that squarely before
MR. EISENBERG: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And I don't see a split,
either. I mean, of course, there is going to be some
discretion. The question is -- the Third Circuit, as I
read the opinion, was concerned that it wasn't firmly
established at the time of the waiver.
I have real problems with whether the waiver
should even be -- whether the time of the waiver is
controlling, but that is not the question you asked us
to resolve.
MR. EISENBERG: Your Honor, I think the
problem here and the reason that we are at this point is
that, whether the test is stated directly as being a per
se ban on discretion or whether simply the standard is
so high under an interpretation of "firmly established"
that allows for virtually no deviation in results by the
State courts, the effect is the same. It's to drive out
the exercise of discretion by the State courts.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But this wasn't the
ruling by the court in analyzing your cases and
saying -- you know, in six out of the cases -- six out
of the ten cases, discretion was exercised, in four it
wasn't, and so it's not firmly established because the
numbers are skewed.
Justice Ginsburg -- you pointed Justice
Ginsburg to page 23, and the Court very directly there
says, look, we are rejecting the State's argument that
the waiver rule was mandatory.
MR. EISENBERG: Justice Sotomayor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so it characterized
your argument that way, that you were saying the
district court had no discretion.
MR. EISENBERG: Justice Sotomayor, the State
didn't argue in Federal court that the State rule was
mandatory. We were very explicit.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, whether you think
you did or didn't, that's how the court described it, so
it understood you to be taking a different position.
Are we going to correct it because it
misunderstood you? Or --
MR. EISENBERG: The problem is that the
Third Circuit did not engage in any inquiry about the
nature of the rule that was applied to this defendant,
so it was not in any position to say that a different
rule was applied to this defendant than the rule that
should have been applied.
That's the problem with the argument that a
new rule was sprung on this defendant. The rule that
was applied to this defendant was discretion, and the
Third Circuit never discusses anything other than that.
They reject our argument that the underlying
rule was mandatory in that language, but they never
discuss what rule was actually applied to this
defendant. We think it was clearly a discretionary
rule.
But the -- the real question is whether, at
the time of the default, the default that occurred by
the extraordinary act of escaping, the defendant was not
fairly apprised of the consequences of his action.
And, really, whether or not the rule --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You mean that the
defendant might not have escaped if he knew that the
rule wasn't --
MR. EISENBERG: Well, I think that's the
irony of applying this sort of adequacy analysis to this
kind of default, but that, I think, is more of a problem
for Kindler than for the Commonwealth.
This Court has consistently held in its
adequacy cases that the litigant must have ample
opportunity to comply with the State's procedure.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I don't know why you
submit -- why you seem to concede that that applies
here. I can understand why we want to look at the time
of the waiver if it's an attorney arguing about jury
instructions and so forth, but the man escapes when the
door is open or when the window is open, and he doesn't
give consideration to these things; and if he does, I
think that's quite irrelevant.
It seems to me that the waiver point is --
is something that shouldn't be conceded. I think that
if ten years elapse between the time of the escape and
the time the State formulates its rules, that he is
bound by those rules when he gets there. But you don't
argue that. That's not what you presented to us.
MR. EISENBERG: Well, I think, Your Honor,
what we are presenting is that the nature of the State
rule here was -- was such that the defendant had
reasonable notice of what he was facing by escaping,
whether or not it would have affected his subjective
decision to escape, and therefore that the State ground
can't be thrown out in Federal court on the ground of
adequacy. And really, whether the rule was strictly
mandatory in 1984 or discretionary doesn't much matter
for purposes of putting the defendant on notice that if
he escaped, he was going to run into serious trouble
trying to appeal at the same time that he was trying to
stay in Canada for the rest of his life.
That's what this case is really all about.
And yet, the lower courts I think have so misconstrued
this Court's adequacy doctrine that they have come to
the point of saying that even in that situation, the
rule is inadequate and can be ignored in Federal court.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What court has said? As
I read the Third Circuit, it says:  A procedural rule
that is consistently applied in the vast majority of
cases; even if State courts are willing to occasionally
overlook it and review the merits of a claim, that
that's okay.
MR. EISENBERG: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what other circuit
has said that any measure of discretion or even a lot of
use of discretion bars deference to the State rule?
MR. EISENBERG: Justice Sotomayor, I think
if you look at the amicus brief filed on behalf of 25
States, you will see that that there are a great many
cases where that's exactly the analysis that the courts
have applied, and in many of those cases they have
required the parties to place before them dozens and
sometimes hundreds of other examples of the operation of
a State procedural rule so that the lower Federal court
can decide whether that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How many of those cases
resulted in the overturning or the grant of habeas --
MR. EISENBERG: I think in California, for
example, it's been quite common. The State's rule for
timeliness of post-conviction communications is seldom
enforced in Federal court, as we learned from the amicus
brief. In fact, it virtually doesn't exist. And even
in those cases where the courts --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But do we -- what --
what does that tell us about us establishing the rule
that you propose?
MR. EISENBERG: I think what it tells us is
that the lower courts are applying a very different
adequacy rule than this Court has been applying. We are
not really asking for some kind of new rule from this
Court as compared to your prior line of cases on
adequacy.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you are asking us to
take away a part of the inquiry.
MR. EISENBERG: Not at all, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Your notice -- your
notice and an opportunity to comply doesn't address a
repeated statement by us, which is that whatever test is
applied has to get to whether the State court is
attempting to evade Federal review of constitutional
questions.
MR. EISENBERG: Yes, it does, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. And so your
test does nothing to inform that question, for example,
the Flowers situation. There was a clear rule, there
was more than an adequate opportunity to comply, and yet
we said it didn't qualify for deference because it was
clearly, given the circumstances of the State
application of the rule at issue, an attempt to evade a
constitutional right.
MR. EISENBERG: The question is what those
circumstances are, Your Honor. And in virtually case
after case, the circumstances that have been identified
by this Court for actually finding a rule inadequate are
that the State rule was some kind of bait and switch,
that it was a -- to use Justice Holmes' classic
formulation, that it was a spring -- a trap that was
sprung on the defendant. One rule existed at the time
that the litigant was proceeding, another rule was
applied when the case reached appeal. And that is
characteristically what has made this Court, not the
lower Federal courts, but this Court, hold that rules
were actually inadequate.
So in Ford v. Georgia, for example, where
the defendant raised a Batson claim after the jury was
sworn, because that's what the law was at the time of
his trial, when the case reached appeal the appellate --
the State appellate court said: No, no; we have a new
rule now; you have to do it before the jury is sworn.
And they found his claim waived. That rule was
inadequate.
In James v. Kentucky, where the defendant
asked for an adverse inference charge and he asked for
an admonition rather than an instruction, and the State
court said, no, no, it was supposed to be an instruction
rather than an admonition, that was a reversal of prior
State law.
There are many cases very much like that
where there is a spring set by the State in the sense
that a different rule is applied on appeal than was
before the litigant at the time that he was trying to
comply with the rule.
Now, this case obviously is quite far from
that, and that's exactly why this case should have been
the last sort of case where a rule was found inadequate.
The higher the standard that the lower courts apply, the
stricter the standard that the lower Federal courts
apply to analyze the adequacy of State rules, the less
opportunity there will be for discretion on the part of
the States. And the loser in that equation, while it
might not be this defendant, will be the vast majority
of defendants who would have been more entitled, more
deserving of discretion, of leniency from the State
courts.
The State courts need to be allowed to apply
the kind of discretion in their procedural rulings that
this Court applies, that the Federal courts are allowed
in -- in Federal procedural rulings -- for example,
under the plain error rule, even under the Federal
fugitive-forfeiture rule.
In 1876 this Court said that it's within our
discretion to dismiss a case where the defendant is a
fugitive, and since then, while there have been a number
of decisions from this Court concerning fugitive
defendants, none of them have laid out the sort of menu,
the sort of standards and substandards and subrules that
the defendant is now arguing have to be present in a
rule for it to be adequate.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the question that you
present -- I mean, you state it forthrightly in your
brief, and I'm reading from page 7, you say: "The court
of appeals interpreted this Court's precedent to compel
a finding of inadequacy for any State procedural rule
that permits the State courts to exercise a degree of
discretion. Any discretion is inadequate." That's what
you say the court of appeals interpreted this Court's
precedent to say: Discretion, inadequate.
Well, I'm looking first at the petition
appendix page 62, which describes the district court's
understanding, which the Third Circuit affirmed. It
says: "An occasional act of grace by a State court in
excusing or disregarding a State procedural rule does
not render the rule inadequate to procedurally bar
advancing a habeas claim in district court."
Well, that's saying, yes, you can have a
rule with discretion, not to follow the rule woodenly,
and that doesn't make it inadequate.
MR. EISENBERG: Justice Ginsburg, an
occasional act of grace, that level of -- of leniency or
flexibility that would be allowed by the district
court's view of the law, or the Third Circuit's, is
simply not appropriate in judging the adequacy of State
grounds.
It's certainly not the kind of miserly,
crabbed review of the exercise of discretion that occurs
in Federal procedural rulings like the plain error rule.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, do you want to
modify then what you said? You said that the court of
appeals said that any -- any degree of discretion means
that the rule is inadequate.
MR. EISENBERG: Justice Ginsburg, we say
that because there was no analysis here of what degree
of discretion or whether discretion was actually applied
by the State court in this case. That's why, in effect,
we say that the Third Circuit's ruling was about the per
se exercise of discretion.
But even if it wasn't automatically about
the exercise of discretion, even if it was merely
applying a rule which is so narrow and strict that in
practical effect the State courts have little actual
discretion to exercise, that's still a problem and it's
still inconsistent with the purpose of the adequate
State grounds doctrine, which was never intended to
allow Federal courts or to require lower Federal courts
to engage in the kind of analysis that many of the lower
Federal courts are now undertaking.
Basically, they -- they are taking out their
magnifying glasses and starting to split hairs by
looking at every single case, by looking at how those
cases compare to each other, by deciding whether there's
enough of a standard, is there enough of a precedent,
did you tell this little particular little fact to the
defendant before. That sort of analysis is not part of
this Court's adequacy doctrine.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what makes -- makes
this particularly puzzling is you are attributing a rule
to the Third Circuit that that very circuit in Campbell
v. Burris said was not a tool. In the -- in Campbell v.
Burris, the Third Circuit said a State procedural rule
can't be, cannot be rendered per se inadequate merely
because it allows for some exercise of discretion.
MR. EISENBERG: And I think if the Third
Circuit had applied that statement in this case, there
might have been a different result and at the very least
there would have been additional analysis, because that
calls for additional analysis beyond the absolute lack
of analysis in this opinion about the nature of the rule
that was actually applied to this defendant.
Without that sort of analysis, you can't say
that the Court is looking at whether this -- this
particular exercise of discretion came within the small
window that that court would allow to the States. That
-- that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, it would be really
odd, considering that one member of the panel was on
both cases, Stapleton, and these cases are in the same
year, for at least that judge not to think that what he
said in the one case was in no conflict with what he
said in the other.
MR. EISENBERG: And yet we have a result,
Your Honor, which is explainable only on the ground that
the State court rule maintains some power of discretion
by the State courts. There is nothing else in the
opinion that explains the result in this case.
But I emphasize again that, even if the
court had applied a different rule, the rule that it
said it was applying in some of the Third Circuit's
other panel opinions, we would still be left with a
standard which is far narrower than anything that this
Court has actually applied in its own decisions.
There have been a variety of phrases in the
Court's decisions, things like "firmly established,"
"strictly followed," "regularly applied."
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it seems to me that
that's not what the Third -- Third Circuit was saying.
It was saying that adequacy of the rule is determined by
the law in effect at the time of the waiver, and it
wasn't well-established.
Now, I have real problems with that as an
opening premise, but that's not what you asked us to
resolve in your petition.
MR. EISENBERG: Well, I don't think that
there is an analysis of whether the law was -- was
established at the time of the waiver, Your Honor,
because what the court says, or at least what the
precedents it rely on say, is that at the time of the
waiver here, assuming for the moment that that's the
relevant inquiry, the rule was discretionary.
The question then has to be, was that rule
applied to the defendant? If a different rule is
applied to the defendant, if the difference --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I don't know
how you say that. Yes, it was clearly established that
the district court had discretion -- none of the
justices below disagreed with this -- to dismiss
post-verdict motions on the basis of flight. The courts
below themselves said: What we don't have a rule about
is what we do with respect to a post-judgment motion to
reinstate or how we the appellate court will treat that
waiver once it comes before us. Will we apply it to the
appellate process as well?
I understood the Third Circuit to be saying
that it was those two latter components, which the
courts below themselves identified as new questions,
that it was resolving, that involve new rules.
MR. EISENBERG: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's as simply as I
thought the issue was. Maybe your adversary will
dissuade me and concede your point that what the court
was saying, the discretionary application, is what was
at issue, but if as I've described things is correct,
how does your position continue to be sustained?
MR. EISENBERG: That wasn't State law in
fact, Your Honor. The State courts didn't make the kind
of decision that the Federal court, not actually in this
case, but in the case that it cited, Doctor, tried to
make. That is a distinction that Doctor invented from
State law. It is not a distinction that the State cases
announced themselves.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what you are
disagreeing with is the Third Circuit's conclusion of
what the status of Pennsylvania law was?
MR. EISENBERG: Well, that would have been
clearer, I think, if we were appealing from the Doctor
decision here now rather than from this decision, but I
think that there is at the very least a great degree of
unclarity in exactly what the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, Doctor dealt with
what will the court do with respect to, not post-verdict
motions, but with respect to appeals that are raised
before or after flight.
MR. EISENBERG: That is what Doctor said was
a distinction in State law.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And that's what Doctor
said?
MR. EISENBERG: Doctor said that. Only that
Federal court said that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So now the only other --
Kindler now raises a new question: What are we going to
do -- according to the courts below, what are we going
to do with post-verdict motions to reinstate and to
appeals that result after flight and after waiver;
correct?
MR. EISENBERG: In fact, not a new question
at all under State law, Your Honor. And we have cited
several State court opinions --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's where the
disagreement lies: Did the Third Circuit get
Pennsylvania law wrong on this issue.
MR. EISENBERG: I think that's at least
where the disagreement lie -- lay between the
Commonwealth and Kindler below. As I say, I think
there's a great --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. Let's assume
the Third Circuit, that we take the hypothetical that
they were right. How do you still win?
MR. EISENBERG: Then the question becomes,
Your Honor, whether the alleged discrepancy, difference
in the State law or -- or degree of unclarity is
sufficient to meet this Court's adequacy test.
And that's where I think we get back to
Federal analogies like the Federal fugitive flight rule.
And I'd like to address that -- that question, and then
reserve the remainder of my time for rebuttal.
Under the Federal fugitive flight rule, many
of these kinds of distinctions have never been spelled
out. The courts simply laid out a general rule starting
in the late 1800s that it was within our discretion to
dismiss.
But despite the fact that the Court hasn't
basically subdivided the rule with the nit-picking
analysis that the Doctor court tried to impose on the
Pennsylvania cases, that doesn't make the fugitive-
forfeiture rule inadequate and therefore inapplicable to
defendants. In fact, even after this Court's decision
in Ortega-Rodriguez, which overturned an automatic
forfeiture rule on -- applied by the Federal Court of
Appeals, the Court allowed the district court's
discretion to carry out the fugitive-forfeiture rule as
they saw fit under the circumstances. And the day after
Ortega-Rodriguez, despite the fact that no substandards
had yet been developed, there was still a Federal
fugitive-forfeiture rule --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask one question
before your time is gone? Has there ever been a
precedent in Pennsylvania where they have applied the
procedural default rule against a capital defendant who
-- who was guilty of flight?
MR. EISENBERG: No, Your Honor, and I think
that that's an excellent example of what I was just
saying. The fact that the general rule of fugitive-
forfeiture hadn't yet addressed the subquestion of
whether there should be an exception for capital
defendants did not render the State rule inadequate.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But wasn't there -- wasn't
there a general rule that capital defendants always get
one shot at their constitutional issues?
MR. EISENBERG: No, Your Honor. At this
time, there was simply a rule that said that in capital
cases we will apply a limited form of relaxation of
our -- of our rules to address significant questions.
When you look at that language, it's almost exactly the
same as the Federal plain error rule.
JUSTICE STEVENS: But were there
Pennsylvania cases in which they had prevented a capital
defendant from raising a Federal constitutional issue
for the first time?
MR. EISENBERG: No, Your Honor. There had
only been a few capital cases even decided at the time
of the flight here.
The point is that the way that the --
JUSTICE STEVENS: How about other rules? In
capital cases, had they applied other procedural default
rules at -- for the first time a capital defendant
sought to raise a constitutional issue?
MR. EISENBERG: At that time, I think they
had not yet, but really, there are only a handful of --
JUSTICE STEVENS: So then how can you have a
firmly established rule?
MR. EISENBERG: I don't think you have a
firmly established rule, Your Honor, because you have --
the firmly established rule was the preexisting rule
requiring preservation of error claims, in the same way
that under the Federal plain error rule the rule is you
have to preserve your claims.
A defendant cannot come along and say: Hey,
in Rule 52(b) it says that if my claim is plain and
significant it's not waived, and therefore I have no
obligation to ever preserve my claims. The Federal
plain error rule is an exception that might apply to
you, but it doesn't do away with the underlying rule of
issue preservation.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Lawry.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MATTHEW C. LAWRY
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. LAWRY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I first want to address what is really at
stake here. The Commonwealth wants this Court to change
the adequate State ground doctrine so that Mr. Kindler
may be executed with no review by any court of his
meritorious claims that his death sentence was
unconstitutional.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that's
because he escaped. He avoided judicial process, and
you would have him be in the same position once he's
captured and returned and captured and returned as he
was before he escaped at all, right?
MR. LAWRY: Well, the question is, was there
a firmly established and consistently applied State rule
that would result in all of his claims being taken away.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And you think
that -- and you don't think -- you think you can argue
that a State rule saying, look, if you escape and flee
the jurisdiction, you bar -- your claims cannot be
adequate and independent?
MR. LAWRY: No, I don't think that, Your
Honor. What -- what -- what this Court has always
required and what we are arguing, this Court has always
required that a State procedural rule be firmly
established and consistently applied in order to take
away a litigant's claims.
And our position and what the Third Circuit
below held was that in numerous respects, the -- the
rules that the State court applied here were not firmly
established or consistently applied.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What rules -- I'm --
MR. LAWRY: Well, it's really --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What is -- what is your
position as to what the Third Circuit was saying or
holding? Are you saying, like your adversary, that they
were saying because it was discretionary and there were
a lot of exceptions to it, it wasn't firmly established?
Or were you -- or do you read it as saying, now that you
have made it mandatory, that's a new rule -- the waiver
mandatory, that's a new rule?
MR. LAWRY: Well -- well, to begin with,
what we're saying is that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's not what you are
saying. What do you think the Third Circuit said?
MR. LAWRY: What -- what I would suggest the
Third Circuit said is that this case is very like
Doctor. It said Doctor was controlling precedent, and
Doctor involved a defendant who fled pretrial or in the
middle of trial, and at that time there was a sort of
two-part rule in Pennsylvania for dealing with fugitive-
forfeiture.
One part was -- and this is in noncapital
cases. One part was if the defendant flees during the
appellate process, then the appeal could be dismissed.
The other part was if it's any time before that, there
is discretion.
And -- and so, when Doctor appealed, by the
time his appeal was heard, Pennsylvania had changed its
rule completely to one in which a flight at any time, at
any time at all, was considered a complete forfeiture.
And that was -- it was that change from a discretionary
rule to a forfeiture rule that the Third Circuit said in
Doctor was inadequate. And it said again in Kindler
that the same kind of change was inadequate.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What was the change --
MR. LAWRY: The change --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that you think the
Third Circuit was identifying?
MR. LAWRY: The change that the Third
Circuit identified was from a -- a situation where there
was complete discretion -- and really more often than
not, even in noncapital cases, the discretion was
exercised to hear the issues. It changed from that to
one where there is essentially a -- a presumption of --
of waiver or forfeiture and some potential way to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Let's assume that a
lower court in this case had said: You know, we have
discretion, but we're not going to exercise it because
you escaped twice and were away much longer than most
fugitives. There is a presumption that witnesses'
memories fade, that it's harder for trials that are so
distant from the event, that distant from an event. We
are not going to exercise our discretion.
Is it your view -- because that's the
undertone I'm hearing -- that under firmly established
ground that the court would have still ruled that that
exercise of discretion was not adequate under --
MR. LAWRY: That the Third Circuit would
have said that?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yeah.
MR. LAWRY: It's a very -- it's a very
different case. I think if --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Sure, it is. But what
you -- there is a tone to the way you presented this
case that says because they chose often to exercise
discretion in the past, if they choose not to in any
case, it's no longer an independent State ground.
That's what -- is that the point you are arguing?
MR. LAWRY: No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Because that's the
question presented.
MR. LAWRY: That's not the point that we are
arguing. What we are arguing is that there needs to be
consistent application of the rules. And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, that begs your
adversary's question, which is every case has one or
more differences in it. At what point does a lower
court have to -- can it say, you know, yes, because they
exercised discretion sometimes but not others it's still
an independent State ground to find forfeiture?
MR. LAWRY: There -- there are several
things that are important in this kind of situation.
One is how -- it's really how is the rule being applied.
And if -- if the rule is -- if there is a situation
where -- where in the vast majority of cases the rule is
being applied to deny review and there are occasional
acts of grace, that's one thing. It's very different
when almost every time the situation comes up review is
allowed and then in the occasional exception, without
explanation, it's taken away.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, following
up on that, I'd like your answer to this question: Is a
State procedural rule automatically inadequate and,
therefore, unenforceable when the State rule is
discretionary rather than mandatory? Automatically?
MR. LAWRY: No, it is not automatically
inadequate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you agree --
MR. LAWRY: It's not our position --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you agree with
the Petitioner's response to that question? Their
point -- their question presented is, is it
automatically inadequate because there is discretion?
They say no, you say no.
MR. LAWRY: And we don't think that the --
that the Third Circuit said --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that was
the same -- that was the position you took in your
opposition to certiorari.
MR. LAWRY: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And yet we
nonetheless granted -- granted cert.
MR. LAWRY: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, if some of
us -- or I suppose if several of us -- think that that
may have been or was what the Third Circuit said, would
you have any objection to us vacating the opinion,
explaining since you both agree that the rule is not
automatically inadequate, make sure they understand
that, and then they can proceed however they see fit?
MR. LAWRY: I would have no objection to
that, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Insofar as the ongoing
rule is concerned, let's assume that as of the time of
Doctor, which was a Third Circuit case, 1996, the
Pennsylvania rule was then clear, Pennsylvania for the
first time having made its rule clear. Would it be
improper to apply it to this defendant, because he
escaped before Doctor made it clear? I -- I just don't
understand why the general rules of -- of -- of waiver
apply in this case. It -- it doesn't affect rational
conduct. It doesn't trap an attorney. Why can't we
take the rule as it was when we heard his case after he
had been returned as a fugitive?
MR. LAWRY: Well, part of the problem here
is that -- that Pennsylvania law and what the
Pennsylvania rule is was a moving target throughout this
time period. There was the -- the discretionary sort of
regime under Galloway which -- which did hold as Doctor
describes it. Then there was a time period when there
was absolute forfeiture. Then there was another time
period where they backed away from that.
And so that -- that kind of shifting, of
turning procedural rules on and off, is the antithesis
of consistent application of rules.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that may be, but
where -- where do you get that from the opinion of the
court of appeals here? I find it very easy to get from
the opinion of the court of appeals the proposition that
if there is discretion, it's not a firmly established
rule.
Where do you get your theory, that they had
changed it from a discretionary rule to a mandatory rule
at the time that the State court made this ruling?
Where do you find that in the opinion of the court of
appeals?
MR. LAWRY: Well, I -- I would -- I would
acknowledge that it's a bit cryptic, but I think because
the Third Circuit in Kindler said that Doctor is what's
controlling in its analysis, I think you really have to
read it in light of Doctor. And Doctor makes very clear
that what the Third Circuit was looking at there was a
change from a discretionary rule to a mandatory rule.
JUSTICE BREYER: So they are going to say, I
imagine below -- I'm not sure -- say: Look, that's
right, and Doctor talked about the shift from mandatory
to discretionary, and the district court -- the State,
in Doctor, said that it was a mandatory -- it's
mandatory.
But in this case, the district court said
it's discretionary. So insofar as there are two rules
-- or were at the time, your client got the benefit of
the most liberal, and, therefore, insofar as there is a
difference, it made no difference.
MR. LAWRY: Well, actually our client didn't
get the benefit of a number of things that were clearly
established law in Pennsylvania at the time.
First off, there was the policy of relaxed
waiver that applied to all capital cases and meant
merits review of all issues. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's -- that's a
different issue. Now, your -- your assertion is that
what the court of appeals was based on -- decision
was -- was not this that you are arguing now, but
rather, it was based on the fact that there had been a
change in the law from discretionary to mandatory.
I can't find that, frankly, in the opinion,
except in its reference to Doctor, so I have got to go
back and read Doctor and guess that that's what they
meant when they referred to Doctor.
But assuming it's true, Justice Breyer says,
even if it is true, what difference does it make?
Because, even if they had changed from a discretionary
to a mandatory, the trial court in the State had not
realized that they had changed and gave him the
discretionary.
So what -- what complaint do you have?
MR. LAWRY: Well, it's not even clear,
really, what -- what the trial court was applying, but I
think that there are -- there are a number of serious
problems with -- with the consistent application in this
case.
If you want to look for just the most
obvious ones, Reginald Lewis, a capital defendant, and
Mr. Kindler escaped together, at the same time, the same
day, together. Mr. Lewis got complete full review,
merits review, of all of his issues on direct appeal,
all of his issues in post-conviction. Mr. Kindler got
no review.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. And that
is -- your objection is that it wasn't fairly applied.
Discretion was abused in this case, to borrow from the
Federal law. They didn't treat them the same. They
should have treated them the same.
But the question is whether the rule is
automatically inadequate if there is discretion. You
are arguing about how it was applied, which I guess
means that it's not automatically inadequate because if
they apply it the way you think it should be then it
would be adequate.
MR. LAWRY: I -- I lost your train of
thought there. I apologize.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe I did, too.
(Laughter.)
MR. LAWRY: No. I don't think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the point is you
are arguing about the application -- the exercise of
discretion. You say the one guy, Lewis, got the benefit
of the rule; your guy didn't get the benefit of the
rule; and that's unfair, right?
MR. LAWRY: That's -- that's part of what
I'm arguing. Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you are not
arguing -- which would be very odd to argue -- that the
discretion always makes the rule invalid because you --
MR. LAWRY: No. We are not -- we are not
arguing that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do I -- Do I take it
that -- that Justice -- Justice Breyer's question,
repeated by Justice Scalia -- just take that fact,
that's the only question before us. If it was
discretionary and it's now mandatory, just focus on that
only.
MR. LAWRY: Uh-huh.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then your client isn't
hurt? If you take --
MR. LAWRY: No, he is hurt if it is now
mandatory, yes, because -- because it's -- it's like --
it's like Ford or any of the other cases where -- where
the rules are being changed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If -- if the new rule was
applied to him.
MR. LAWRY: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the point is the new
rule wasn't applied to him. The trial court thought
that it had discretion.
MR. LAWRY: Well, yes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's clear from the trial
court's opinion, isn't it?
MR. LAWRY: Okay. But -- but what I'm
focusing on is what the Pennsylvania Supreme Court did,
and they did a number of things.
Another thing that the Pennsylvania Supreme
Court did was they said, in the direct appeal opinion,
Mr. Kindler's flight makes his case like somebody who
affirmatively goes and gives up his direct appeal
altogether. All right.
Now, the people that they mentioned who
affirmatively gave up their direct appeals altogether,
when those defendants went and sought post-conviction
--
relief, they got full post-conviction review in the
Pennsylvania courts. When Mr. Kindler went, he got no
review.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: By whom?
MR. LAWRY: By any -- I'm sorry. By either
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no. Stop.
Is the relaxed waiver rule one that applies
to district court consideration or appellate court
consideration or both?
MR. LAWRY: It applies at all levels.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: At all levels. What is
your reading of what the new rule that the State was
announcing was announcing? That it was doing away with
the State court's relaxed waiver rule? Was it doing it
away with its own relaxed waiver rule? What's your
position in this case?
MR. LAWRY: The -- the State courts simply
did not apply relaxed waiver to Mr. Kindler.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: None of them, including
the trial court?
MR. LAWRY: Including -- including the trial
court, yes. Mr. Kindler asked for relaxed -- in fact,
when the Commonwealth initially moved to dismiss his
post-verdict motions, the Commonwealth said: We know
there is this relaxed waiver out there, so if you -- if
you don't dismiss his post-verdict motions entirely, at
least dismiss the guilt phase and consider his issues
with regard to capital sentencing. The Commonwealth
said that.
So -- so the -- so there's -- there's no
question that -- that, on the PCRA appeal, what the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court applied was a mandatory rule.
They said it's forfeited, no review whatsoever, and --
and that would be the difference --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: By the trial court and
by us, is that what you're --
MR. LAWRY: Yes, yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: How would you fill in this
sentence? I'm beginning where the Chief Justice did.
Say everybody said: Look, this opinion is at least
unclear. It's -- everybody agrees that the simple
existence of discretion does not make a State ground
inadequate, so we send it back for you now. And you
will have some good arguments, I guarantee each side
will have some good arguments, as to whether they were
being consistent or not, whether there was a consistent
rule or not.
MR. LAWRY: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, next sentence, which
maybe would never be written: This is not to say that
discretion automatically means it's adequate, for it
could be applied inconsistently.
Now, there could be another sentence,
because that other sentence would have to go on to the
fact that any discretionary rule will never be applied
with perfect consistency or anywhere near it. That
would be true if you give a trial judge the choice in
his discretion to waive a -- a time limit ruling.
Some will do it with one. Some will do it
in the other. You can't do it perfectly. So is there
any sentence we could put in there? So you hedged on
there, and probably they will, too, because it's very
hard to find the right sentence.
You don't want the simple application of
discretion, you say -- which inevitably means some
inconsistency, to make a State rule inadequate. On the
other hand, they can't go too far. So what is too far?
MR. LAWRY: Well, I would -- I would
actually direct you to Judge Harlan's opinion in
Sullivan, where he says: "A court has an obligation to
be reasonably consistent and to explain the decision,
including the reason for according different treatment
to the instant case." But that never happened --
JUSTICE BREYER: But, but, but, but, but, a
trial Supreme Court -- a Supreme Court in a State is
supervising lots of trial courts, and you will have
different human beings sitting there as judges, and they
will inevitably be inconsistent with each other to some
degree. Have you not noticed that?
MR. LAWRY: Certainly.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: So is there anything we can
say that will improve the situation? That's why I
started out by saying maybe the best thing is to say
nothing.
MR. LAWRY: Well, the -- the key is really
consistent application and -- and looking to see whether
the rules are being turned off and on.
Like I would -- I would point the Court to
Barr v. City of Columbia, which I think is a very good
example, where there is maybe five people who make the
same objection, and four of them get merits review, and
the other person doesn't get merits review. Now, maybe
there's some explanation somewhere for that, but this
Court said: You know, this is not what we call
adequacy; this is not consistent application.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the problem --
Justice Stevens' question brought this up. I mean, how
do you address that question if you don't have very many
applications of the rule?
MR. LAWRY: Well, it's certainly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Say it's the first
one that comes up.
MR. LAWRY: Well, it would certainly help to
give a -- a reasoned explanation of what's happening.
There -- you -- you're not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but your
reasoned explanation --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But all -- all those books
on our wall are the first time it's ever come up. I
mean, that's how the law -- that's how the law is made.
So -- the whole point of the adequate independent State
ground, it seems to me, is part we don't want to affect
rational conduct retroactively -- not applicable here.
Two, we don't want to have the State court use this as a
subterfuge or a device to avoid a Federal right. I
don't think that's applicable here. You might want to
argue about that.
So it seems to me that the fact that it's a
completely new rule in the case of an escape may mean it
is still an adequate ground.
MR. LAWRY: Well, I would -- I certainly
would argue that there -- there is every reason to see a
potential for the State seeking to avoid Federal review.
Look at the relaxed waiver cases in the attachment to
the brief. There are 51 cases over a 20-year period
where the State courts reviewed every single issue on
the merits in a capital case, regardless of what
happened below.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they concluded that was
ridiculous, so they stopped doing it.
MR. LAWRY: But -- but during the time
period, during the relevant time period in Mr. Kindler's
-- from his escape all the way through his PCRA
proceedings, that was the rule. And then they changed
it, which is similar to -- to some of the other things
that we see in this case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But those weren't escape
cases. Were they all escape cases?
MR. LAWRY: Oh, no. No.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that's the point.
Why isn't escape sui generis, and how can we ever say
that?
MR. LAWRY: Well, but -- but if you want to
look at what the Pennsylvania Supreme Court actually
said here, they said Mr. Kindler's case is in the
category like people who affirmatively waive. Okay,
that's what they said on direct appeal. Then you look
in PCRA, on the PCRA appeal, and they don't treat him
--
like the people who affirmatively waive. That's not
consistent application.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You don't doubt that
it would be an independent and adequate State rule to
say whenever anybody escapes they waive their claims?
MR. LAWRY: That -- certainly, going forward
that's -- that's an adequate rule, yes.
Another -- another aspect --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, what's the interest
in not applying this in this case? As you say, that's a
fine rule. If you are a fugitive, you are out. You say
that wasn't the rule at the time he escaped. But you
are not asserting any reliance interest by the escapee,
that, gee, if I knew that the rule was going to be
mandatory, I wouldn't have a chance to appeal to the
discretion, I wouldn't have escaped.
There is no -- there is no absence of notice
that -- that matters. I mean, if he had notice he would
have still escaped, I assume.
MR. LAWRY: Yes, but the -- the issue here
is not solely about notice to Mr. Kindler. There is an
issue also about evasion of Federal review. That goes
right back to Ward, in like 1920, talking about State
courts seeking to take away this Court's jurisdiction by
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you just said that it
would be okay to have a rule going forward that if you
are a fugitive, you are out.
MR. LAWRY: But that -- but that's if it's a
firmly established rule that is consistently. And
that's not what we see here. And let me give you
another example of that. Even in a noncapital case, the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court never held that a
presentencing flight meant that the defendant would get
no post-conviction review. They -- they affirmatively
rejected that idea in Commonwealth v. Huff. But for
Mr. Kindler they said a presentencing flight means no
post-conviction review. Put simply --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What is -- what is
the Federal fugitive rule?
MR. LAWRY: The Federal fugitive rule is --
that was set in Ortega-Rodriguez -- says that a flight
presentencing does not take away your appellate rights.
It says that the district court has discretion how it
would want to deal with that. It also --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Has discretion?
MR. LAWRY: It has discretion. It says, you
know, the blunderbuss of dismissal is not -- is not an
appropriate -- is not usually an appropriate device,
because there are a lot of other things the district
courts can do short of taking away all appellate rights,
no review by any court anywhere.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does the discretion
that the Pennsylvania courts have here -- is that
similar? Can the Pennsylvania Supreme Courts exercise
that discretion in a calibrated way, not all or nothing?
MR. LAWRY: They -- they certainly could.
The -- one of the things that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Were you still answering
the Chief Justice's -- I had -- had one more.
MR. LAWRY: No.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I didn't mean to
interrupt.
You said there was no post-conviction
review. I -- I thought they in this case went on to
ask -- to exercise a limited review. They didn't reach
the Mills v. Maryland point, but they did give a limited
review to determine the sufficiency of the evidence,
whether the death penalty was a product of passion or
prejudice, whether the evidence fails to support the
finding of the aggravating circumstance, whether the
sentence was extensive or proportional. They did give
post --
MR. LAWRY: -conviction review.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- -conviction review on
all those points.
MR. LAWRY: Well, those were -- those were
direct appeal things that they looked at, yes. The --
the -- those are part of the statutory appellate review
for capital cases in Pennsylvania.
As far as I am aware, nobody has ever gotten
relief from that statutorily mandated direct appeal
review. But in post-conviction, they -- they gave no
review at all to the post-conviction claims, including
the ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: There is a certain irony
that the case you're relying on on the merits is Mills,
where if he hadn't escaped he would have gone through
the whole process before Mills was decided.
MR. LAWRY: Well, but he may well have
gotten relief anyway. He raised -- he actually raised
an objection, a Mills-type objection at trial. It was
raised in the post-verdict motions. It would presumably
have been raised on direct appeal. And -- and if it had
been so raised on direct appeal he could have -- and he
didn't win on direct appeal, he could have sought
post-conviction relief in Pennsylvania based on the fact
that Mills came down later, because the Pennsylvania
retroactivity rule is that you can get retroactive
application of a decision if you -- if you objected. If
you raised the issue earlier and a new decision comes
down that would help you, you can raise that later.
So the idea of a windfall that was raised in
the Commonwealth's brief doesn't -- he didn't get a
windfall. He didn't get any review in State court, and
there's also of course the ineffective assistance of
counsel claim. The law has not changed on the
ineffective assistance of counsel claim.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, he got the
windfall of being free for eight years, right? I guess
that gets back to the point of your friend, which is he
is in no worse position because he escaped and spent
eight years on the lam than if he had stayed in prison.
MR. LAWRY: He is in much worse position.
He -- he just -- he just had all -- all review taken
away in the State courts and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. Obviously
if the State prevails he's in a worse position. But
under your view, he's in this -- he's in no worse
position. He hasn't waived all his objections and
claims, procedures.
MR. LAWRY: Well, there are certainly other
things that the State can do. They can -- they can
prosecute him criminally for escape. There is
administrative confinement, those kinds of things. But
there is really --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Before or after his
execution?
(Laughter.)
MR. LAWRY: Well, there -- this -- this
Court said in Ortega-Rodriguez that -- that increasing
somebody's sentence by a number of years based on escape
would introduce an element of arbitrariness and
irrationality, and -- and certainly changing the
sentence from life to death based on disrespect to the
courts seems like a fairly -- a fairly serious
consequence.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I'm sorry, if
I could just nail down the point. As far as his rights
and proceedings in this case, he is in no worse position
under your theory having escaped and been out for
eight years than if he had stayed put?
MR. LAWRY: In -- in Federal court if it's
held, as we argue, that the State court rulings were not
adequate, that's true. And their argument is he should
be executed with no review by any court.
I do want to return for a minute to relaxed
waiver because, you know, the primary argument that I
heard was that in 1984 at the time of the escape that
relaxed waiver wasn't that firmly established. That's
simply not true. There are four decisions applying
relaxed waiver prior to 1984, and those decisions held
that a person who affirmatively waived a constitutional
issue -- I see my time is up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Finish your
sentence.
MR. LAWRY: There -- okay. There are four
cases and in every case the Pennsylvania Supreme Court
gave full merits review to all issues, even issues that
were only first raised at oral argument.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I please --
MR. LAWRY: Sure.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do you pick 1984 as the
time of the escape? Whether it's an adequate or
independent State ground, whether it's been consistently
applied, it seemed to me -- it seems to me you should
look to the time at which the State rule is applied.
Now, as of 1984 I suppose there are some
notice requirements that you can say due process
requires, but I don't know why the adequacy of the State
ground, whether it's consistently applied, should be
judged on the basis of what was the law in 1984, rather
than what was the State law at the time they applied the
rule.
MR. LAWRY: Well, there -- there is a
question about whether that is introducing a novel rule.
But -- but I was -- in the comments I was just making, I
was principally addressing the Commonwealth's argument
that relaxed waiver wasn't that well established in
84.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Eisenberg, you have four minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF RONALD EISENBERG
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. EISENBERG: Mr. Lawry's answer to the
question about a mandatory forfeiture rule, Your Honors,
I think is the crucial one here. When asked whether an
automatic mandatory forfeiture rule would be adequate,
he said yes. And I think that's the problem with just
trying to remand this case without doing more, because
that's where you wind up.
If the lower Federal courts continue to
undertake the kind of consistency analysis that they
think consistency requires, it will drive that sort of
discretion out, and you will wind up with forfeiture
rules and other State procedural rules that are all
automatic, because that's the way the Federal courts
will be telling the State courts that their rules will
be found adequate State grounds and enforceable on
Federal habeas corpus review.
There was no subterfuge here the -- to avoid
or evade the Federal question. The argument in favor of
that position is: Look at all the other cases where the
State court did address Federal constitutional
questions. Well, exactly. Of course we did in many
other capital cases. And the -- the penalty for trying
to be lenient in those other cases is that now in the
worst case we can't apply any sort of forfeiture, any
sort of procedural bar, even for a guy who breaks out of
jail twice. The State court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what about his --
his colleague who broke out with him? How do you -- how
do you explain that.
MR. EISENBERG: That defendant was gone less
than two weeks. And, so, we withdrew our motion to
quash his appeal. It's not just that the State court
didn't grant it, we withdrew it because he was
recaptured in New York two weeks later.
This guy was out for seven years. After he
was captured the first time in Canada and started to
fight extradition, his post verdict motions were
dismissed. The motions that he had been -- and told him
that under state law at that time were absolutely
essential to preserving any claim for further review,
and his response to the dismissal of his post verdict
motions after the first escape was to break out of jail
again a second time.
During the second escape, somebody died,
another prisoner fell to his death. During the first
escape the plan, the diversion that allowed this
defendant to sneak out through the window he sought
through was to have a riot staged on the part of the
other prisoners, during which they tried to push one of
the prison guards off the third tier of the prison cells
to the floor below. That would -- that caused all the
other guards to rush up. During that time the defendant
slipped out the window.
That's why this was the case where the court
exercised its discretion to impose a procedural bar.
Mr. Lawry says, well, the Commonwealth just wants to
execute him without any sort of review.
He did have limited review, as Justice
Kennedy pointed out, but really you are left with only
the two choices of imposing a procedural bar, a bar that
this Court said was longstanding and well established in
American law in Estelle v. Dorrough --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask --
MR. EISENBERG: -- or else leaving the
defendant better off than he would otherwise have been.
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this question?
We have all been somewhat trouble because some ambiguity
in the opinion below. What if we -- I think your
opponent answered this question. What if we were to say
that the answer to the question presented, in italics in
your brief is no? And send it back to the court of
appeals and tell them whether they -- that would change
their decision or not.
Would you agree that were a proper
disposition.
MR. EISENBERG: No, Justice Stevens. I
think the reason the case is worth being here is to
provide greater guidance than to that provide to the
lower courts. I think the reason so many States have
weighed in on this question --
JUSTICE STEVENS: The guidance you have
asked us to give is whether there is this automatic
rule. And if you say there isn't, doesn't that give
guidance? And the answer -- wouldn't that -- that
answer the question on which there is a conflict among
the circuits?
MR. EISENBERG: I'm afraid it doesn't -- it
doesn't help resolve the -- the path to which the Third
Circuit got to that point. And that's really the
underlying problem.
There has been a lot of confusion about this
Court's adequate State grounds doctrine. Not, I would
suggest, so much in the results that this case -- that
this Court has reached, not in the kind of inadequacies
that this Court has found, which by and large deals with
retroactivity or civil rights era cases where the courts
-- the State courts were clearly discriminating against
Blacks defendants in favor of White defendants.
We don't have anything like that here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 2:01 p.m., the case in the
