IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
J. MCINTYRE MACHINERY, LTD., :
Petitioner : No. 09-1343
v. :
ROBERT NICASTRO, ET UX. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, January 11, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:13 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ARTHUR F. FERGENSON, ESQ., Ellicott City, Maryland; on
behalf of Petitioner.
ALEXANDER W. ROSS, JR., ESQ., Marlton, New Jersey; on
behalf of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ARTHUR F. FERGENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ALEXANDER W. ROSS, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ARTHUR F. FERGENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 59
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:13 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 09-1343, J. McIntyre
Machinery, Ltd. v. Nicastro.
Mr. Fergenson.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ARTHUR F. FERGENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FERGENSON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Because J. McIntyre did not direct any
activity at residents of New Jersey either itself or by
directing its distributor MMA to do so and had no
awareness or knowledge that the distributor took the
action that it did toward New Jersey, New Jersey lacked
adjudicative jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SCALIA: When you say "its
distributor," was this distributor at all controlled by
the defendant?
MR. FERGENSON: No, Your Honor. It was not.
And both under Ohio law, Wells v. Komatsu America, and
under the Restatement (Second) Agency, section 1(1), the
right to control is essential to ascribe actions to
create an agency, and it's on a per-purpose basis.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It might be better to refer
to it as the company that distributed its product,
rather than calling it "its distributor."
MR. FERGENSON: Very good, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's loaded, it seems to
MR. FERGENSON: Very good, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Fergenson, in your
question presented to this Court, you ask whether
there's personal jurisdiction -- and I'm quoting here --
"solely because the manufacturer targets the United
States market for the sale of its product."
So I'm taking from that, that you
acknowledge that this manufacturer, McIntyre, a British
manufacturer, targeted the United States market for the
sale of its product. That's correct, yes?
MR. FERGENSON: Your Honor, that's what the
New Jersey Supreme Court held, and that's how we
fashioned the --
JUSTICE KAGAN: That's your question
presented.
MR. FERGENSON: -- the test.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Did this -- well, I'll just
ask you, then: Did this manufacturer target the United
States market? Did it want to sell its products in the
United States?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Okay. So what does that
mean, exactly, Mr. Fergenson? Because the United States
is the United States. It's made up of 50 States. So I
assume that what that means is the manufacturer wanted
to sell its products in each of the 50 States. Is that
right?
MR. FERGENSON: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: It only wanted to sell its
product in a few States?
MR. FERGENSON: No, Your Honor. It wanted
to sell its product anywhere that the distributor could
find. The distributor was the market manager.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Right. Anywhere. So if the
distributor came up with California, that was great. If
the distributor came up with a customer in New Jersey,
that was great. As many as possible, more the better,
all over the United States. Is that right?
MR. FERGENSON: As many as possible,
wherever the -- the distributor could find a customer,
yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Exactly. So you targeted
New Jersey no less than you targeted California or New
York or Illinois or Massachusetts or anything else.
MR. FERGENSON: Well --
JUSTICE KAGAN: You targeted the entire
United States. Why shouldn't there be jurisdiction in
each of the States you targeted?
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, because,
first, this Court's jurisprudence looks to a direct act,
from World-Wide Volkswagen and even before, as it
brought forward Hanson. As this Court has applied
World-Wide Volkswagen, Burger King and Justice
O'Connor's concurrence in Asahi and the other
occurrence -- concurrence, Justice Brennan's concurrence
in Asahi, look toward a specific State --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Fergenson, I suppose
you could say the same thing about any United States
manufacturer --
MR. FERGENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- who would desire to sell
his product in any of the States that would buy it.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And to say that this
foreign manufacturer is therefore suable in any State
would mean that any American manufacturer is suable in
any State, which --
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- none of our cases hold.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, suable in any State
where the incident arises. This is not general
jurisdiction. This is specific jurisdiction. So the
question is, when you target the entire United States
and each of the 50 States within that and an accident
occurs within one of those States, are you subject to
jurisdiction in that State for that accident, for a
claim based on that accident? Not generally, but just
for a claim based on that accident.
Didn't even Justice O'Connor -- you
referenced the Asahi opinions, but Justice O'Connor said
as long as there's purposeful availment, there is
specific jurisdiction, and there is purposeful availment
when there's an active effort to target a market.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, in Burger
King, in Hanson, in World-Wide Volkswagen, the
purposeful availment is defined as conducting activities
within the forum State. The -- this Court, through
those opinions, foreseeability, clear notice, reasonably
anticipate -- all converge.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: In all of those cases,
there was a forum in the United States where someone
injured in the United States could sue. Your
proposition is that a company can deliberately send its
products, wants to exploit a U.S. market. But I take it
that there is no place in the United States, because New
Jersey is no different than California or any other
place -- is it your position that there is no forum in
which McIntyre can be sued, even though it set up this
distribution arrangement for the very purpose of having
its machines in as many locations in the United States
as it could? Is there a forum in the United States
where it could be sued?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Which one?
MR. FERGENSON: Ohio. It could have been
proceeded against in Ohio.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It could be reached in
Ohio. Now, does that make a whole lot of sense? Is it
any more convenient for McIntyre to come to Ohio than
New Jersey? It's a lot less convenient for
Mr. Nicastro, who had his fingers removed by this
machine.
But you -- you are conceding that there is a
forum where this British company can be sued on a tort
that occurred in New Jersey. Explain to me why, since
there is a forum in the United States, the logical one
isn't New Jersey rather than Ohio.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, first, the
issue of convenience, choice of law, conflict of law, as
a determinative factor was rejected by this Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm asking you --
MR. FERGENSON: What?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- the question: Where
can it be sued? Well, something happened in New Jersey.
The machine, allegedly defective machine, caused a harm
there. What happened in Ohio? What basis for specific
jurisdiction is there in Ohio? There was no tort in
Ohio.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, under Ohio
law, the -- there can be an assignment. There was no
written contract between MMA and J. McIntyre. There can
be an assignment in return for a release of a common law
indemnification right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't understand.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Yes, but, Mr. Fergenson,
just picking up where Justice Ginsburg left off, Ohio is
a perfectly good place for jurisdiction over a claim
between the British manufacturer and its distributor in
Ohio. Any kind of contract claim, a claim based on the
agreement between the two -- Ohio is the appropriate
place for jurisdiction. But Ohio does not seem the
appropriate place for jurisdiction -- and again, we're
talking about specific jurisdiction, not general -- as
to a claim based on an accident that occurred in New
Jersey.
The entire idea of specific jurisdiction is
that you need a relationship between the defendant and
the forum and the claim. And here the claim arose in
New Jersey and was in fact not related to Ohio.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, Ohio
explicitly provides, and they -- it's arisen in statute
of limitation cases, and it goes back to Travelers
Indemnity v. Trowbridge, that an action under both
express and common law indemnity arises under contract.
So, upon the assignment -- and there need
not be a judgment under Ohio law; that's Fort Defiance
Construction v. Village of Grover Hill -- there can be
an assignment of a common law indemnity under strict
product liability.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What kind of common law
indemnity are we dealing with here? Where does
Mr. Nicastro sue? He hasn't got any assignment, any
indemnity. Mr. Nicastro is injured in the United States
by a machine manufactured in England, and he wants to
sue, understandably, in the United States. Why are we
talking about assignments, indemnity? That has nothing
to do with Mr. Nicastro.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor, it does.
Mr. Nicastro had an action under strict product
liability. I want to come back to more fully answer the
why question that you asked: Why is it just and right
that he go -- that he to Ohio?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No, I would just like to
know first -- you said there is jurisdiction in Ohio and
not in New Jersey. In New Jersey, it's the place where
the accident occurred; and in Ohio, there's nothing but
the relationship between the distributor -- there's a
contract between the distributor and McIntyre. So why
does Ohio have jurisdiction over this New Jersey tort?
MR. FERGENSON: Ohio has New Jersey --
jurisdiction. There -- as Your Honor noticed, there are
three places that Mr. Nicastro, in looking over this,
could have chosen: United Kingdom, which he is now in,
in filing a claim in the liquidation proceedings; Ohio;
and New Jersey. The accident occurred in New Jersey.
That's a forum non conveniens issue that's -- -
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It's a forum what?
MR. FERGENSON: That's a convenience issue,
a forum non conveniens issue. And Justice Brennan was
clear before Burger King that that's what he wanted to
see the law go in the direction of. He was clear about
that.
Ohio, however, in looking at International
Shoe, going back to International Shoe, which talks
about the relationship between the defendant and the
forum State --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the claim in suit.
That's very important.
MR. FERGENSON: And -- and the cause of
action, yes. There -- the one place where both the
distributor, who would upon suit and then a claim over
under product, strict product liability, would disappear
-- that's why you could get an assignment -- the
distributor is in Ohio, and so too is the contract
relationship.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I still don't -- I don't
follow how Mr. Nicastro gets involved with assignment,
indemnity. Mr. Nicastro has a claim against -- well, he
sued them both, but the distributor is now bankrupt.
And he says, well, this is specific jurisdiction;
specific jurisdiction, as International Shoe teaches, is
where the claim arose. International Shoe, it arose in
the State of Washington because that's where the shoe --
the people who were promoting sale of International
Shoe's -- International Shoe's shoes worked every day.
So it was a claim relating to a tax owed by
International Shoe based on the events that occurred in
California. It was not all-purpose jurisdiction.
And your suggestion that Ohio somehow is a
proper forum for Mr. Nicastro's tort claim, I really
don't follow that.
MR. FERGENSON: It -- Your Honor, it is.
Mr. Nicastro could have contacted MMA, and stated I have
a strict product liability action, or the trustee in
bankruptcy. The statute of limitations was 2 years in
both cases. Ohio would have applied New Jersey strict
liability law.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Your answer to Justice
Ginsburg -- I don't want to make your argument for you,
but it seems to me rather strange. All of a sudden
you're talking about how Ohio law will help you out.
thought the question was, from the standpoint of the
defendant at least, whether the defendant purposefully
availed itself of the forum. And you would say the
defendant here purposefully availed itself of Ohio by
choosing an Ohio distributor. But you don't make that
argument. You're talking about a contract, an
indemnity, which seems to me another step. That's
choice of law and applicable law.
MR. FERGENSON: I agree, Your Honor; it is
choice of law. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Also, I don't think it's
worth your time, because frankly it doesn't make a whole
lot of difference to me whether they can sue in Ohio or
not. You really think that that's --
MR. FERGENSON: And, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about in the United
States? Would the United States have jurisdiction?
MR. FERGENSON: No, because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The United States would
not? They surely targeted the United States.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, in the --
in Justice O'Connor's footnote on national contacts in
Asahi, which was not disputed and I think essentially
accepted by Justice Brennan -- in that footnote, it
states that national contacts is for the national
sovereign to decide.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's right. But if the
national sovereign, the United States, provided by
statute that Federal district courts would have
jurisdiction over any -- any tort suit by a person
injured by a foreign manufacturer that targeted the
United States, would that be proper?
MR. FERGENSON: This Court has not evaluated
under the Fifth Amendment what circumstances it may be,
and this is speculation, how Congress would establish
it. It may be that Congress --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course. It's a
hypothetical.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Hypotheticals are always
speculation.
MR. FERGENSON: I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How do you speculate about
that?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes. Your Honor, I think
that, without Klaxon and with a reasonable choice of
venue, Congress could establish a uniform system to
bring -- to bring foreign defendants into this country.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would you say the same
thing if, hypothetically, since we're engaging in a
hypothetical, the distributor were in France -- machine
manufactured in England, distributor is in France, and
the distributor then selects the United States and then
the same facts, New Jersey? United States would be an
appropriate jurisdiction under the Due Process Clause,
but not New Jersey?
MR. FERGENSON: I think that, with that one
step --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Assuming the statute that
Justice Scalia hypothesizes.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor. I think
that, with that one step beyond --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's a little odd that the
States, which have residual sovereignty, which are not
limited sovereigns, would not have jurisdiction, but the
United States, which is a limited sovereignty other than
in the foreign affairs area, which may be relevant here,
does have jurisdiction. That seems backwards.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, I think
that if one looks at this as part of the Congress's
power to control, let's say, imports, then as a
condition -- and this is what the proposed Foreign
Manufacturers Legal Accountability Act looks for.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, Congress has power to
control the jurisdiction of Federal courts, and Congress
says Federal courts have jurisdiction over this matter.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Fergenson, could I try
another hypothetical?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the question is why
the State can't make the same choice that the Congress
does. The State lacks foreign affairs power, to be
sure. Is that the only distinction? That doesn't sound
to me like due process. What we're talking about is a
source of authority, not fairness to the defendant.
MR. FERGENSON: Well, Your Honor, I think --
and I go to two words in particular in Burger King, one
taken from Hanson, which is "essential": It is
essential in each case that there be a purposeful
availment of the privilege of conducting activities
within the forum. And then the other --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Fergenson, the
question is whether seeking to serve a market -- and
here you're seeking to serve a market in each of the 50
States -- is purposeful availment. So let me -- let me
just try a different hypothetical.
Suppose you had the same arrangement with
your distributor in Ohio, but the arrangement was not to
serve the entire United States market. Instead, the
arrangement was to serve only five States in the
Midwest. That's what you wanted, your client wanted,
the market to be. So it was going to be Ohio and
Indiana and Illinois and Michigan and Iowa, all right?
So now a machine blows up in Illinois. Is there
jurisdiction in Illinois?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: There is jurisdiction in
Illinois, even though your relationship with your
distributor was in Ohio. But there's jurisdiction in
Illinois because the machine blew up there and you were
seeking to serve the market; that's right?
MR. FERGENSON: Because there was a
direction of the distributor to go into the State where
the accident occurred.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Okay. Now we have -- now we
say this is working very well. Let's get another nine
distributors on board. We'll give each of them five
States, all right? Now, if I understand you correctly,
now you're liable all over the United States because
you've had this relationship with 10 different
distributors, each of whom are going to serve 5 States.
So there's personal jurisdiction in any State where a
machine blows up.
MR. FERGENSON: If the -- yes, Your Honor,
if the States are assigned by name.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And now I say: Let's forget
these 10 distributors. Who needs 10 distributors? I'll
just have one distributor.
Why is there any difference?
MR. FERGENSON: Because that distributor --
unless that distributor is told you must go -- like a
traveling salesperson, you must go into each State, you
must personally go into each State -- that's purposeful
availment.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Fergenson, with respect,
this distributor was told to sell as many products as it
could in as many States as it could.
MR. FERGENSON: No, it was not, Your Honor.
It was not told to do anything more than to sell
products, not in as many --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me, counselor --
counselor, going back to --
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- the relationship,
Justice Scalia asked you whether there was legal
control, and you said no. But there was coordination,
wasn't there? Isn't -- doesn't the record show that the
English company traveled to the trade shows with the
American company? Wasn't your president, your English
president, present at the Las Vegas show in which this
New Jersey company first saw the machine? Is that
correct?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I know there's a --
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. And you
approved all marketing efforts. You had to approve --
according to the findings of the court below, you
approved all the marketing materials that the American
company --
MR. FERGENSON: No, Your Honor. There is a
letter that's undated that speaks about we have
advertised under your direction and per your
suggestions.
That letter also states that we've spent
$350,000 and we performed the -- we performed repairs
and warranty service without seeking reimbursement from
you, and that's consistent with the distant relationship
here.
Your Honor, we asked for the names of the
customers. We didn't get it. We didn't get -- we
didn't drop-ship. And that would obviously have been a
lot less expensive in cost rather than shipping it to
Ohio. They were the market maker. They controlled the
relationships with the individual customers.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Then why was your number
and name both printed on the machine and in the warranty
book? The American -- obviously, some customers had to
be reaching out you to because all the materials they
received directed them to the English company, not to
the American company.
MR. FERGENSON: And, Your Honor, the record
shows that we were sued in Kentucky, we were sued in
Massachusetts. The Kentucky dispute was settled -- was
resolved by dismissal under the statute of limitations,
but --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I think you've begged my
question.
MR. FERGENSON: I'm sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You did travel to
certain of the trade shows --
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- with the America
company?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You did make suggestions
with respect to advertising? At least with -- at least
the once, but they did?
MR. FERGENSON: The -- the company that
distributed the products stated in a letter that we
conformed our advertising to what you suggested.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay. And you don't
believe that coordinating your actions with the
distributor and appointing that distributor to
distribute products wherever it can is not enough for
you to reasonably believe -- know that you're going to
be dragged into a State where that product has been
sold --
MR. FERGENSON: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- and has caused
injury?
MR. FERGENSON: That's correct, Your Honor.
And I would ask Your Honor to look at
Professor Kurland's University of Chicago Law Review
article in 1958, very influential, and to look at
footnote 99, in which Professor Kurland quotes, all
quotes, from this Court's transcript of record in
International Shoe. And in international Shoe, the
salespeople were controlled by International Shoe.
JUSTICE BREYER: Right. Can I ask you --
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, first, the word
"distributor" hurts you, so I'm going to take that out,
and I imagine a hypothetical -- I know your case differs
from that, but I'm going to ask them how it differs, not
you, okay?
Now, a person walks into a shop in either
West Virginia or the country of India where they make
pots. They're very nice pots made, actually, in West
Virginia. And the potter makes several thousand a year,
and this individual says: Mr. Potter, I want to sell
your pots; send me a thousand each year. Where are you
going to sell them? Everywhere. Great.
Okay? That's it. Now, suppose that the law
were, as it could be perhaps, that it is sufficient for
jurisdiction throughout the United States that the
distributor or independent buyer said good, I'm selling
them everywhere I can. And two or three end up in New
Mexico, but it doesn't matter where they end up.
Suppose that was sufficient to find jurisdiction.
You've prepared for this case. I want to
know in your opinion, if that were the rule -- that's
all that's necessary -- what cases in this Court in your
opinion would that conflict with? I mean, I'm thinking
of the facts. I'm not thinking of statements of law or
whatever, but you can bring those in, too. I want to
write those down because I want to read those cases, and
you know them better than me.
MR. FERGENSON: Your Honor, I believe that
the -- that the principles of law as stated, because
they're law and they're applied in each case, it could
-- which you apply to the facts, I believe that the
rejection of the convenience test by this Court in
World-Wide Volkswagen, Savchuk, and in Shaffer, where
Justice Brennan posited that there be a convenience
test, that those --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know what a
convenience test is. Assume I'm very ignorant, which
isn't too far from the truth. I would like you to tell
me, are there any cases which we would actually be
conflicting with were we to say all that's necessary to
assert jurisdiction in every State is that a buyer walks
into a shop where the manufacturer of pots makes pots
and tells the potter I'm going to sell everywhere I can,
and the potter says good, okay. Now -- and he buys the
pots.
Now, if that were the rule, can you find a
case that that actually conflicts with?
MR. FERGENSON: I believe that that
conflicts, Your Honor, with Asahi.
JUSTICE BREYER: Asahi, okay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Asahi -- Asahi,
Mr. Fergenson, was a litigation between a Japanese
component part manufacturer and a Taiwanese finished
product manufacturer. What -- how in the world could
you compare that case, which really has nothing at all
to do with the United States? It's -- it's a Japanese
valve manufacturer sells the valve to a tire maker in
Taiwan, and there should be -- that suit should go
forward in the United States?
I can see it going forward in -- in Japan,
but it has no connection with the United States. And
how can you possibly compare that with this case where
somebody was injured by a machine that malfunctions,
allegedly?
There was something very interesting you
said in your brief. And you said the U.K., which you --
you say -- now you've added Ohio, but you said U.K.
would be the place for Mr. Nicastro to go. It provides
a trusted legal system.
What would be your answer if the
manufacturer, same arrangement with a distributor, sell
anyplace in the United States you can, is from China?
Would you give the same answer?
MR. FERGENSON: Your Honor, I would have to
look at -- and -- and the answer would not be, off the
cuff, the same. It would not be flatly the same.
There's been a recent decision by Judge Chasanow on
melamine in which Chasanow applied the availability law
that this Court has set forth in Piper and Gulf Oil
and -- and the other cases that follow, and determined
that China was an available forum for the plaintiffs
suing for the harm to their children from tainted milk.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You -- you made a point
about the trusted legal system. Well, let's say it was
Russia, Mexico -- you may pick any one. The machine is
manufactured in one of those countries where it's not so
certain that there's a trusted legal system.
MR. FERGENSON: That's correct, Your Honor.
And so under Piper, Gulf Oil -- and I can't remember the
name of the other case that Judge Chasanow relied
upon -- they are difficult cases, and the ability of the
court to determine whether the other forum is available
is quite cabined. And they are difficult, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Those that -- the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Perhaps you'd like
to reserve some of your time for rebuttal, counsel.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you.
Mr. Ross.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ALEXANDER W. ROSS, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. ROSS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
"All we wish to do is sell our products in
the States and get paid." That's what the British
manufacturer said.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if he said we
want to do that, but we don't like New Jersey, so don't
sell our products in New Jersey, and the Ohio company
nonetheless does so? Can you get them -- can you hale
them into court in New Jersey?
MR. ROSS: I would say under those
circumstances, yes, because the purpose that -- this
particular manufacturer purposefully availed themselves
of the entire U.S. market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But he said: But I
have no intention of selling in New Jersey; I'm afraid I
might get sued there, and I don't want to get sued
there. He is not entering the stream of commerce in the
United States. He's entering a stream of commerce that
detours around New Jersey.
MR. ROSS: So every State with the exception
of New Jersey -- is that the hypothetical, Your Honor?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. ROSS: Then I would say under those
circumstances, yes, New Jersey would be excluded.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, it would be
excluded?
MR. ROSS: Yes. If the manufacturer --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it depends on the
intent of the manufacturer?
MR. ROSS: I think it's the intent and the
additional conduct of the manufacturer, Your Honor. I
think, as Justice O'Connor said in the Asahi case -- she
gave several examples. I think we'd meet all those
examples under the circumstances of this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if a manufacturer
tells a distributor: You have international
distribution authority; you can sell my machine anywhere
in the world, sell as many as you can anywhere in the
world -- that would include the United States, right?
MR. ROSS: That is correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And, therefore, it would
include New Jersey?
MR. ROSS: Under those circumstances, of
course, which are different from our case, it would seem
to me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I know; it's a
hypothetical.
MR. ROSS: Of course, of course. But the
fact of the matter is if the manufacturer purposefully
availed itself of -- of the market which would include
the world and had a distributor for the entire world and
did --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It would include New
Jersey.
MR. ROSS: Yes, it would.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Purposeful availment of the
government of New Jersey?
MR. ROSS: I would say the manufacturer has
to take some additional conduct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, availment doesn't
mean much if that's all it means.
MR. ROSS: Well, if --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You tell somebody
distribute in the world and you are availing yourself of
the government of New Jersey?
MR. ROSS: If there is purposeful availment
and additional conduct, Your Honor. In this case,
that's what we have here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Additional conduct?
MR. ROSS: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: What I have written down in
my notes, which you can add to --
MR. ROSS: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is that there are three
things that happened. One -- it's the equivalent of the
potter. One thing that happened, we have to take it as,
I think, an independent company, whether you want to
call them a distributor or not. I didn't see a
difference there. An independent company goes to a firm
somewhere in the world and says: I will buy your
product and sell it in the United States. And the guy
says good. And that's true whether it's a woman's
cooperative in southern India or whether it's the
biggest company in the world, okay? That's the first
thing.
The second thing is that an executive of
that company went to seven trade shows in the United
States.
And the third thing is that two, three, or
four machines ended up in New Jersey.
Now, is there anything other than that? And
there's a lot of rhetoric, and there are all kinds of
characterizations, but when I looked for facts, I found
those three, and I want to be sure I have them all.
MR. ROSS: You do, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: I do. Now, then my
question following from that, if I have those are the
three facts, what worries me is the exact opposite of
what the New -- the New Jersey Supreme Court said. It
said in worldwide markets this is a good thing. I think
I worry about it, because I'm worried about the woman's
cooperative in India, I'm worried about the Chinese
development, I'm worried about development everywhere.
We have a lot of small businesses. And I'd worry --
now, maybe the worry is legally irrelevant -- but I'd
worry about a rule of law that subjects every small
business in every developing company -- in every
developing country to have to be aware of the law in 50
States simply because they agreed to sell to an
independent company who is going to sell to America,
plus your two factors.
And really the third is none, because if it
hadn't ended up somewhere, there'd have been no
accident.
MR. ROSS: I would say --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, that's my basic
concern here.
MR. ROSS: I would say in -- in response to
your hypothetical question, that because there was
purposeful availment where they came to the United
States, attended trade shows in an effort to sell their
product to anyone who would come to that trade show
throughout the United States, and those sales were in
fact consummated, then in that case I think that the
manufacturer has done more than just intend to sell.
They have taken certain positive steps.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Okay, but you see
what my -- my problem is a sort of policy problem that
may be irrelevant, but I -- I don't see how the world's
going to work or develop if in fact every small business
everywhere in the world has to know, you know, the law
of every 50 States and hire lawyers and come here,
rather than making the accident victim go there.
Now, it's tough on the accident victim, but
the other is also tough. So -- so that's -- that's sort
of the -- I'm sketching out my concerns here. You --
MR. ROSS: I understand.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What is --
JUSTICE BREYER: What would you say?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe you could
respond to Justice Breyer's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. ROSS: In -- in my judgment, it's not
enough to just have intent; it's not enough just to send
the product out on -- adrift on the stream of commerce.
There has to be some additional conduct, some concrete
steps taken. And I believe --
JUSTICE BREYER: Trade shows.
MR. ROSS: -- in your hypothetical,
attending the trade shows, perhaps hiring a distributor,
selling the products --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, that's the same as
the first; that's a sale to the entity.
MR. ROSS: That's right. So I think those
are the additional concrete steps that were taken in
your hypothetical.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Ross --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Ross, do you think if
there's a small business in the United States that sells
a product and that actively seeks to serve a foreign
market -- maybe it's Great Britain, maybe it's China --
and that product blows up in that foreign country --
Great Britain, China -- do you think that the
manufacturer, the American manufacturer, is subject to
jurisdiction there?
MR. ROSS: Yes. If they actively seek the
market there, they have purposefully availed themselves,
they have taken --
JUSTICE KAGAN: All -- all over the world
this is true; is that right?
MR. ROSS: Yes. Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And it is a
jurisdictional rule that civil law systems have always
had.
MR. ROSS: That's correct, Your Honor. I
believe --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But -- and I assume that if
we do this to a company in England, any country in the
world, and we say that this satisfies due process, we
would have to honor a judgment from Bangladesh based
upon -- against an American company, based upon a
similarly modest degree of -- of availment, right?
MR. ROSS: Well, Your Honor, it depends on
the extent of the availment, I would say, under those
circumstances.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Just as -- just as modest
as what you propose here, or as extensive. I don't mean
to demean the degree of it here.
MR. ROSS: It seems to me -- if there's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But the same kind of
contact in India, which has different -- different
States in India. And -- strike Bangladesh. Make it
Madras, okay?
MR. ROSS: All right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And we would have to honor
a judgment by a court of Madras against an American
manufacturer who had as little contact with Madras as
exists here.
MR. ROSS: I would say under -- yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: We would have to?
MR. ROSS: Yes, I would say.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Ross, we do that now;
isn't that right?
MR. ROSS: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: We do? We do? So if
someone goes into a shop in West Virginia and buys a
thousand pots and says I'm going to sell them in Madras,
or I might sell them anywhere in the world --
MR. ROSS: That's a slightly --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and then that
manufacturer, that potter in West Virginia, now has to
go to wherever he ends up -- wherever that pot ends up?
MR. ROSS: That's a slightly different
scenario in my judgment, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: Ah. Ah.
MR. ROSS: -- because the distributor came
to the manufacturer. In this case, the manufacturer
from Britain hired --
JUSTICE BREYER: We turn it on that? We
turn it on whether the independent buyer -- the
independent buyer walked into the shop or whether the
seller found that there was an independent buyer? Is
that what this case should turn on?
I mean, I'm nervous. I see a lot of rather
deep issues here, and I -- that's what are making me
nervous.
MR. ROSS: I understand, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: I want to --
MR. ROSS: I understand that.
JUSTICE BREYER: You've thought about it
more than I. So --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can we go back to Justice
Scalia's question? I mean, the United States has been
telling the rest of the world: We do recognize and
enforce your judgments --
MR. ROSS: I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- if there is a -- a
proper jurisdictional basis.
MR. ROSS: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We do, and we would like
you to recognize ours. And we don't get that
reciprocity, but we still are trying to get it.
MR. ROSS: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the United States has
taken a very neighborly view about recognizing and
enforcing foreign judgments.
MR. ROSS: Yes, Your Honor. I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's true when there's a
proper jurisdictional basis, which is what we're talking
about here: What does the United States mean when it
says there is a proper jurisdictional basis? Is all
that the court in Madras needs what existed here in
order to hold an -- an American manufacturer liable?
That's -- that's a little scary.
MR. ROSS: Well, Your Honor, if the
corporation, the manufacturer, is purposefully availing
itself of the Madras market and hires a distributor to
go to Madras and to sell its products, then indeed I
don't see why a court in Madras would not have -- and
the product explodes or causes some horrific --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it really, to you --
are you saying that Justice Breyer's hypothetical
creates jurisdiction, that the mere sale to a
distributor anywhere creates jurisdiction, wherever that
distributor is marketing the manufacturer's product?
I thought because, in the hypothetical he
created, it was they were availing themselves of the
U.S. market because they were marketing. They went to
seven trade shows. They did merely -- they did
something more than the sale. So where's your -- what's
your position?
MR. ROSS: My position is exactly what Your
Honor has just stated. They have to do something more
than just sell. There has to be purposeful availment.
There has to be some concrete action, attending trade
shows, designing the product for the market.
JUSTICE ALITO: What -- what difference does
attending some trade shows in the United States mean --
make? Suppose they're -- they didn't attend any trade
shows. They just have a Web site that provides a
description of the product.
MR. ROSS: I think --
JUSTICE ALITO: Would there be no
jurisdiction then?
MR. ROSS: Well, it depends on the Web site.
But in my judgment, attending trade shows is a large
factor that is unique in this case. As I pointed out in
our briefs, they were -- they didn't just attend a trade
show; they attended trade shows throughout the United
States to sell this product.
JUSTICE ALITO: But not in New Jersey.
MR. ROSS: Not in the State of New Jersey,
but a lot of other places.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where did the New Jersey
company that bought this machine find out about it?
MR. ROSS: Well, Mr. Curcio, who was
Mr. Nicastro's employer, went to one of these
conventions, trade shows, in Las Vegas, where he saw the
machine. And at that trade show the British
manufacturer shared a booth with the -- its American
distributor. And that's where Mr. Curcio, Mr.
Nicastro's employer, saw the machine, and that's why he
decided to buy it there.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What difference does
it make that they go to a trade show somewhere other
than New Jersey? We have the notion that they're
availing themselves of the -- the entire United States
market. That's -- I'll accept that.
MR. ROSS: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What does the trade
show in Nevada add to the jurisdictional ties to New
Jersey?
MR. ROSS: The difference for this case,
precisely this case, is that we feel that under those
circumstances there may have been minimum contacts, even
under a traditional sense here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: With Nevada?
MR. ROSS: With -- no, with New Jersey,
because the British manufacturer was there. He was in a
booth. A New Jersey person came to the booth and said
that's a great machine. There was some kind of
interaction. The record is unclear as to what it was,
but the result was the British manufacturer wound up
selling its product --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Ross --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If you interact with
somebody from New Jersey, you have --
MR. ROSS: It's more --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- committed availment of
the government of New Jersey?
MR. ROSS: It's more than that. It's much
more.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There are a lot of people
from New Jersey.
(Laughter.)
MR. ROSS: It's more than -- it's more than
that, Your Honor. It's more than that. It's the
distributor acting under the direction, guidance, and
control of the British manufacturer, and there are
records in the -- in the record, there's plenty of
reference to that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He didn't tell them --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And, Mr. Ross, isn't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- to just seek out a
person from New Jersey.
MR. ROSS: He was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He told them to talk to
people.
MR. ROSS: He was prepared to sell to
anyone. Whether it was from New Jersey or Massachusetts
or Connecticut, it didn't matter as long as the sale was
into the United States and the manufacturer got the
economic benefit of it.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And, Mr. Ross, isn't the
point that he was selling by using large convention
sites in the United States, expecting that people from
other States would show up to those large convention
sites?
I know that Justice Alito doesn't want to
hear this, but New Jersey doesn't have all that many
large convention sites like Las Vegas does. Newark --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KAGAN: Newark is not such a hot
place, but they're expecting people from Newark to go
and look at these machines and buy these machines.
That's the marketing system that's used for these
massive machines that they're trying to sell nationwide.
MR. ROSS: That's exactly correct, Your
Honor. The --
JUSTICE BREYER: What if --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if there is no
scrap metal plant in Montana? Can Montana be a
jurisdiction in a case like this? You know, a Montana
worker is over in New Jersey and comes back to his home
in Montana, and he's been injured. Do they avail
themselves of the market in Montana when there's no
market for their products there?
MR. ROSS: Well, if someone from Montana
attends one of these trade shows and decides to purchase
one of these machines, that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. He's just
injured by one of the machines somewhere else, but he's
from Montana. Can he sue in Montana?
MR. ROSS: Under those circumstances, I
would say not.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the basis would
only be the plaintiff's residence?
MR. ROSS: That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we don't accept that
as a sufficient basis.
MR. ROSS: That's correct. That would not
be enough.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I thought -- I
thought this was what the case was all about: whether
this is -- the stream of commerce is sufficient to add a
basis on top of the plaintiff's residence.
MR. ROSS: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And I would have
thought -- to me, that's a significant limitation on
your theory to say that in areas where you don't expect
to be haled into court because your machine is not going
to be used, you can't be.
MR. ROSS: Well, it seems to me that if
the -- if the manufacturer has purposefully availed
itself of the entire United States market, which is
inclusive of Montana --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. ROSS: -- and the machine somehow winds
up in Montana --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. Not the
machine.
MR. ROSS: The individual.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. ROSS: So the individual is in Montana;
the accident happened somewhere else?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. ROSS: Under those circumstances, I
would say that wherever that machine was sold into,
whether it was in an adjoining State, and the fellow
from Montana lived across the border, say --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, exactly.
MR. ROSS: -- I would say that the
jurisdiction would better be put where the accident
occurred.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could it be put
elsewhere? Could it be put in the other State?
MR. ROSS: I would say that if the -- if the
manufacturer has not purposefully availed itself of the
State of Montana --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. ROSS: -- and has taken no steps --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. ROSS: -- to push into Montana, even
though it is seeking to sell to the entire United
States --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. ROSS: -- I think the better location
for that lawsuit --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, better -- I
know -- I know you think it's better, but can he be sued
in Montana?
What I'm trying to get at, obviously, is
we're talking about the stream of commerce in the United
States, but the stream doesn't wash over the United
States evenly. The manufacturer, as I asked earlier,
may decide I don't want to sell New Jersey.
MR. ROSS: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The manufacturer may
reasonably assume his machines aren't going to be in
Montana because there's no scrap metal business in
Montana. So I'm just trying to see if there are
limitations to your theory about the stream of commerce
covers everything.
MR. ROSS: Yes, Your Honor. The answer is
yes, there are limitations. There are those
limitations, and I think the best way of -- of stating
it would be if there is purposeful availment of entering
a market and you sell the product into that market, you
take these additional steps plus the intent, plus the
additional --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right, but the
market cannot be simply the United States, because you
carve out New Jersey if the manufacturer does, you carve
out Montana if --
MR. ROSS: That is correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MR. ROSS: That is correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: But what I'm thinking is
this -- this area of law has treated States as if
they're foreign countries, in a certain way analogous
to. If that -- and I'm trying to -- let me ask: What
you said at one point, that if an independent company
comes to a business, however small, in the United States
and says give us some of your product, we're going to
sell it everywhere in the world we can, fine. And they
A couple go -- get into some very -- Burma
or whatever, Myanmar. And right now, it's the law that
consumers in all those countries sue in that country if
they're hurt. Is that really the law? Is there
something you can cite me to on that?
MR. ROSS: Well, there are conventions.
There's a Brussels convention and a Uganda convention.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what does it -- what
does it say?
MR. ROSS: They basically state, according
to my understanding, that where the -- where the tort
occurred to the signatories of that convention, which
includes the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, and we're one?
MR. ROSS: The United Kingdom. Which
includes the United Kingdom.
JUSTICE BREYER: And are we one?
MR. ROSS: That -- then in those cases,
where the tort occurred there would be jurisdiction over
the foreign manufacturer. For example, if there's an
injury in Belgium and the machine is manufactured in
Britain, someone is hurt in Belgium, according to those
conventions, then the person in Belgium could sue the
British company in Belgium.
JUSTICE BREYER: Did you refer to that? Do
you have a citation to that in --
MR. ROSS: They're in our brief. Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in your brief?
MR. ROSS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It's the EEOC Convention
on Jurisdiction and Judgments? Because that operates
only within the Community.
MR. ROSS: That's correct. The United
States is not a signatory to that convention. But the
hypothetical was -- and I tried to answer the
hypothetical.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does your argument depend
on whether the manufacturer is the manufacturer of the
whole machine as opposed to a component part, like
Asahi? Suppose there was a little battery or lever that
was manufactured, I don't know, in France, and it was
sent over to this English manufacturer, and they were --
this part is incorporated in many different kinds of
machines, but the part then -- and then the facts are
the same: It goes to the Ohio distributor and New
Jersey, but the part is what causes the injury.
What results?
MR. ROSS: I would say no jurisdiction for a
component manufacturer under those circumstances, unless
the component manufacturer was deliberately
manufacturing a product for sale into a State in the
United States --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's like Justice
Breyer's hypothetical. He wants to sell to the entire
universe if he can.
MR. ROSS: That's correct, but the
manufacturer in your hypothetical did not purposefully
avail itself of the United States market. He simply
sold a component part.
And this is, of course, not a component part
case we have here before us. So he may have known --
there might have been foreseeability that it was
possible that.... That's not enough.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, what if --
MR. ROSS: We're not saying that's enough.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Let's say he does
know, it's a component part for something that is sold,
widely sold, in the United States. Or it's a component
part of this machine.
MR. ROSS: Our position is that under those
circumstances, if the manufacturer did not purposefully
avail itself of the United States market by hiring a
distributor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But why would it
be --
MR. ROSS: -- it wouldn't be targeting that
market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you have an
entirely different test.
MR. ROSS: As to components. I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have -- you have
an entirely different test for a component manufacturer
than you do for the finished product manufacturer. The
component manufacturer may well know to a certainty that
his component is going to be used in a product that's
sold in the United States.
Let's say he makes a component for this
machine.
MR. ROSS: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why is that
different? Shouldn't it be the same test?
MR. ROSS: I think it's different. And
that's where the limitation of the Due Process Clause, I
think, comes into play because that manufacturer, making
a small component, a spring, a small part for a large
machine like in the Asahi case, he may not -- he may
have known. It's foreseeable that this product will go
there, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He makes -- let's
say he makes the 25-inch blade that only goes into this
machine. That's the only market for it. Does -- no
difference?
MR. ROSS: I would say there is a
difference, because that component --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. That was
poorly phrased. Is it the same test for the machine, or
is it a different test? Is it your component test?
MR. ROSS: I think it's -- I think it's the
same test, but it would come out differently for the
component manufacturer. That's the way I'd like to --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And, Mr. Fergenson, isn't
that what Justice O'Connor said in Asahi, that the
component manufacturer may have all the knowledge in the
world -- for Justice Brennan, that was enough; for
Justice O'Connor, it was not enough, that knowledge was
insufficient, that there had to be purposeful availment,
that there had to be an active decision, a choice to
seek the market. And -- and I understand that, on your
view, McIntyre made that choice.
MR. ROSS: Exactly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How can there not --
how can there possibly not be purposeful availment if
the manufacturer of the 25-inch blade knows it's only
going to be used in McIntyre's machine and it knows that
McIntyre is trying to sell its machine in the United
States?
MR. ROSS: Because the manufacturer of that
blade did not specifically target the United States
market. He --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He put it in a
product that is only going to be -- that he knows is
going to be sold in the United States.
MR. ROSS: But it's not specifically
designed for them. And that -- that machine is not
specifically designed for the U.S. market. That
machine --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have a
partnership. One of the partners makes the shell of the
machine; the other partner makes the insides of the
machine. Are they, as individual companies -- are they
availing themselves of the United States market?
MR. ROSS: Now, under those circumstances, I
would think there would be a difference. I think there
would be a difference because they are combined in
joining to market into the United States. But if this
is a -- a manufacturer of blades in Birmingham, England,
and the manufacturer of blades in Birmingham, England,
sends it to Nottingham, England, and then something
happens in New Jersey, and all the facts are the same, I
would say Birmingham is off the hook.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Suppose the company in
Nottingham only sells to the United States. It's the
only place its machines are -- are marketed.
MR. ROSS: That would be different then.
Then there -- there is more than that. There --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then the component
manufacturer would be liable in New Jersey?
MR. ROSS: Because he is basically
piggybacking on the actions of the manufacturer.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. What about
today, is there any difference between the trade show --
and he did show up at seven trade shows. I -- I mean,
the manufacturer here had a representative at several
trade shows, you're right.
MR. ROSS: Twenty-six.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's right. Twenty --
no, well, the record said seven.
MR. ROSS: There were 26 trade shows.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that in the record?
MR. ROSS: Yes, it is. Joint Appendix 114
to 117a.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. All right. Is there
a difference between that, do you think, and -- I just
read in the paper the other day there's some Ethiopian
or some foreign country -- it's a very poor country --
and they're selling goats, and they're sending some to
the United States for some kind of festival purpose or
something. Now, he said I have a site on the Internet.
All right.
Now, all of these people, however small, I
mean, many, many will have Internet sites, and some of
them might have an Internet site that's accessed by
American buyers, as this man did.
MR. ROSS: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Is there any
difference between that and your trade shows?
MR. ROSS: And if the goat poisons someone
in the United States and the -- and the person who
raised the goat --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. ROSS: -- purposefully availed itself --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, don't use the
characterization. I mean, I'm -- see, I'm trying to
figure out does this count as purposefully availed?
MR. ROSS: If -- if they take steps,
concrete steps, additional conduct, then yes. The
answer is yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So the answer is
going to be, in this case, if we say you win --
MR. ROSS: Sadly, even if --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- then everyone with a --
with a -- everyone with an Internet site who also sells
to a buyer who says anywhere in the world, perhaps -- I
don't know how far that reaches -- seems pretty filled
with implications.
MR. ROSS: Yes, it does. The Internet -- we
deliberately did not raise the Internet or any Web sites
in our briefs.
JUSTICE BREYER: But it's the same, you
think? It's the same -- I thought it might --
MR. ROSS: I think if there's purposeful
availment and if the Internet is being used to market
specifically into the United States and the product
causes harm to someone in the United States --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are there -- there are
some cases just beginning -- at the beginning stages,
aren't there, involving sales through the Internet?
MR. ROSS: Yes. Yes, Your Honor. I believe
that those cases say if there's an interactive Web site;
in other words, if the person sitting in the United
States can press several buttons on its computer and
interact and make -- consummate the transaction, if you
will, with the foreign manufacturer, then under those
circumstances, I believe, the trend of the cases seems
to be that there would be jurisdiction.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but you were cut
off before you finished your answer. I want to make
sure I understood it. I -- I make the inference that
you -- you would say that if there is an advertisement,
not a sale, just an advertisement on the Internet,
replacing the trade show, that that is a significant
availment -- a purposeful availment, and there can be
jurisdiction in New Jersey. Same factors here --
somebody who doesn't go to the U.S. trade shows, but he
does put it on the Internet, the same result?
MR. ROSS: That was one of the four examples
that Justice O'Connor gave us in Asahi, advertising
for --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I want to know what your
position is.
MR. ROSS: Yes. My position is yes, because
they are -- they are attempting to sell into the United
States with advertising. But the trend of the decisions
has been that it has to be an interactive Web site.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can -- maybe
everybody knows this except me. Do you -- are Web sites
targeted to the United States? Don't you -- you can --
let's say they put it on their Web site in England.
Can't you -- can't -- can't I access that from here?
MR. ROSS: Yes, you can.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So they don't even
have to send the Web site to the United States? They
just have to have a Web site?
MR. ROSS: If it's an interactive Web site
where you can sit in New Jersey, order a product, the
product is then delivered by the foreign manufacturer
into New Jersey, and the product then chops off four
fingers of someone's hand --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it has to be
interactive?
MR. ROSS: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If it's just -- what
if it says, here, we're McIntyre -- on a Web site -- we
make these machines; give us a call at this number if
you want to buy one?
MR. ROSS: Not enough.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Not enough?
MR. ROSS: That's like a billboard. That's
not enough. That's just a pure advertising; not enough.
But if the additional steps that I just mentioned are
taken and a sale occurs --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And this distinction
is somewhere in the Due Process Clause?
MR. ROSS: I believe that the Due Process
Clause requires the additional conduct. The purposeful
availment, which is what we have in your hypothetical,
and the actual transaction, the sale, then we have
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But was the sale here
negotiated in -- or part of the sale negotiated in
Nevada or the person just -- the New Jersey manufacturer
just was interested in the machine and then later
contacted the Ohio distributor?
MR. ROSS: In this case, the manufacturer
said that they own the machines until they're paid for
in full. The machine was not paid for in full.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, I'm -- I'm trying to
relate what happened here to the Internet hypothetical.
I have the --
MR. ROSS: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- Internet hypothetical
where there's just an advertisement.
MR. ROSS: Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And, at first, I thought
you were saying that's sufficient. Now you say no,
because they have to be part of the contract. I'm
trying to make the Internet equivalent to the trade
show.
MR. ROSS: If the Internet Web site is
interactive, so you can sit in New Jersey, order the
product, complete the transaction, send money, and in
response to the money coming, you get a product --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Okay. But not just an
advertisement?
MR. ROSS: Not just an advertisement.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Even though that's the
cause for the buyer's interest in it and he pursues --
pursues his -- his transaction after finding out all the
information on the Internet, but he phones the Ohio
distributor?
MR. ROSS: It's not enough, in my judgment,
if -- under the Internet example that you just gave. If
there's an interactive Web site where the person in New
Jersey can press buttons on his computer and complete
the transaction with the result that the product comes
to New Jersey, under those circumstances, I would say
there is jurisdiction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Complete? He's got
to complete the transaction?
MR. ROSS: That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if it's --
MR. ROSS: I don't --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- you know, punch
these numbers, and we will send you an application for a
machine? Is that not enough, because he's got to
complete the transaction?
MR. ROSS: I would say, under those
circumstances, that that's part of what the manufacturer
requires, but the end result is that the machine winds
up in New Jersey through this contact between the person
and the manufacturer. Then I would say that would be
enough for jurisdiction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So that if they say
fill this out, and contact this person, McIntyre,
whatever, in Ohio, that's where you can get one of our
machines -- that's enough?
MR. ROSS: I would say, in that case, they
have deliberately targeted the entire United States
market, but they want you to go through their
distributor, which they have hired --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Would their --
MR. ROSS: -- in Ohio, and he sends it.
It's the same situation.
Well, if there's no further questions, I
would simply like to ask this Court to affirm the
judgement of the Supreme Court of New Jersey in this
case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
MR. ROSS: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
have 2 minutes remaining.
Thank you, Mr. Ross.
Mr. Fergenson, you
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ARTHUR F. FERGENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FERGENSON: Thank you, Your Honor.
Justice Breyer, I would -- in response to
your concern, I would ask you to look at page 29 of the
States' amicus brief: "Ignorance of the fact that New
Jersey is a State within our union, or of the specifics
of New Jersey products liability law, should not allow
Petitioner to avoid jurisdiction. Its own lack of
research prior to embarking on a nationwide marketing
campaign is no defense." I think that --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Fergenson --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you answer --
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- could I ask you a
question?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. Could you --
just one quick point of clarification.
MR. FERGENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's a point that your
adversary raised in passing. I'm not quite sure, do you
sell outright to the American company? Do you ship a
product and they pay you, or they only pay you when they
receive the money from their customer? There appears to
be some suggestion of the latter.
MR. FERGENSON: And the New Jersey Supreme
Court said that there was a suggestion that some trades
could have been by consignment. I believe that that is
outside of this -- taken out of this case by an
admission in the brief -- at least for this sale -- in
the brief in opposition to defendant's motion to
dismiss, at 19-20, filed October 11th, 2006, where they
state -- where Respondent states it was sold by us to
MMA, and it was sold by MMA to Curcio Scrap Metal.
So, there is no consignment. There's no
consignment under 9-102, which Ohio has adopted.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's a different
question than I asked. There was no consignment on this
machine?
MR. FERGENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you're not claiming
that there might not be on others?
MR. FERGENSON: The evidence in the record
under 9-102, which Ohio has adopted, I think can only be
reasonably viewed -- and this Court obviously treats it
as de novo, on a jurisdictional review -- can only be
viewed as not a consignment because MMA was in the
business of selling the products to others.
Let me say that for the -- there was no
interaction in the record with anyone from New Jersey by
MMA or by J. McIntyre. It was the booth, and then there
was an order. And if you look at the invoice, it says
verbal order. There was an order by the son of the
owner of Curcio Metal Works, and that's it. The order
was fulfilled.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Fergenson, Toyota,
Honda, Volkswagen -- pick your car company -- sells many
millions of cars to the United States. They start
blowing up here. They operate through independent
distributors only. Can they be subject to jurisdiction
in any of the States?
MR. FERGENSON: I think that most
sophisticated distribution networks -- and this one was
not -- I -- the defense takes it as a -- takes on the
issue of this as a scheme. Most sophisticated
distribution networks, such as the manufacturers you're
talking about, there is -- there is recourse to remedies
throughout the United States, whether against the
distributor or against the manufacturer.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. FERGENSON: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:13 a.m., the case in the
