IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
WILLIAM FREEMAN, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 09-10245
UNITED STATES :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, February 23, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:14 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
FRANK W. HEFT, JR., ESQ., Louisville, Kentucky; on
behalf of Petitioner.
CURTIS E. GANNON, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
FRANK W. HEFT, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
CURTIS E. GANNON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
FRANK W. HEFT, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:14 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 09-10245, Freeman v. United
States.
Mr. Heft.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF FRANK W. HEFT, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. HEFT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
William Freeman's plea agreement, his
presentence report, and the sentencing record all show
that his term of imprisonment was based on a crack
cocaine guideline that was retroactively lowered by the
United States Sentencing Commission. This case asked
the Court to decide whether the fact that a sentencing
court accepted a plea agreement under Criminal Rule
(c)(1)(C) precludes eligibility for a sentence
reduction under section 3582(c)(2). We submit that
Mr. Freeman is not barred from eligibility for a (c)(2)
sentence reduction for several reasons.
First, under the ordinary definition of
"based upon" and in the context of this particular
statute, since the subsequently lowered guideline was
used to determine Mr. Freeman's term of imprisonment,
that term of imprisonment was based on the subsequently
lowered guideline.
Second, the categorical ban on eligibility
adopted by the Sixth Circuit and advanced by the
Government frustrates the purpose underlying section
(c)(2) and finds no support in the plain language of the
statute, of the rule, and under the terms of
Mr. Freeman's plea agreement.
Third, a record-based analysis that reviews
the plea agreement, the presentence report, and the
sentencing record to determine the basis of the sentence
is -- is best suited to correctly implement section
(c)(2), and it's -- that record-based analysis supports
the conclusion that Mr. Freeman's sentence was indeed
based on a retroactively lowered guideline. The -- the
Sixth Circuit --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If -- if we issue an
opinion and we analyze the statute's language, the
statute's purpose, and the statute's legislative
history, would the opinion, the judgment be based on
each of those or -- or not? In other words, does
everything that goes into the final determination, would
you say that determination is based on each of those
factors individually?
MR. HEFT: Yes. Certainly, it is based --
the determination certainly would be based on the
statute, Your Honor, but, as we've -- we've argued in
our brief, we've asked the Court to take what we believe
to be a record-based analysis and look at -- look at the
record in this case, look at the terms of the plea
agreement, look at the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No. My --
MR. HEFT: I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think my question
goes in a different direction. This plea agreement, I
think, could be said to be based on the sentencing
guidelines, but it is also based on the agreement. In
other words, the combination of the two of them is what
gives you the -- the sentence. So how can you say it's
based on only the sentencing guidelines when it may not
have been imposed in the absence of the plea agreement?
Probably wouldn't have been.
MR. HEFT: Mr. Chief Justice, we don't
believe that that's mutually exclusive. A sentence can
be a guideline -- a sentence based on the guidelines,
and it can be a sentence based on a C plea agreement.
JUSTICE ALITO: You quote one definition
of -- the noun "base" in your brief uses a point from
which something can develop, but you omit another
standard definition of the term, the principal element
or -- or ingredient of anything, considered as its
fundamental part. Why do you do that?
MR. HEFT: Well, Your Honor, I -- I think
the dictionary definition that we've given encompasses
the definition that Your Honor has just -- just
described. The -- and our position --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, there's two -- there
are two different definitions. One is something that
provides a starting point for analysis. The other is
the fundamental thing on which something is -- it rests.
MR. HEFT: Well -- well, our contention
is --
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, if you use the latter
definition, you have to decide which is more fundamental
here, the agreement between the parties or the
sentencing guidelines, which certainly provided the
starting point for the analysis of the sentence by
the -- by the district court.
MR. HEFT: Justice Alito, that's correct.
The guidelines certainly were the starting point, but
they were also the principal foundation of this
agreement because what the agreement is --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Isn't it enough for you
to say -- or based not in whole, but in part -- based
on, something could be based on several things, and one
of them is the guidelines that then existed?
MR. HEFT: Certainly. Certainly. And this
-- this plea agreement reflects that it was based on the
guidelines. If you --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, then are you
saying the plea agreement was based on the fact that he
was caught with -- with two guns rather than four guns?
Would you be willing to say that? In other words,
everything -- your position, it seems to me, could be
criticized for saying everything that contributes to the
final 106 months, that that sentence is based on every
one of those things --
MR. HEFT: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- which makes the
-- which makes the statutory language largely mute on
this.
MR. HEFT: Well, Your Honor, the -- the
sentence is based on a number of guidelines. Each -- no
sentence is based on just one guideline, as this plea
agreement reflects. It's based on a compilation of
guidelines. It's -- it's based on the crack guideline,
and as prior --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it's also
based on things that are not reflected in the
guidelines. You've got a particular U.S. attorney who
is more lenient in prosecuting these types of crimes
than another one. The fact that you got the minimum
under the guidelines might be based on that. It's based
on the fact that this person felt he could handle 106
months in prison, and he wasn't willing to risk whatever
the top -- what was the top sentence under the guideline
calculation?
MR. HEFT: It would have been 117 months.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So he figures it's
better for me to get -- it's based on his decision that
I -- 106 months is better than the risk of 117.
MR. HEFT: Well, certainly there are a
number of factors that go into plea bargaining and
negotiation, but what -- I think what the court has to
look at is what is said in that plea agreement. And I
think, as Justice Ginsburg pointed out a minute ago, the
definition of "based on" -- if a guideline sentence
is -- if a sentence is based in part on the guidelines,
that would be adequate under the -- under section --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What sentence would
he have gotten if he were just sentenced under the
guidelines, no plea agreement?
MR. HEFT: He would have got the -- he would
have received the same sentence, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well -- well, how do
we know that?
MR. HEFT: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The guidelines give
you a range. The judge might have given him 117 months.
MR. HEFT: But -- but the plea agreement
here was for the bottom of the guidelines. The parties
calculated --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I know. I'm
putting aside the plea agreement. What would he have
gotten under the sentencing guidelines? We --we don't
know, right?
MR. HEFT: It would have been left --
left -- well, assume it depends upon the nature of the
plea, Your Honor. You're talking --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: There's no plea. He
is convicted at trial.
MR. HEFT: It would be somewhere within that
guideline range. That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So how can you say
that this is based on the guideline range when the
guideline range would not have been determinative?
MR. HEFT: Well -- well, we're looking --
we're looking at the content of the plea agreement, Your
Honor. The -- the plea agreement says --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, I know, but my
hypothetical is in a different context.
MR. HEFT: But even -- even at that, Your
Honor, if -- that sentence ultimately is going to be
based on a guideline range, and if that guideline range
is subsequently lowered by the Sentencing Commission,
then the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, could you --
maybe it would be easier if you would describe to us the
situations you don't think would be based on the
guidelines.
The Solicitor General claims that since
every plea negotiation has to start with the guideline
calculation as a starting point for departure and/or
consideration by the judge under 6B1, that every C plea
agreement would be considered based on. Are you taking
that position?
MR. HEFT: No, Your Honor. Absolutely not.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So I'll give
you a couple of examples, but you give me more. Would a
plea agreement that doesn't mention the guidelines at
all but picks a sentence within the actual guideline --
is that based on the guideline?
MR. HEFT: Possibly, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. And how
about one that departs or varies from the guideline, the
range, whichever word you want to use?
MR. HEFT: Your Honor, the -- the Sentencing
Commission, in 1B1.10 note 3, says that a
below-guideline sentence can be based on the guidelines.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there -- the
Solicitor General is right; there really isn't any
situation that you're claiming is not based on?
MR. HEFT: Oh -- oh, no, Your Honor. There
are -- there are C pleas.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Give me the examples.
MR. HEFT: All right. Well, first of all,
we've cited cases in our brief where circuit courts have
determined that a C plea was not based on the
guidelines. But let me give you another example.
Let's just assume the guideline range is
something like 151 to 188 months, and then -- but the
parties agree to a sentence of 60 months, and they do
that for several reasons. First of all, maybe the
defendant is elderly. Maybe the defendant has serious
medical conditions. Maybe the defendant has -- was
sexually abused as a child. If those are the factors,
if that's the reason why the defendant got that --
received that 60-month sentence, that sentence is not
based on the guideline range.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, wouldn't the
guidelines, even in that situation, provide the starting
point for analysis? Isn't the district court obligated,
and isn't the -- doesn't the presentence report have to
go through the guidelines calculation before the
sentence is imposed? So you start out with the -- the
guideline sentence of whatever the figure was that you
mentioned, and then you go from there, and maybe you
depart downward.
MR. HEFT: That -- that's true. The -- the
guidelines would be the starting point of any
negotiation, but --
JUSTICE ALITO: So why wouldn't that be
based on the guidelines? Just because there's such a
big downward departure?
MR. HEFT: It -- Your Honor, it would not be
based on the guidelines if those other factors were the
motivating reason for the imposition of the sentence.
JUSTICE BREYER: Sorry, I don't understand
that. Don't the guidelines provide for departures?
MR. HEFT: They do, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well -- and aren't you
giving a guideline sentence, if you give your reasons as
is required by the Sentencing Commission in 6B1.2 and
you say -- the judge says, I think this is a special
case and, therefore, I am giving a lower sentence? Just
as he's required to do under the guidelines in order to
accept a C type agreement.
MR. HEFT: If the parties can show that the
sentence is tied to the guidelines.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, how could it not be?
Wouldn't the judge have to say it's not tied to the
guidelines, because I am varying and I no longer wish to
apply the guideline? If he doesn't say that, isn't he
applying the guideline?
MR. HEFT: In that instance, he would be --
he would be applying it.
JUSTICE BREYER: Whether he gives the
specific robbery 3-point whatever it is, 17 months, or
whether he says, I have a special case and I depart
under section 5 of the guidelines. Both of those are
guideline sentences, aren't they?
MR. HEFT: If the -- if the judge were to
take -- were to actually apply those guidelines and say,
based on that guideline, I am going to depart, that
sentence is based on the guidelines.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So from what base does a
judge depart downward? From the crack cocaine range or
from the downward departure range?
MR. HEFT: I think it would depend on the
nature of the agreement, Your Honor. It may very well
depend on -- the judge may depart from the crack
cocaine.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So aren't you just
asking us to permit district court judges to make up
their own C agreement, to decide what the parties would
have done in the absence of a higher range? And don't
we fall prey to sort of just asking district court
judges to create their own agreements?
MR. HEFT: No -- no, Your Honor. I don't
believe that's -- that's not what we are asking the
Court to do at all.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Heft, are you relying
on -- this was -- this is a plea agreement that said,
specifically, defendant agrees to have his sentence
determined pursuant to the guidelines, and then the
judge says that he was adopting the probation report and
the application of the guidelines as set out therein, so
both the -- the defendant says, I agreed to a
determination pursuant to the guidelines, and the judge
says, I'm going to apply the guidelines in giving you
your sentence.
So the hypotheticals we're talking about are
quite far afield from where you have a specific
statement by the defendant and the sentencing judge that
the guidelines are being applied.
--
MR. HEFT: That is correct, Your Honor, and
that's why we've asked the Court not to take a
categorical approach to this issue, but to take either a
case-by-case approach or a record-based analysis, to
allow the district judge to determine, as Justice
Ginsburg pointed out, what our -- you know, what is the
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Heft, would you require
those kinds of statements in the agreement or in the
colloquy in order to satisfy the standard? Suppose
those statements just didn't exist.
MR. HEFT: That's certainly problematic,
Justice Kagan. If those -- if there was nothing in that
plea agreement to tie the sentence to the -- the
sentence -- the agreed sentence to the guidelines, that
certainly would be problematic.
But that doesn't resolve the issue one way
or the other, because the judge would have to consider
the presentence report to see if there's a connection or
correlation between the agreed sentence and the
guidelines, and also the judge could look at the guilty
plea colloquy and sentencing transcript to see if the
attorneys actually expressed their intent about where
this sentence came from.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Heft, that seems very
complicated. You have to look at everything and you're
not giving us a lot of guidance as to what you do when
you -- when you see these things. I mean, this sort of
case-by-case, all-things-considered approach just seems
as though you're going to get a lot of inconsistent
decisions.
MR. HEFT: Respectfully, Your Honor, I
disagree. I think this is what district judges do all
the time, not just in the context of a C plea, but a B
plea as well. They have to look at the nature of the
plea agreement. They have to look at the PSR. They
have to look at the sentencing transcript to -- to
determine whether or not the defendant is -- is eligible
for that sentence reduction.
So judges are doing this routinely. They're
doing this --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, in every case, they
have to go through the guidelines calculation, and the
parties have the opportunity to object to the
calculation, right?
MR. HEFT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: So what does paragraph 12 of
the plea agreement contribute here, other than with
respect to the fine and things besides the sentence that
we're talking about? It doesn't seem to me to add
anything substantively.
MR. HEFT: I -- well, Your Honor, I think it
does, Justice Alito. I think it does add -- it adds
substance, and it adds meaning to that plea agreement
because in paragraph 11 where the parties very
meticulously go through the offense level, tie that to
the guidelines, and then -- then they state in paragraph
, the -- the defendant agrees to be sentenced pursuant
to the -- to the guidelines. That's very clear that the
review in the guideline calculation is what the sentence
is based on. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can a -- can a sentencing
judge be found to have abused his or her discretion in
approving a plea -- a C plea agreement which provides
for less than the minimum guideline sentence and gives
no -- no particular reason for that? Would that be
appealed as an invalid sentence?
MR. HEFT: Well, Your Honor, under -- under
section 3742, the government could -- could appeal an
incorrect application of the guidelines if that's what
Your Honor is referring to.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But now you're talking
about a plea agreement, which the government has
consented to whatever this agreement is and whether --
whether -- sometimes a plea agreement will say okay, if
you take a plea, we'll drop certain charges or we'll
charge a small amount -- value of the drug. Was there
any of that in -- in this plea?
MR. HEFT: No, Your Honor. Mr. Freeman
pleaded guilty to all charges in the indictment. The
parties stipulated the amount of -- of drugs that were
found on his person when he was arrested. So there were
no dismissed charges, no amended charges in this plea
agreement.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let -- let me ask my
question a different way. In deciding whether to
approve the plea agreement, doesn't the judge have to
consider whether it is an application of the guidelines,
whether it is wildly inconsistent with the guidelines,
whether it does not take into account valid reasons for
departure from the guidelines?
MR. HEFT: Yes. The judge would have to
consider the guidelines. Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then, if that's the case,
then every plea agreement is based on the guidelines,
every single one, because the judge always has to
consider how do the guidelines apply to this plea
agreement.
MR. HEFT: Well, Justice Scalia,
consideration of the guidelines alone is not enough to
determine whether or not that sentence is actually based
on them.
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't understand why you
resist that. I mean, that's precisely what the
guidelines say. The only ones that aren't guideline
sentences are -- are dismissal charges, where it's an
agreement to dismiss. But a type B, type C -- the
guidelines themselves say that the judge, here's what
you do. Judge, you look and see if the guidelines
sentence is there. Is it a guideline sentence? If it
is, you can approve it. If it isn't, you can't.
I mean, that's my reading of what it says.
So -- so why do you resist that conclusion?
MR. HEFT: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: And, of course, the judge
now could depart from the guidelines -- I mean, "vary,"
whatever that word -- technical word, is -- "vary." He
can say, I'm not going to apply the guidelines at all.
But if he is going to apply the guidelines, isn't that
what they tell him to do? I've always thought that.
You may tell me I'm mistaken.
MR. HEFT: They -- they do; obviously they
do consider the guidelines, but then the other question
is whether or not the sentence is based on those
guidelines --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, how could it not be,
since the judge has no power if he is to apply the
guideline --
MR. HEFT: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- to accept any agreement
other than agreement that corresponds with the
guideline? That's what it says. It says the court
should accept a recommended sentence or a C -- the
specific sentence -- only if the court is satisfied
either that it is within the applicable guideline range
or if it's based on a departure under the guidelines.
That seems to me what it says. Isn't that what it says?
MR. HEFT: That is what it says, Your Honor,
but --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Then if that's so,
every sentence is -- you're going to say no?
MR. HEFT: No.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, I thought that was
helping you, but if you want to say no, go say no and
explain why that is.
(Laughter.)
MR. HEFT: Your Honor, to go back to the
point that Justice Sotomayor made --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. HEFT: -- with the hypotheticals, there
still can be C pleas that are not based on the
guidelines.
JUSTICE BREYER: How?
MR. HEFT: Well, the example --
JUSTICE BREYER: Give me an example.
MR. HEFT: Well, the example that I gave --
I gave previously.
JUSTICE BREYER: What?
MR. HEFT: There's a guideline range.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. HEFT: But the judge bases his decision,
his or her decision, solely on other -- factors other
than the guidelines. As I mentioned earlier --
JUSTICE BREYER: Are we supposed to
psychoanalyze the judge? The judge says on his writing,
checks the box: This is a guideline sentence. It is
robbery. It is precisely within the robbery range. But
I -- I am going to give it the low end of the range
because I believe that the -- he has a lovely mother and
family and so forth.
Okay? You're saying that isn't based on the
guideline. No? Okay. Is that the point?
MR. HEFT: Well, it depends what the judge
does at sentencing, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: What he does is he applies
the guideline sentence. He has to do that. Now, within
that range, he has applied the guideline sentence, he
got the information. He says, I am satisfied it
applies -- done.
Now are we supposed to look further and say
what his true reason is? Is that what you're saying?
MR. HEFT: It would -- Your Honor, I would
submit it would depend on the nature of the -- the plea
agreement, whether or not that sentence is -- is
actually based -- going to be based on the guidelines.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, I suppose --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Incidentally, and it sort
of bears upon this discussion, are the guidelines
mandatory when they are applied in approving a plea
agreement? In other words, does Booker/Fanfan not apply
to the application of the guidelines when a judge is --
is approving a plea agreement? Do you think the
guidelines are mandatory in that situation?
MR. HEFT: No, Your Honor. They're --
JUSTICE BREYER: You were -- you were just
at the very point when we decided Booker, is that right?
It was -- your -- your sentencing took place in July
05 and we came out with Booker in --
MR. HEFT: I believe it was March of 2005.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So it's quite
possible the judge wasn't totally -- but I mean -- I
agree; it's much more complicated after Booker. I don't
know how to treat yours.
MR. HEFT: That's true.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's on the cusp.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if there had been
evidence here of that? What if the government in
connection with this plea agreement had dropped counts
or had decided not to seek a superseding indictment
adding counts? Would -- would the situation be the
same?
MR. HEFT: Yes. Your Honor, I think it
would; it would be the same. Because the court would
have to look at, again, what the terms of the plea --
plea agreement was and what the parties determined.
Now, the -- I think what I should emphasize is that
we're only talking about eligibility here; and if -- if
those -- if those concessions that the government has
made would -- would perhaps result or at least in the
government's view, result in an unjustified windfall,
that -- that's -- that is not a critical factor in
determining eligibility. That's not factor at all in
determining eligibility.
That could come into play after eligibility
is determined and the judge -- district judge determines
whether or how much.
JUSTICE ALITO: How would that possibly
work? Let's say the government drops count -- agrees to
a plea on count 1 with a guideline range of 60 to 65
months; drops count 2, which would have increased the
guideline range to, let's say, 100 to 105 months; and
says this is our deal, you know, you agree to -- to 65
months and we're going to drop count 2. All right?
MR. HEFT: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: And then the guideline for
that is lowered, and you say in determining whether the
defendant is eligible, what -- the government would then
have to have a mini-trial and prove that the -- prove
count 2?
MR. HEFT: No. No. No. No. It would --
JUSTICE ALITO: How would it work?
MR. HEFT: It would work -- assuming that
the defendant is eligible, the case is remanded to
district court.
JUSTICE ALITO: Right.
MR. HEFT: As in this case, there would be a
recalculation of the guidelines to determine if the --
JUSTICE ALITO: Right.
MR. HEFT -- guideline range would be
reduced, and then, as the judge said in this case said,
if you have objections, let me know; file your
objections. That's where the government could file --
JUSTICE ALITO: Yes. The government files
its objections and says, well, we dropped count 2. And
the defendant says, well, I wasn't guilty of count 2.
MR. HEFT: That's -- that's up to the
district judge's discretion, whether or not to -- to
reduce that -- that amended guideline sentence.
JUSTICE ALITO: How is the judge going to
decide that?
MR. HEFT: Well, the -- I think that's
something that district judges decide every day, whether
or not -- because the judge presumably has -- has
been -- is familiar with the case, with the presentence
report, with the terms of the original plea agreement,
with the facts of the case; and the -- and the judge can
make an assessment based on those factors whether or not
the sentence reduction should be granted and, if so, how
much of a reduction should be granted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But Justice Alito's
hypothetical points out -- points up the fact that even
though the agreement may mention the guidelines, it may
do that just for the purpose of enabling the -- the
judge more readily to approve the agreement, but there's
no reason to believe that the government is interested
in the guidelines, as opposed to being interested in
putting this person away for a certain amount of time,
especially when another count is dropped and the
government says, well, I'll -- you know, I'll drop it
if -- if this guy goes to prison for 2 years. But if
the government had known he's not going for 2 years, he
is only going for a year and a half or a year, the
agreement might not have been concluded. So it
really -- I mean, it doesn't further the intent of both
parties, at least, to say when the guideline is changed,
the agreement changes.
MR. HEFT: Well -- well, the agreement
certainly has been -- was modified by the amended
guideline, and that's where the district judge has to
exercise his or her discretion whether or not to grant
that reduction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But in that event, the
sweet part would be open to reconsideration too. I
mean, you can't say, I want the good part, the lowered
guideline, but I also want to keep that certain counts
are dropped and that a certain quantity of drugs was
agreed upon. You would have to reopen the whole thing.
MR. HEFT: No, Your -- no, Justice Ginsburg.
I don't think you'd have to reopen the case. Again, I
think the judge could look at the presentence report,
the government could make its objections saying here's
why we gave that particular sentence, and the judge
could exercise his or her discretion to say whether or
not the defendant is going to get that sentence
reduction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. HEFT: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Gannon.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CURTIS E. GANNON
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. GANNON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
When a criminal defendant and the government
agree to a specific sentence and that agreement is
binding on the sentencing judge by virtue of Rule
(c)(1)(C), the resulting sentence is based on the
parties' agreement. It is not based on the advisory
guideline range that would otherwise have been used at
sentencing, even if the sentence corresponds to that
range.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, here the agreement
at various points says that the parties agree on the
calculation of the guideline. I think it's paragraph 11
and 12. They say that the sentence is according to the
guidelines. So there's reference to the guidelines
throughout, and the court made the guidelines
calculation.
MR. GANNON: The court certainly made the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So it seems to me fair
under the statute to say that it is based on the
guidelines.
MR. GANNON: Well, the question --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And there are other
provisions in the agreement you might argue about.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think the statutory
question here isn't just whether the sentence is based
on the guidelines. The language under 3582(c)(2) is
whether the defendant was sentenced to a term of
imprisonment based on a sentencing range that has
subsequently been lowered by the Commission. So it's
not just whether the guidelines played a role; it's
whether this particular sentencing range was what was
driving the sentence.
And, Justice Kennedy, you point out pages
, 26 of the plea agreement in the Joint Appendix. And
I think it's instructive that the agreement deals
differently with the fine component, as Justice Alito
referred to earlier, than it does with the term of
imprisonment. At the bottom of page 25, the agreement
says that a fine will be at the lowest end of the
applicable guideline range. And then if you go over to
pages 27 and 28 in paragraph 11, that's where the
guideline calculation occurs. And notice it is an
incomplete calculation. The parties don't actually come
up with a final calculation because they don't come up
with a criminal history. They don't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, they do come up with
a recommendation, which is three levels below the
otherwise applicable guideline.
MR. GANNON: They -- they come up with a
recommendation for purposes of determining the offense
level, the base offense level of 22 and then reduced to
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, but that's all based
on the guidelines.
MR. GANNON: Well, that aspect is based on
the guidelines, but then the guideline application
computation is incomplete because the next paragraph,
paragraph B, says we aren't agreed on what the criminal
history is going to be. And to the next paragraph,
paragraph C specifically says that the foregoing
statements of applicability of sections of the
sentencing guidelines are not binding upon the court.
The defendant understands the court will independently
calculate the guidelines at sentencing; that is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that doesn't mean that
the court can't base its conclusion on his
independent -- on its independent judgment on the
guideline.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think what I'm trying
to say, Justice Kennedy, is the agreement expressly
contemplates that the judge needs to determine the
applicable guideline range for purposes of determining
what the fine will be. And that's different from the
way the plea agreement deals with the term of
imprisonment because if we go back to page 26, it does
not tie the -- the term of imprisonment to a guideline
range. That's completely different from the way it
deals with a fine. It specifically says there's an
agreement that the sentence of 106 months of
incarceration is the appropriate amount. And so that
happens to have been at the bottom end of the guideline
range that would have been applicable if the parties'
agreement -- if the parties' prediction about the likely
criminal history calculation turned out to be the right
one.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, you're talking about
what "based on" means, and that's an important part of
your argument. If I could just, while I've got you,
jump to this question of what happens on remand if you
lose the case. On remand, I take it, you're not bound
by the agreement because of the last --
MR. GANNON: Well, I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- the last of section 24
says the defendant argues for any sentence other than
the one to which he has agreed to and breached the
agreement.
MR. GANNON: Well, at that point the remedy
for the breach would be that the United States is
relieved of its obligations under the agreement.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would you -- what would
that mean?
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that's -- that's
part of the problem in a case like this where there was
a specific sentence agreement, that it's impossible for
government to get back the things that it gave up at the
time, that were agreed to under --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's got guilty
pleas on all of the counts. We know that.
MR. GANNON: Well, but it also --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In your position, in your
view, would the government be able to take the position
that the guilty pleas stay in place, but it now wants
maximum?
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that -- that
would --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Maximum guidelines.
MR. GANNON: I don't think that the
82(c)(2) contemplates that the sentence will be
increased. The only thing, as the court --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, except that the
agreement does. The agreement relieves you.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that's if --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Of any obligation. I see
what you mean.
MR. GANNON: Now that the sentence has
become final, I think 3582(c)(2) has opened a narrow
window for ways in which the otherwise final sentence
could be modified. It only contemplates that the judge
will have the discretion to reduce the sentence if it
is, first, a sentence that was based on the relevant
guideline range that's subsequently been amended and
made retroactively applicable. But also, second, then
the judge would need to comply with a policy statement
that appears in 1B1.10 of the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So you say the judgment's
final, so the fact that the plea -- that there's a
breach of the plea agreement is irrelevant at this
point?
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that the remedy
that the agreement contemplates of the government being
released from its other obligations in the plea doesn't
really leave us much of an option at this point. We're
not going to be able to go back and argue that he should
have been sentenced at the upper end of the range that
we're talking about. We're not going to be arguing that
the criminal history should have been a higher or that
the criminal history substantially underrepresented the
seriousness of his history where he had 10 years of
offenses preceding this one. There may have even been a
potential career adjustment that -- that went by the
boards. That's mentioned on page 162 of the Joint
Appendix.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Gannon, you assert that
the -- within the language of the statutory provision,
the sentence here is not based on the guidelines, but
it's based on the agreement, and the agreement arguably
is based on the guidelines.
MR. GANNON: I think the agreement is
arguably -- I mean, I don't think the face of this
agreement proves that it's based on the guidelines, but
I -- it is obvious that the parties negotiated in the
shadow of the guidelines.
JUSTICE SCALIA: If -- if you take that
position, that "based on" means determined by
absolutely, then I don't think any sentence would ever
be based on the guidelines after Booker/Fanfan.
MR. GANNON: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The guidelines form part of
the consideration of the judge, but the judge's decision
is not based on the guidelines. Just as here, the --
the agreement -- the guidelines form part of what
produces the agreement, so also they form part of what
produces the judge's decision. And it seems to me, if
that's going to be enough for the judge's determination,
it ought to be the same for the agreement.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think it's not clear
that the judge needed to be considering the guidelines
in the course of deciding whether to accept the plea
agreement. And Justice Breyer earlier had a colloquy
with Mr. Heft about guideline 6B1.2, which, even before
Booker, was a nonbinding policy statement. And so, to
be sure, when 3582 was enacted, the guidelines were
binding, and, therefore, it -- they would have been
expected to have played a larger role in most sentences.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but let's -- let's
assume there is no plea agreement.
MR. GANNON: Yes. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you have a judge who
sentences post-Booker/Fanfan. Now, his sentence is not
based on the guidelines any more --
MR. GANNON: I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- any more than this
agreement is based on the guidelines. The guidelines
are one of the things that he must take into account and
does take into account in determining the sentence.
Now, if that is enough for purposes of
determining whether this statute -- statutory provision
applies to a sentence imposed directly by a judge, it
seems to me the same analysis ought to apply to a
sentence imposed through a plea agreement.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that there's a
different purpose that's being served by asking the
82(c)(2) inquiry, which is asking the judge to -- to
go back and redo the aspects of his analysis that would
have been different had the -- the relevant guideline
range been changed at the time he engaged in his
analysis, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you -- you acknowledge
that "based on" covers post-Booker/Fanfan sentences by
the judge?
MR. GANNON: Outside of the context of a
specific C --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. Yes. Yes.
MR. GANNON -- a specific sentence rendered
under type C that -- on page 28 of our brief, we
acknowledge that in most contexts, it's -- it's open to
-- to contend that the sentence was based on the
relevant guidelines --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Even though -- even though
the guidelines are just one of the things that have to
be taken into account?
MR. GANNON: It is -- the test that we state
in the subheading of that section of our brief is
whether they're of legal consequence in the
determination.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Defining "legal consequence"
is your test, Mr. Gannon --
MR. GANNON: Well, our -- the.
JUSTICE KAGAN: It's not a binding legal
consequence post-Booker.
MR. GANNON: The test that we have for --
the overarching test is whether it is of legal
consequence, and the phrase that you're talking about on
page 27 of our brief, Justice Kagan, is when we know
that there is something that was of binding legal
consequence and was controlling, we know that that is
the thing that the sentence was based on.
JUSTICE KAGAN: So that's not your test.
What is your test instead?
MR. GANNON: Well, that is -- in -- when
something literally is controlling the analysis -- the
parties' agreement here binds the district judge -- we
know that that is what the sentence is based on. There
isn't any -- any --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Yes, but is -- is there some
other instances in which you would say that something is
based on, even though it's not of binding legal
consequence?
MR. GANNON: Well, it would be of legal
consequence even if it weren't controlling. This Court
has -- has made clear even after Booker that under
53(a), courts still need to go through the relevant
guidelines analysis. They apply the guidelines. It may
turn out that the sentence turns out not to be based on
the relevant guideline range because the judge --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, then I'm back with
Justice Scalia, because if it's only of legal
consequence, not of binding legal consequence, if it's
something that somebody considers rather than something
that is determinative, it seems to me the same in the
non-plea context and in the plea context.
MR. GANNON: Well, I don't think that's true
in the context of a specific sentence agreement under a
type C plea because of -- and this is reinforced by the
language in the policy statement, 1B1.10, which the
Court last term in Dillon held is binding and controls
what needs to be done during the sentence reduction
proceeding. And it specifically refers to the guideline
provisions that were applied when the defendant was
sentenced. And that's something that happens in the
process of the 3553(a) factors applicability.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why doesn't this line of
questioning lead logically to the conclusion that no
sentence after Booker and Fanfan is based on the
guidelines? Because, today, a sentencing judge can
engage in the same analysis that the Sentencing
Commission may engage in when it decides that a
guideline range should be lowered and that that should
be retroactive. The judge can do that at the time when
the sentence is imposed.
We roll the clock back on the crack -- on
the crack cocaine guidelines. Under the authority that
judges now have under Booker and Fanfan, a judge could
say, well, I see that this is the crack cocaine
guideline right now, but I think it is too harsh for all
the reasons that were later persuasive in lowering the
range, and therefore, I am sentencing below the range.
So it seems to lead logically to the
conclusion that 3582 is yet another provision of the
Sentencing Reform Act that was tied to the old
pre-Booker mandatory sentencing regime, and now that
that is out the window with Booker and Fanfan, the
whole -- the whole mechanism is -- is superfluous.
MR. GANNON: Well, I -- I understand the
point that the analysis has certainly changed since
Booker, but it is still the case that the defendant can
appeal an error in application of the guidelines after
Booker.
If the judge were to -- to misapply the
guidelines before he engages in the analysis that you're
talking about, Justice Alito, that would be grounds for
an appeal. In retrospect, if the judge is asked whether
the sentence was based on the guidelines, he -- he may
say that particular sentence wasn't, because I ended up
disregarding the guidelines under 3553(a). I did the
analysis. I was exercising my sentencing discretion the
first time around under 3553(a), and the guidelines
ended up not being the basis of the sentence.
And that is not something that is an option
in a type C plea agreement, because there, the defendant
cannot appeal when the judge agrees to the sentences in
the agreement.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, I find it hard to -- I
find it hard to understand the analysis that would
require courts to decide whether some (c)(1)(C) plea
agreements are based on the guidelines and some are not
based on the guidelines. Maybe they are all based on
the guidelines, and then the obligation would be on the
government to put a provision in a standard plea
agreement requiring the defendant to give up the
opportunity to move for a sentence reduction if the
guideline range is subsequently lowered.
Or maybe none of them are based on the
guidelines because -- for the reasons I just mentioned:
This whole mechanism is now needed no longer as a result
of Booker and Fanfan.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think in the context of
an actual specific sentence plea agreement, that is the
one that we think is off the table, because that is what
is going to control the sentence. And some type C plea
agreements affirmatively contemplate application of the
guidelines, as this one does with respect to the fine.
And so when you have a plea agreement that
tells the district judge, you are bound to apply a
guideline provision once you've accepted this agreement,
we haven't taken the position that the resulting
sentence there is not based on the relevant guideline
range, but that is not what is going on here.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. You want us to
decide this case. I completely agree with what Justice
Alito is saying, Justice Scalia, that maybe the world
after Booker is different. And I have not thought that
one through.
I am thinking this case is a pre-Booker
case. It is not real. I am thinking it is on the cusp,
so how am I to treat this case? If it is a case where
the guidelines apply, if it is such a case -- and I
think maybe everyone here has assumed throughout that it
was. Am I right about that? Were you saying this is a
case where the guidelines do not apply, where they are
not binding? I mean, where pre-Booker doesn't count?
MR. GANNON: Well, I -- I --
JUSTICE BREYER: How do you want us to take
this, pre-Booker or post-Booker?
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that the answer
is, it's different. But this is a -- this is a
post-Booker case.
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, you think the -- I
think it is completely different regardless. So let's
avoid that controversy at the moment, and you tell me
whether you want me to take it pre-Booker or
post-Booker.
MR. GANNON: The sentencing proceeding
occurred six months --
JUSTICE BREYER: I want you --
MR. GANNON: -- after the Booker opinion
came out.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So you want to
-- you want to set aside this post-Booker?
MR. GANNON: Yes, but.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then perhaps we should have
the pre-argument. If we are taking this pre-Booker, I
would have throughout it is QED.
MR. GANNON: I disagree, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, imagine that the
that the Sentencing Commission -- imagine. It is not
true, but imagine that the Sentencing Commission had
written the following words: "Plea bargaining over
sentences is above," as many argued they should. They
write those words. Then they write the next word,
"exception." There is an exception, however; you are
permitted to plea bargain about a sentence insofar as
you argue about the range, where, within the range, it
applies. And of course when you apply the guidelines,
as when you always apply the guidelines, here or
elsewhere, departure is an unusual case.
Now, suppose those were the words that the
Commission had written. Could -- how -- is it possible
under those circumstances you would still be arguing
this sentence under the -- plea bargaining abolished
except over where within the range -- is it possible you
would be arguing that this is not based on the
guidelines?
MR. GANNON: Well, I think that had the
Sentencing Commission adopted such a position, and if it
were binding on the sentencing judge --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, it is, because of
(a)(4). It used to be --
MR. GANNON: Which is -- well, because --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- because it says in the
sentencing guidelines, Judge, you will apply the
guideline, unless you find a circumstance the Commission
did not adequately take into account and in respect to
that, you may and must consult policy statements, but
guidelines and other materials. That is what it says.
Okay?
So take I am right on that. Assume I am
right. You can disagree with me, and I will look into
MR. GANNON: Before Booker was decided,
it -- several of the circuits had already concluded that
a judge could accept a type C plea agreement that had a
sentence outside the range, and that that wasn't a
guidelines-based sentence.
JUSTICE BREYER: I want an answer to my
hypothetical, because I am trying to figure out how to
think about it, and you will help me if you answer my
hypothetical.
MR. GANNON: I think in those circumstances,
the Commission effectively would have repealed type C
plea agreements, because --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, that's right. That's
what they wanted to do. Okay? Now, that is correct.
But you can still have them.
MR. GANNON: In your hypothetical, that is
what they wanted to do.
JUSTICE BREYER: You could still have them,
but they allow them only for the purpose of where within
the range the sentence will lie. Okay?
MR. GANNON: In those circumstances I think
that it would be fair to say that the sentence was based
on the guideline range --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine.
MR. GANNON: -- because the agreement hadn't
given any reason for the judge to -- to leave the
guidelines.
JUSTICE BREYER: Correct. Now I would like
-- because if they wrote those words, C agreements are
abolished, but for where within the range -- okay? You
agree it would be based on the guidelines. Now what I'd
like you to do is to look at section 6B, whatever that
MR. GANNON: 6B1.2 --
JUSTICE BREYER: Exactly.
MR. GANNON: -- is on the last page of
the --
JUSTICE BREYER: You tell me how this
differs from what I just said.
MR. GANNON: Well, I think it differs in two
key ways. First of all --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You were about to tell us
where it is?
MR. GANNON: It is on the last page of the
government's appendix which is the 16A of our brief.
And I think that it differs in two regards. First of
all, it -- it was a policy statement that even before
Booker was not binding on the sentencing judge. The
Commission determined that -- that this particular
guideline was not binding on judges the same way other
provisions in the guidelines where.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But I thought you just told
me that -- binding -- was not a part of the test
--
anymore.
MR. GANNON: Well, I -- but the question is
whether the judge even had to apply it at all, and the
judge did not need to. And -- the second point that I
was going to get to is that, unlike the colloquy that
Justice Breyer had with Mr. Heft earlier on, it doesn't
say the court may accept the agreement only if the court
is satisfied that it is within the guideline range. It
gives the court permission to accept the agreement.
This is a policy statement that gives the court
permission to accept the agreement when it is within the
guideline range or when there is a justifiable
departure, but it does not then say that everything else
is prohibited.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's only if. The words
there are "only if." It said should accept the
recommended sentence or a plea agreement requiring
imposition of a specific sentence only if the court is
satisfied either that such sentence is appropriate
within the guidelines, or departure.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're reading a different
JUSTICE BREYER: I am? I'm reading 6B1.3, I
am reading commentary on the policy statement.
MR. GANNON: This is for 6B1.3?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. I am reading the
commentary on the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He is reading the
commentary.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. GANNON: I've been looking at a text of
B1.2 itself, which leaves out the word only. But I
think that here, even if you go back to the pre-Booker
practice, I think it was clear that judges were able to
depart from the guidelines to accept type C plea
agreements that imposed the sentence that was outside
the guideline range, and they -- and it wasn't
considered an abuse of discretion.
JUSTICE BREYER: I think you're right. You
see that is why I am having such a hard time. I am
having a hard time because first I put myself back in
the Commission days, and there the Commission did want
to abolish C.
MR. GANNON: Well--
JUSTICE BREYER: And then that is what it
intended to do and that is what it said it did, but for
what we are talking about. Now, you first raised the
question of did they have the authority to do that and I
agree with you that that is a legitimate question. I
made you assume it away, but I think it is a legitimate
question.
Now we have the additional question of how
Booker/Fanfan changes that and for what and when. Do
you see why I am puzzled and why I was asking you rather
harshly to start with my hypothetical?
MR. GANNON: I -- I do think that -- that
this gets puzzling as -- as you get further down, but I
think that this is the simplest case. It is a narrow
category of cases. We are dealing with a subset of one
particular type of plea agreement. It is distinct from
every other aspect of Federal sentencing. It's unlike
what happens when somebody goes to trial; in those
circumstances the judge clearly has the discretion to
apply the sentencing guidelines at the time of
sentencing.
It is different from regular type B plea
agreements where the parties have come up with an
agreement and the judge notwithstanding the agreement is
still free to determine the sentence that he or she
wants to determine.
This is a unique -- this uniquely gives a
high level of certainty to the parties about the
specific sentence that they negotiated.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't -- I am not in
disagreement with the point you're making, but I think
that going back to what had bothered Justice Alito and
Justice Scalia on now that the guidelines are not
mandatory, is any sentence even under C really based on
the agreement? Because even a C agreement has to be
approved by the judge.
The legal consequence is not the agreement.
That doesn't sentence the defendant. It is the judge's
decision as to what the sentence should be which he
denotes in accepting the agreement that binds.
And I think -- I may be making Justice
Breyer's argument -- that if under the policy statement
and it's clear what the judge did here, if the judge
feels bound by the agreement or otherwise to calculate a
sentence in the guidelines and impose one in the
guidelines, how can you say that the legal effect is not
the guideline sentence?
MR. GANNON: Well, because I think that the
relevant question for purposes of both 3582(c)(2) and
the policy statements that the court said in Dillon
controls the -- the process of implementing 3582(c)(2),
is what did the judge do at the time of imposing the
sentence? And so although it is true that the judge
generally will consider how the type C specific sentence
that the parties have agreed upon corresponds to a
guidelines analysis at the time of deciding whether to
accept the plea agreement, the relevant phrase in
B1.10(b)1 which is -- which is on page 8A of the
government's appendix is that the judge is supposed to
go back and look at what -- to only make substitutions
for the corresponding guideline provisions that were
applied when the defendant was sentenced.
And so when you have a type C plea agreement
that has a specific sentence even under the terms of
this agreement, the only thing that the judge considered
when he decided the sentence was going to be 106 months
with respect to the term of imprisonment was the binding
plea agreement. That is what rule 11(c)(1)(C) required.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- no. Because you're
assuming that the agreement was automatically binding on
the judge.
MR. GANNON: It was --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The judge was always
capable of saying at the time of sentence I won't accept
the 106. If he had calculated the guidelines and if it
turned out that the guidelines called for 240 to 360, he
could have said easily no, that is so far outside of the
guideline range with no justification that I am not
going to accept -- impose the sentence. You could
withdraw your agreement and do whatever you're going to
MR. GANNON: And had he not done that the
proceeding would have occurred differently and it may
not even have right occurred then, and -- and I think
because under Rule 11 if he was rejecting the plea
agreement and -- and the 106 months that the parties had
agreed to, he would have to give the defendant the right
to withdraw the plea at that point. So the government
would have been released from its obligations; the
parties -- the defendant could have gone to trial. He
could have -- he could have continued to plead guilty.
The parties could have come up with a type plea -- B
plea agreement. The parties may have asked for time to
renegotiate a different type C agreement. We do not
know what would have happened in those circumstances.
And as you pointed out before, Justice
Sotomayor, this is not about asking the judge to step
into the shoes of the parties and renegotiate what the
agreement would have been had the judge decided to
reject it the first time around. Instead 3582(c)(2)
contemplates a limited process by which the judge will
reapply those provisions of the guidelines that he
applied the first time around and -- and make the
substitution that is now called for by the retroactively
applicable change. But here because the judge didn't
actually make that application at the time of
sentencing, the judge did not actually have to apply the
drug quantity table.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I am not following that
argument for this reason. It seems to me if you ask
what did the judge apply at the time he imposed the
original sentence, well, it has got to be the
guidelines, because first the agreement provides for it;
then he says I am going to wait for the probation report
so I can see what the calculation is, whether I agree
with it; and then he gives him a sentence that is
precisely within the guidelines.
So if you asked me to describe what that
sentence was -- of what was it, 46 to 106 days -- I say
that was a guideline sentence. It was right there
within the brackets that -- the guidelines. So why
wasn't it a guideline sentence?
MR. GANNON: Because for purposes of the
term of imprisonment the judge was not actually applying
the guidelines at that point. He did so for purposes of
the fine. He ended up actually waiving the relevant
fine, but those type C plea agreement here called for
the judge to apply the guidelines with respect to the
fine and did not call for the judge to apply the
guidelines with respect to the term of imprisonment. He
knew that it was within what the PSR had calculated as
the guideline range and he concluded that that was the
applicable guideline range which he needed to do for
purposes of calculating the fine and other things, but
it wasn't actually the basis for the sentence.
The basis for the sentence was the plea
agreement that he accepted, and there it was the
parties' agreement. And there are all sorts of things
that went into the parties' agreement that the judge
does not have the wherewithal to reconsider in
retrospect.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought one of the
things in the plea agreement was that the -- that the
judge would have the right to himself calculate the
guideline range.
MR. GANNON: Yes. And that specifically
contemplated in Rule 11(c) and in the guidelines, that
the judge may postpone acceptance of the plea agreement
until after the presentence report is prepared. And the
judge did do that here. So he was aware of what the PSR
recommended, but once, and had he decided that he did
not like the 106 month sentence and he wanted to
preserve his sentencing discretion, the option at that
point was to have rejected the plea agreement, at which
point the parties would have been free to do different
things. And among other things, the Government could
then have then argued for a higher sentence within the
range. Could have argued that the criminal history
failed to represent the seriousness of the defendant's
criminal past. Could have argued for an upward
departure even, but the Defendant got the benefit of the
6 month agreement of not having the Government raise
any of those other arguments at that time. And now he
is asking for essentially another bite of the apple and
we think that because the basis for the sentence was
indeed the negotiation and the agreement between the
parties, that the court of appeals decision was correct.
If there are no further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Gannon.
Mr. Heft, you have three minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF FRANK W. HEFT, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. HEFT: Thank you, Your Honor. Just a
couple of points. First of all, the record here leaves
no doubt that the judge based his sentence on the
guidelines. The sentencing transcript specifically
states that the judge and I'd like to quote this, this
is at page 47 of the joint appendix and I quote, "the
court will adopt the findings of the probation officer
disclosed in the probation report and application of the
guidelines as set out therein." On page 48 of the joint
appendix the judge says, having considered the advisory
guidelines, he went on to impose that sentence. So it
is quite clear that the judge and even in his statements
of reasons on page 95 of the joint appendix, again
reaffirmed that this sentence was based on the
guidelines.
Now, the other point that I'd like to make
is that the Government acknowledges that it has carved
out a very small exception to its argument that C pleas
regarding specific sentences and sentencing ranges are
not eligible for (c)(2) relief. But it seems to me that
reading, taking the Government position into account, if
this plea agreement had not stated 106 months, then
Mr. Freeman's under the terms of this plea agreement in
the Government's view and under the Government's
argument of what exception exists under the C pleas for
purposes of 3582, Mr. Freeman would be eligible for the
relief that was granted. And we would simply urge the
Court in this case to adopt a rule that does not exclude
specific sentences and C pleas for eligibility in 3582.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:12 a.m., the case in the
