IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MATRIXX INITIATIVES, INC., ET AL.,:
Petitioners :
v. : No. 09-1156
JAMES SIRACUSANO, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, January 10, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:00 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JONATHAN HACKER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioners.
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondents.
PRATIK A. SHAH, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JONATHAN HACKER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DAVID C. FREDERICK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 30
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PRATIK A. SHAH, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as
amicus curiae, supporting the Respondents 47
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JONATHAN HACKER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:00 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 09-1156, Matrixx Initiatives
v. James Siracusano.
Mr. Hacker.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JONATHAN HACKER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. HACKER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
All drug companies receive, on an almost
daily basis, anecdotal hearsay reports about alleged
adverse health events following the use of their
products. Those incident reports do not themselves
establish any reliable facts about the drug's
performance or its safety, especially where, as here,
there are only a handful of reports out of millions of
products sold over a 4-year period, and --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Hacker, do we know
that from this record? I mean, we know that the
plaintiffs were able to identify -- there's some dispute
whether it's 12 or 23, but do you represent that there
were no other complaints made? So that, let's say,
there has been discovery; now we're just at the pleading
stage. The company would have said: That's it; we
didn't have any more.
MR. HACKER: All I can speak for is what's
alleged in the complaint, and the complaint, no matter
how read, doesn't allege any more than 23 adverse event
reports.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But they might have been
able through discovery to find that there were many
more.
MR. HACKER: That's true, but there's no
allegation that what they -- what they know about or
what they could find would have been a statistically
significant difference between the rate of reported
events and the background of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But why shouldn't that
determination be deferred until there's discovery, and
then we can know how many reports there really were?
MR. HACKER: Because it's incumbent on a
plaintiff to come to court with a case, to plead the
facts necessary to establish all of the elements of a
claim, and a securities fraud claim, of course, requires
both materiality and scienter. And neither of those is
established unless the company has knowledge of facts
establishing a reliable basis for inferring that the
drug itself is the cause of the reported event.
Absent information like that, there is
neither materiality nor scienter under the securities
laws, because neither the company nor an investor --
until there's reliable evidence of a causal link between
the two products, neither a company -- excuse me, a link
between the product and the event -- neither the company
nor an investor would have any reason to think that an
adverse event report is -- actually indicates a problem
with the product --
JUSTICE ALITO: Can there be --
MR. HACKER: -- as opposed to a coincidence.
JUSTICE ALITO: Can there be some situations
in which statistically significant evidence would not be
necessary?
For example, suppose some very distinguished
physicians concluded, based on clinical trials, that
there was a connection between a drug and a very serious
side effect. Could that establish materiality?
MR. HACKER: Well, I think a distinguished
physician would not conclude that there's a connection
unless the clinical trials reveal a statistically
significant difference between what they've seen and
what they would expect to see were there no association.
So there's that point, Your Honor.
But the second point I would make is we
acknowledge there are a very narrow, limited number of
circumstances under which a claim can be pled absent
statistically significant evidence, but that's -- that's
because doctors and researchers will conclude that there
may be causation under narrow circumstances. For
example, I think the most common set of criteria are the
Bradford-Hill criteria. But nothing like that is pled
here, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Hacker, the complaint
did not rely exclusively upon these adverse incidents
but also referred to a -- a study, a report by
researchers at the American Rhinologic Society --
MR. HACKER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- which -- which asserted
that there was a connection.
MR. HACKER: But that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the -- is the question
before us simply whether in isolation the adverse
incidents would be enough, or is not the question
whether those adverse incidents placed next to this
study would be enough?
MR. HACKER: Well, two points, Your Honor.
First, the plaintiffs have, throughout this litigation,
framed their case as one based on the failure to
disclose adverse event reports. It's the number of
adverse event reports that they say is the problem, and
they're not saying that there was a study out there and
that we failed to disclose the study. They say --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why didn't they say that?
MR. HACKER: -- it's the fact of the adverse
event reports. Well, I think if you look at the -- now,
to be clear, the study is not attached to the complaint,
so there wasn't a basis in the complaint for saying the
company was aware of a reliable study, and here are the
details of the study, and they failed to disclose it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I thought the --
you're saying the complaint did not refer to the study?
MR. HACKER: It did refer to it. That's
true. And if you look at the study, there's really
nothing there. It's based on -- primarily on a case
study of one -- and, again, this isn't in the complaint;
it's in the -- it is attached to the red brief, Your
Honor.
There's one case study of one man who is 55
year old -- 55 years old, which is the population most
likely to experience anosmia. You're more likely to get
it when you're -- he's suffering from signs of lupus,
which causes anosmia, and he's taking Flonase, which
also causes anosmia. And so the idea that you can infer
from that one incident out of millions over years of
product sales that -- that Zicam causes anosmia and that
there's a problem out there.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You're talking about
-- you're talking about who's right or wrong about the
connection between Matrixx and anosmia. But that's not
the question. I'm an investor in Matrixx; I worry
whether my stock price is going to go down. You can
have some psychic come out and say Zicam is going to
cause a disease, with no support whatsoever, but if it
causes the stock to go down 20 percent, it seems to me
that's material.
MR. HACKER: But if -- that's precisely the
point, Your Honor. If a psychic came out or a lunatic
on the street corner is barking, you know, through a
megaphone that there's a problem with the product,
that's not the kind of information a -- a reasonable
investor would rely on.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But wait a minute.
These -- these weren't psychics. These were three
clinical doctors in this area, one of them you knew
poised to go to a society meeting to make this
allegation.
Doesn't it make a difference who the reports
are coming from and what the substance of those reports
may do to your product?
MR. HACKER: It may make a difference, Your
Honor, and I didn't mean to suggest that, you know,
these are psychics. The point simply is, following up
on the Chief Justice's question, that it does matter
what the basis of the allegation, and is the evidence,
the facts available to the company, reliable? Does it
create a reliable inference that a reasonable investor
would be concerned about?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, suppose -- suppose
you stipulate, in response to the Chief Justice's
question, that it's irrational, that it's probably
baseless, but that the market will react adversely. Is
there a duty then to address the claim?
MR. HACKER: Under the case law, it's not
clear that that's true. In this case, looking at this
case specifically, Your Honor, when the market reacted,
what the market was reacting to was a Good Morning
America report. It's very important to be clear about
what that report said.
On Good Morning America, a leading morning
news program, the allegation was made by Dr. Jafek that
Zicam causes anosmia. That's a very different
allegation that what the company was -- than what it was
the company was aware of, which was simply the adverse
event reports.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But had there --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But if there's a baseless
report -- and we stipulate that, although it's baseless,
it's going to affect the market -- could that be the
basis for an allegation, assuming the requisite
scienter, that there's liability?
MR. HACKER: Two answers, I would say, Your
Honor. First of all, we have to be very careful about
creating a rule through our interpretation of
materiality that would require companies in advance to
disclose the fact that a baseless, false allegation
about the company is going to come out because it
requires the company to ring the bell --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But it's not the
allegation. It's the fact that the market may be
affected.
MR. HACKER: Well, I understand, but the
problem is if the-- what the rule would say is, because
the company is aware the market may be affected, the
company in advance has to say: A false report about us
is about to come out. It requires the company to first
ring the bell and then un-ring it in the same statement,
and that's not a good rule for companies.
Shareholders wouldn't want that rule, to
require companies to denigrate their product and then do
their best to explain why the allegation is untrue.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Hacker --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Hacker, you just
said, if I understood you correctly, that when the --
when the news came out on Good Morning America, accurate
or not, there was an obligation to do something about
it, but among the -- the charges, it's not simply that
there was these reports, but it's the way the company
responded to them: two press releases that said
allegations of any linkage of the drug to anosmia are
completely unfounded. That statement was made even
after the -- what was it, Dr. Jafek?
MR. HACKER: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- had this presentation,
and he was going to put Zicam's name on it, and the
company said you don't have any permission to do that.
So the company prevented Good Morning America from
happening earlier, and it made these affirmative
statements that there's no linkage.
MR. HACKER: Well, what they said was -- and
this was true -- that it was completely unfounded and
misleading. The very scientific panel that plaintiffs
themselves rely on, which convened and issued its report
weeks later, confirmed that. There was no -- it's
absolutely unfounded at the time to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that the
scientific report that came out later said we can't say
one way or the other, as opposed to the company saying
that any suggestion of linkage is completely unfounded.
MR. HACKER: And that's correct, there
isn't, when -- when the scientific panel said you can't
make that claim, it's unfounded, there's no basis in the
available science.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: They didn't say
"unfounded." They said the evidence is not -- we can't
say yes and we can't say no. That's different from
completely unfounded.
MR. HACKER: Well, I'm -- with respect, Your
Honor, I'm not entirely sure it is. When you're talking
about science, you make a claim that's either supported
in the science or it's without support. And the point
the scientific panel was making is there was no support
in the available science, and what Jafek was relying on
was unreliable. As I just described, the one --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Hacker, you're
saying that the question of whether there is support is
reducible to the question of whether there are
statistically significant findings. Now, as I
understand it, the FDA takes action all the time as to
drugs -- they force the withdrawal of a drug from the
market, they force relabeling of a drug -- on the basis
of findings that are not statistically significant.
Now, clearly in those cases the market has a right to
know the very things that are going to make the FDA take
action against a product and that are going to severely
affect the product's value to the company. Not
statistical significance there.
MR. HACKER: That's true, but the problem
with that sort of standard -- well, first of all, to
emphasize -- to look at the facts of this case, the FDA
didn't take any action until 5 years later, but -- and
which shows that the --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, it could, and
eventually it did.
MR. HACKER: But that's what --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And you are suggesting a
test for what -- what counts as material, which is
statistically significant, a test that the FDA itself
doesn't use when it thinks about what it should -- what
it should regulate.
MR. HACKER: The problem is ex ante. You
have to -- you can't look at this through hindsight.
You have to look at this ex ante. When a company has a
handful of reports -- it's absolutely true, nobody would
dispute, that some day in the distant future, with the
accumulation of more data, the FDA may take action based
on its own prophylactic public health regulatory
discretion. But at the time, ex ante, no company, when
it gets an adverse event report, can possibly know
whether that's enough information for the FDA to act.
So the prospect that the FDA may some day act on the
basis of additionally accumulated information would
require disclosure of all reports all the time, and
that, we submit, cannot be the standard.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Hacker, suppose Good
Morning America made the same claim, categorically
saying that this drug caused this condition, but did so
simply on the basis of these adverse incidents, and they
didn't have Dr. Janner's, or whatever his name is,
reports, but nonetheless Good Morning America comes out,
and on the basis of those incidents, saying Zicam causes
whatever the condition is. Would that have to be
reported?
MR. HACKER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And if not, why not?
MR. HACKER: I think what you would have to
be hypothesizing is evidence that the company, say a
week in advance, knew that Good Morning America was
going to come out and say that, because once Good
Morning America says it, it's said it and the effect is
what it is.
But even in the hypothetical -- you're --
you'd have to sort of unpack what you said. If Good
Morning America came out and said just what Matrixx knew
at the time -- there are a handful of adverse event
reports, there's -- it's over millions of product uses
over a 4-year period, and no indication that that's at
all in any way different from the incident rate in the
general population, especially among cold users, who, of
course, are most likely to experience anosmia -- you
know, we don't know what would have happened. But then
you add the element that Good Morning America then
declares that Zicam causes anosmia -- again, the
hypothetical would have to be in advance Matrixx is
aware --
JUSTICE SCALIA: All right. That's --
MR. HACKER: -- that the false claim is
going to be made.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Fine.
MR. HACKER: Right, and I would say, first
of all, we have to be very careful, as I said before,
about a rule that requires a company to disclose false
facts. I would say, second, that a reasonable investor
doesn't want false information; a reasonable investor
wants accurate information. And a reasonable investor
would actually --
JUSTICE SCALIA: These are unreasonable
investors who are relying on some talking head on Good
Morning America who says that this is true --
MR. HACKER: And that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- even though it isn't
true.
MR. HACKER: And that's a third point I
would make, Your Honor, is it's a different case, a
fundamentally different case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No --
MR. HACKER: -- if you're talking about a
media splash.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You haven't answered yes or
no. There's no basis for its being said on Good Morning
America, but unreasonable investors by the thousands
rely upon it.
MR. HACKER: And I think the answer is no,
and I think that the reason it's no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No --
MR. HACKER: -- a qualified no, is because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't --
MR. HACKER: -- the law doesn't respond to
irrational, unpredictable, or unreasonable investors.
It responds to a reasonable investor who wants
accurate -- a reasonable investor is going to hold the
stock --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: A reasonable
investor is going to worry about the fact that thousands
of unreasonable investors are going to dump their
Matrixx stock.
(Laughter.)
MR. HACKER: I -- I absolutely -- I
understand that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- but, I mean,
there's nothing unreasonable about that. If it looks --
if you're looking at Good Morning America, you say, my
gosh, everybody else is going to sell this; I'm going to
sell, too. And if it turns out you knew about it, you
should have told me about it before.
MR. HACKER: And the point I would make is,
first of all, a company ex ante can't know when that's
going to happen. So all the hypotheticals are
suggesting some way of knowing the company --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It may not know, but
it certainly can know.
MR. HACKER: And if --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you -- if you
know this is a very false report, but we know that, I
don't know, the surgeon general, somebody, is going to
come out and announce it and that will cause an
effect --
MR. HACKER: And that's why it's a
meaningfully different case. If the plaintiffs have --
plead in their complaint that there's a memo inside the
company, for example, so this false fact is going to
come out, and we know it's going to cause a stock drop,
that would be a case involving the materiality of a
media splash, a big media event.
It can't be that there's a false claim out
there somewhere and the company becomes aware of the
false claim and then, purely hypothetically, it's
possible that somebody will make the false claim. It
becomes also possible that the media will pick up and
not be persuaded to ignore the false claim.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Hacker --
MR. HACKER: That's the kind of case we're
talking about here.
JUSTICE KAGAN: In most cases we don't know
whether the claim is false or not. So let me give you a
hypothetical: There's a pharmaceutical company and it
comes out with its first and only product. It's 100
percent of the sales, and it's a new contact lens
solution. And it sells this product to many, many, many
hundreds of thousands of people. And most of them use
this product with no adverse effect whatsoever, but
there are 10 cases where somebody uses this product and
they go blind. Three of those 10 cases -- the person
had to borrow a contact lens from a friend, only used it
in the one eye; they go blind only in that one eye.
This is not statistically significant.
There is no way that anybody would tell that you these
cases are statistically significant. Would you stop
using that product, and would a reasonable investor want
to know about those 10 cases?
MR. HACKER: I -- I would want to know more
about the number of uses and all that, but, no, there
wouldn't be a basis. A reasonable investor would want
to know all the facts and details that would establish a
reason to draw a --
JUSTICE KAGAN: There are a lot of contact
lens solutions in the world. So if I heard that, 10
people went blind, 3 used it in one eye, 3 went blind in
that eye, I'd stop using the product; and if I were
holding stock in that company, I'd sell the stock.
MR. HACKER: The problem is -- I mean, there
has to be some reliable basis. You may be describing
facts that would satisfy the Bradford-Hill criteria, for
example, where you can draw a -- a reliable inference
that the product is the cause. That's the key here.
There has to be --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So --
MR. HACKER: -- a reliable basis for
inferring causation.
JUSTICE BREYER: This is the same kind of
question, but suppose I don't really know how drug
companies operate. I suspect, but I don't know, that
where you have a serious drug, people are hurt all the
time and they blame the drug. So probably drug
companies operate in an environment where they get all
kinds of complaints and some are valid, some are not;
who knows? People are frightened.
MR. HACKER: Very much so.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, I don't know
that. But you say at the beginning your client says:
Look, we get complaints all the time; you know, just put
up with it if you buy our stock. Now, I don't know to
what extent that's true. I don't know how that fits in.
I don't know whether their complaint is unusual or not
unusual or general.
Who is supposed to decide that? The judge
at the complaint stage? Or the judge after you get some
evidence on it? Or the jury? And the same is true of
scienter, after all, because the scienter, you see --
and you have to plead that with particularity. Okay.
What's my -- what's your answer? What's the -- what's
-- I mean, Justice Kagan has an interesting view of
this, and could be, that she's putting forward and
others might have a different view. Who is to decide
this?
MR. HACKER: Well, ultimately it's a
question -- it would go all the way to the jury if the
plaintiffs were able to plead facts in the complaint
that entitled them to relief.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, we don't know. You
see, what they're saying is we have one respectable
doctor, studier, at -- you know, in Colorado. He, by
the way, has an abstract which isn't in the complaint,
which says that they do allege that it's zinc that's the
problem, a free zinc ion. And they say we also have 25
people who were hurt and some burning sensations in
people where it didn't rise to that level.
You know, I don't know. I don't know if
that's within the range of expectation of drug companies
as part of the normal course of business which investors
should know about, and I suspect a district judge
doesn't know, either. So how does it work where we in
fact just don't know whether this does or not arise
above the background noise of a drug company?
MR. HACKER: We think the answer is
statistical significance, just like the Second Circuit
said in Carter-Wallace --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, no, it can't be. I
mean, all right -- I'm sorry. I don't mean to take a
position yet. But --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: But, look -- I mean, Albert
Einstein had the theory of relativity without any
empirical evidence, okay? So we could get the greatest
doctor in the world, and he has dozens of theories, and
the theories are very sound, and all that fits in here
is an allegation he now has learned that it's the free
zinc ion that counts.
MR. HACKER: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: And that could be
devastating to a drug even though there isn't one person
yet who has been hurt. So I don't see how we can say --
MR. HACKER: But -- but --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- this statistical
significance always works or always doesn't work.
MR. HACKER: But, Your Honor, out of
millions of uses, if there was that problem, you would
-- it wouldn't be hard to plead a case that says there's
a statistically significant problem --
JUSTICE BREYER: They did. They said --
they said the free zinc ion was -- that word on this was
told to your client by a person who knows a lot about
it, is apparently reputable, and was told to a person
who also knows a lot about it. Huh. I think they're
saying you ought to have been very nervous at that
point. That isn't just a usual background noise, okay?
So I'm back to my question, which is -- you can answer
the other one too if you like. But, I mean -- but my
question is: Who is supposed to decide, how?
MR. HACKER: Well, I think a plaintiff -- I
mean, I may just be repeating myself, but a plaintiff
has to plead the facts that would entitle them to relief
at the end of the day. So, I'm not saying a judge
always --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, and we're back at
my question --
MR. HACKER: And --
JUSTICE BREYER: The question is: The facts
that are pleaded is -- I think it's assumed that this is
above the normal background noise -- they certainly
argue that at length -- that there was this free zinc
ion conversation, that there are 25 people who were
hurt, and there is a lot of burning sensation going on,
even though it doesn't rise to the level of people being
hurt, and that's supported by some of the zinc sulfate
studies in the fish --
MR. HACKER: I think you need --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- okay? Now, they're
saying that's above the background noise, and you say,
no, it isn't. Now, who decides and how do we decide?
Don't we have to go to a trial?
MR. HACKER: The answer is no, Your Honor,
because there's no basis on those pleaded facts for
inferring that there's actually a problem with the zinc
ion --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know. I know, but
over --
MR. HACKER: Look -- look at the allegations
that --
JUSTICE BREYER: We're not saying -- you're
saying if you are a scientist -- now we're back to
Justice Scalia's questions and the others.
MR. HACKER: But it matters what a scientist
would think because it's only then that anybody ex ante,
again, remember --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, then what --
MR. HACKER: -- has a basis for inferring
that there's a causal link which will create the
problem. And the zinc -- to be very clear, let's -- to
be very clear about the zinc studies, the claim made on
the telephone wasn't even a claim of causation. It
said, are you aware of the zinc sulfate studies, which,
of course, is a fundamentally different compound
than zinc gluconate.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, because the sulfate --
you see in the abstract, which they didn't put in the
complaint, that the problem that they saw arising out of
the zinc sulfate studies was the free zinc ion.
MR. HACKER: No, the zinc sulfate studies
were polio related --
JUSTICE BREYER: I --
MR. HACKER: -- totally irrelevant. What
they cited for the free zinc ions were studies of
catfish and turtles.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right --
MR. HACKER: And nobody thinks, nobody
thinks, that you can infer anything from a study of
catfish and turtles about their smell sensation and
human beings --
JUSTICE BREYER: The trouble is, you know,
the truth is I don't know --
MR. HACKER: But their --
JUSTICE BREYER: And so I'm back to my
question.
MR. HACKER: Well, in terms of scienter,
under the securities law there has to be a plausible
basis, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I -- you got
cert granted on a limited question, and the limited
question was whether, in a complaint that alleges only
adverse reports, can you prove materiality and scienter
without proving statistical importance. That's the
question presented.
Justice Kagan started with the point that
the FDA doesn't require that. It requires just
reasonable evidence of a connection, not statistical.
Many of the amici here have done a wonderful job of
explaining why statistical importance can't be a measure
because it depends on the nature of the study at issue.
So given all of that -- and even in your
brief, in a footnote, you answered the question by
saying no, we can't establish that rule as an absolute,
because there are additional factors that could prove
materiality and scienter. So you've already answered
the question presented.
Are we down to what Justice Scalia asked
you, which is: We've got a "no" to the question: Are
the facts in this case enough? I don't know why we
would have granted cert on that, but you presented a
different question presented. Given the question
presented, is the answer no? And if not, why not?
MR. HACKER: Let me -- let me start with the
premise of the question presented. It's presented on
the facts as the case had been litigated today, trying
to rely on adverse event reports, which is
understandable. The plaintiffs don't want to have to
prove all of the other -- you wouldn't think they'd want
to prove all of the other facts.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can I just interrupt a
second?
MR. HACKER: Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: This wasn't an FDA-
approved drug.
MR. HACKER: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there weren't any
adverse reports in the legal sense of that word.
MR. HACKER: In the FDA sense, that's true.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: In the FDA sense. So
we're using a misnomer here to start with.
MR. HACKER: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Continue.
MR. HACKER: I would just say that adverse
event reports are not limited to what qualifies for the
FDA, certainly not by the way the case is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, if I may
interject --
MR. HACKER: -- litigated.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- the FDA acts in the
public interest, doesn't it?
MR. HACKER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it doesn't make money
by withdrawing a drug from the market.
MR. HACKER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: As opposed to somebody who
sues, who makes money on the lawsuit.
MR. HACKER: That's true. But there's a
broader point about the FDA, which I think is underlying
your question and Justice Kagan's question, which is I
don't even think it's true that the FDA really requires
reasonable evidence. They have broad discretion and
should have broad discretion. Nobody is contesting
that. But the question is, again, ex ante, before you
know what the FDA might do, before there's sufficient
evidence to justify the FDA to act. Remember, the FDA
didn't act for 5 years. The FDA didn't act on the basis
of what Matrixx was aware of at the time, and so that
can't be the standard, the idea that the FDA may some
day act.
Statistical significance -- the question of
statistical significance is presented in this case to
the extent the courts below were arguing about and the
plaintiffs were arguing about whether or not the small
number of raw adverse event reports tell you anything
meaningful. The real standard -- the -- the case got
developed in the briefing here when the plaintiffs came
back and said, well, there's more to it and there can be
more to it, and that, of course, is true, but the
standard has to be reliability.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, but you -- you have
said raw adverse event reports. Am I not right that all
of these reports came from medical doctors, and in
response to the very first one, the company
representative said, yes, we've been getting reports
since 1999?
MR. HACKER: Well, there's a reference, but
-- I mean, there's a -- 1999 was the first call from
Dr. Hirsch, who reported one patient. There's a
discussion with Dr. Linschoten about one other patient.
And there were some reports -- nobody is disputing that
there were some reports out there.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But my question is, does
it make a difference if these reports come from medical
experts in this particular field?
MR. HACKER: No, because a doctor doesn't
have unique expertise in diagnosing causation. A
doctor -- if you have a sore knee, a doctor is qualified
to tell you -- to diagnose the fact that your sore knee
is the product of bone cancer. A doctor is not
qualified to tell you why you got bone cancer, and
that's the problem that we have here.
I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Hacker.
Mr. Frederick.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DAVID C. FREDERICK
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. FREDERICK: Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
In TSC and Basic, this Court reaffirmed the
longstanding rule that materiality is judged based on
the total mix of information available to investors.
Matrixx initially sought a major change to this Court's
contextual approach to materiality by offering a
bright-line standard of statistical significance.
In its reply brief, Matrixx offer -- offers
a rule that would apply only in the hypothetical
scenario where investors rely solely on numbers of
adverse event reports in pleading securities fraud.
This Court should reject both arguments in
this case. The broad theory has numerous legal and
policy flaws. First, the longstanding totality of the
circumstances test best comports with the varied reasons
why investors make investment decisions.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, suppose the
allegations of materiality are based solely on adverse
event reports. Suppose that it's alleged that 10
million people during -- during -- during 1 year have
taken a particular drug and 5 people, shortly after
taking the drug, have developed certain -- have had an
adverse -- have had -- experienced an adverse event. Is
that sufficient to go to a jury?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, probably not
sufficient to go a jury absent a drop in the stock
price, absent evidence that there was a scientifically
plausible link, absent evidence that the product was
highly important to the company's long-term financial
prospects. All of these things go into the contextual
mix that investors would regard as important in making
an investment decision, and they all happen to be
present here. We --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If it was the only product
they sold, that might be enough -- 5 adverse reports out
of 10 million? If -- if that's the only product they
make, you say, totality of the circumstances, that may
be enough?
MR. FREDERICK: Under the Basic test, Your
Honor, that very well might if the probability and the
magnitude of the harm -- if those five incidents were
deaths from a product that was easily substitutable,
that might be a relevant decision and information that
investors might want to take into account.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In response to
Justice Alito, I heard you say something about a
scientifically plausible link.
MR. FREDERICK: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That seems to me to
be a rather significant concession. In other words,
you're saying it's not simply the fact that some psychic
would say something, that that is not sufficient, even
if that has an impact on the market price, that there
has to be some scientifically plausible link to the
report.
MR. FREDERICK: I think this goes back to
Justice Kennedy's question as well, Mr. Chief Justice,
because there could very well be materiality. The
information might be important for investors, but it
could very well be that the people making the
disclosures don't have the requisite scienter because
there is an absence of any plausible relationship.
The stock price might drop on news that
would not be regarded as news that the most highly
scientifically rational people would take into account.
But that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I thought this might
come up. At some point, do we look at scienter and then
go back from that to whether or not it's material, i.e.,
the argument would be the company knew that this would
affect the price, and that's why they didn't disclose
it, and therefore that shows it's material? Or do we do
this with two isolated boxes -- one, materiality; two,
scienter -- and we don't mix the analyses?
MR. FREDERICK: They're both analytically
distinct and related, Justice Kennedy, and I don't have
a simple answer for you because many of the reported
cases raise issues of both materiality and scienter.
What the Court has said in Basic is that the test is the
total mix of information and whether that -- under that
total mix, the investor would find that information
important. In Tellabs, the Court said that whether or
not the inferences of scienter could be deemed -- were
as plausible as other inferences based on the mental
state of the people making the information.
So the Court has announced separate tests.
In a case like this, there is a natural overlap, and in
fact the other side has litigated this case on the basis
that no one would have thought within the company, based
on the adverse event reports, that there was a basis for
thinking there was information.
We plead the other way by saying that when
you have three medical specialists in three distinct
periods where the last wants to bring findings to the
leading ear, nose, and throat medical society suggesting
that, based on studies that go back as far back as the
30s, there is a scientifically plausible link based on
the zinc ions, that's something that the company should
have taken seriously and disclosed to investors.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Frederick, suppose
you were the CEO of a pharmaceutical company with a new
drug, you've just put it out on the market, and you get
a report back, this drug has caused a death, right?
This is your first adverse effect report. Do you have
to disclose it?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, I guess the first
thing I would say is, if the drug has not been FDA
approved, that would be material information that
investors might want to know. If the drug had been FDA
approved and that report was then submitted to the FDA,
I think that there's a closer call depending on the, you
know, effect of the report that might be on the stock
price, because that's the only company product and the
other factors that we've mentioned in our brief.
I think the question of one event is
obviously much more difficult than where there are
multiple events submitted by doctors with a
scientifically plausible basis on a product that's 70
percent of the company's revenues.
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, we're told that there
are hundreds of thousands of these, where for a -- for a
typical drug there may be thousands of these adverse
event reports in -- in a year, and you're -- basically,
you're saying all of those have to be disclosed?
MR. FREDERICK: Justice Alito, they already
are all disclosed.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well they -- already. So
then why does the company have to make additional
disclosure?
MR. FREDERICK: The --
JUSTICE ALITO: Analysts who follow the
stock price can easily look at the FDA Web site and see
the adverse event reports that have been reported --
MR. FREDERICK: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- and draw whatever
conclusions seem to be warranted based on that.
MR. FREDERICK: That's why I think this case
presents the issue in a rather artificial way, because
the reports here were not the classic FDA-regulated
adverse event reports. This was a homeopathic drug that
was put on the market without FDA approval, and there
were no requirements of reports until 2006, which was
after the period at issue here.
JUSTICE BREYER: How would you write --
look, I'm asking how do you write this, because what --
where I think where the other side has a point is if --
with these -- this is a big class of these kinds of
things, you know, vitamins, all kinds of things like
that, and if we say that they have to disclose too much,
what will happen is people won't pay attention to it,
you know.
And if -- if you have, you know, 4,000 pages
of small print saying everything that was ever reported,
what really happens in -- in such instances is the
public pays no attention, and they think -- and it will
hide the things that are actually important.
So how would you write some words --
assuming that you're right, that their test is wrong --
but how would you write some words that will put a
disclosure obligation such that it's not going to be
overkill and it is going to get incidents that rise
above the background noise, and those are the incidents
that are -- that would be significant for a reasonable
investor?
MR. FREDERICK: I would start with the
language in Basic, which says the total mix of
information is what has, long standing, been the test
for materiality under this Court's cases. I would say
that where there is credible medical professional
describing the harms based on credible scientific
theories to back up the link, a very serious health
effect risk for product with many substitutes, and the
effect is on a predominant product line, then the
company ought to disclose that information. I would
not --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, I'll go back and read
what you have just said, and -- I will, because it will
be in the transcript, and -- and the -- this case -- I
-- you are very good, your clients and the lawyers --
MR. FREDERICK: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- at writing complaints.
All right? So they've alleged in this complaint
everything they can show, and I -- I suspect -- and
during the class period. And what it doesn't say is
that very helpful chart that you put in the brief, in
the pocket. It doesn't say they ever showed that to the
company. All it says is there was a phone call and this
individual from -- from Colorado said something, which
it doesn't specify, about zinc and the -- and the number
of deaths.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, in 1999, though,
Justice Breyer, Dr. Hirsch -- and this is outlined at
paragraph 25 of the complaint -- also said that
intranasal application of zinc could be problematic, and
he specifically asked about how much zinc is put in
Zicam precisely because of his awareness of prior
studies going all the way back to the polio period in
which zinc had created a problem of persistent anosmia.
But our submission here is that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How was your -- that
long litany of factors that you mentioned a few minutes
ago about how a company will go about determining
whether an adverse event report is material or not or
should be disclosed or not -- are you saying that
companies don't have to respond to irrational securities
holders? Are you accepting your adversary's proposition
that on some level -- you said credible evidence -- that
they don't have to respond to things they judge are not
credible?
MR. FREDERICK: It really depends, Justice
Sotomayor, and I don't mean to be evasive, but if there
is a product, say, that has some link to satanic
influences, and there is some reason to think that a
large body of followers in an irrational way might
regard there to be satanic influences on the basis of a
particular product, a cautious, reasonably prudent
investor might want to know that on the basis of that
information that most of us would regard as irrational,
might affect the stock price.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So what protection
is there at the summary judgment stage in response to
allegations? Because it doesn't have to be
scientifically valid; it can be completely irrational.
All you have to do is allege that, you know, if you had
told this, the price would have gone down. If you had
told -- if you had disclosed this, the price would have
gone down. And the response from the company is, well,
but this is just ridiculous; this is some guy in his
garage who writes this out on -- on a -- you know, a
piece of paper in -- in handwriting. And the response
is going to be, well, let's let the jury sort it out.
MR. FREDERICK: There are two answers, Mr.
Chief Justice. One is, in Basic itself, the Court
talked about the actions of a reasonable investor, and
this Court and many courts have always looked at a
reasonable person standard in making all sorts of these
fine judgments about the importance of particular
information. But the second answer is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you just told
me that it would be enough if somebody says that there's
a satanic, you know, impact on this, because a
reasonable investor would say there are enough crazy
people out there that this is going to affect the price.
MR. FREDERICK: What I said was if the
product was one that might be, you know, attractive in
some way to people who had that particular following.
think you have to link up the product with the nature of
the complaint and the effect of the importance of the
information.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it matters
whether -- I don't know what kind of product has
particular satanic susceptibility --
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- but I mean, are
you saying it matters if it's something that -- that
Satan's not going to be interested in? I don't
understand.
(Laughter.)
MR. FREDERICK: You're --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't mean to be
facetious, but your way of distinguishing the satanic
product is that it depends on whether people who follow
satanic cults are going to be interested or not. I
mean --
MR. FREDERICK: Well, Your Honor, there are
people who follow those things, and they spend money and
they buy stocks, but my second point is that scienter --
scienter is the other way around this problem, because
even though information --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know that -- if
scienter is -- it seems to me ridiculous to -- to hold
companies to -- to irrational standards. And we did --
and we did say in -- in Basic that it's viewed --
whether it would be viewed by the reasonable investor.
And -- and you are saying, well, the reasonable investor
takes account of the irrationality. I don't think
that's what we meant in -- in Basic.
MR. FREDERICK: Well, Justice Scalia, you
can certainly write as a prophylactic here that that
isn't part of this test. We certainly have here all of
the indicia of credible medical professionals on a
credible scientific theory on a product that was
important to the company's finances and a very serious
side effect for a drug that had ready substitutes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay. So that --
I'm just trying to get your response to that. You just
talked again about credible scientists and all that, and
you're putting those other things to one side.
So even if you have your satanic problem,
that is not enough. And you can sit there and allege it
would cause a drop of 30 percent in the stock price, and
you should have let this know -- your answer is no, they
don't have to let -- they don't have to disclose this
because there is no scientific credible basis for the
link that's alleged?
MR. FREDERICK: Now, I'm saying two things.
One is that there's a difference between scienter and
materiality. There is importance of information and an
intent to deceive, and the questions are analytically
distinct. In your hypothetical, Mr. Chief Justice, I
think you merged them, and I'd like to keep them
separate because as we -- as this case comes to the
Court, the issue is what is the standard for materiality
and whether or not statistical significance is the only
way to --
JUSTICE ALITO: On materiality --
MR. FREDERICK: -- materiality.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- can I give you -- because
I'm having a little difficulty understanding the
boundaries of the argument that you're making.
Let me give two hypotheticals, and they both
involve companies that have one product, and this is
their one product. The first one was what I mentioned
before, and I wasn't -- I wasn't clear about your
answer. All that's alleged is that a very large number
of people took the drug and that three people, after
taking the drug, within a week developed a certain
syndrome. That's the first one. Is that enough for
materiality?
The second one is that a company receives a
telephone call: Hello, I'm a general practitioner from
wherever, and I treated a patient, and the patient took
your medication and shortly after that developed this
syndrome, and I think there might be a connection. Is
that enough for materiality?
MR. FREDERICK: On the second one, I would
say probably not. And I would say, on the first one,
there's not enough information about the side effect and
what the drug is intended to solve.
I mean, the probability/magnitude test as
articulated by this Court goes to the probability of the
effect versus the magnitude that would be perceived by
investors, and those are important factors they go into.
So your hypothetical is very difficult to answer as you
have framed it.
JUSTICE ALITO: All right. This drug, let's
say it's a drug to relieve the common cold, and the
effect is loss of the sense of smell. Five million
people take it. Three people, after taking it, lose
their sense of smell. Is that enough for materiality by
itself?
MR. FREDERICK: It -- by itself, that could
be enough, and the reason we know that could be enough,
Justice Alito, is that when, you know, some score
additional were released and this information was
disclosed, the stock price went down by 23.8 percent.
So reasonable --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Frederick, your time
is running out, and there's one thing that you emphasize
in your brief -- I haven't heard you say one word about
it here -- and that is you're saying it's -- this is not
a case of a company that remains silent. The company,
in response to this, issued press releases in which it
said any suggestion of a linkage is completely
unfounded. Now, that's something different from there
are X number of reports. To what extent are you relying
on the affirmative statements that the company made?
MR. FREDERICK: We're relying on those to
establish scienter, both at the beginning of the class
period when they forced Dr. Jafek, through their legal
threats, to take Zicam off his poster presentation, and
then later when they said that the reports of anosmia
were completely unfounded and "misleading," was the word
that they used. "And misleading." And they repeated
that after the Good Morning America program came on,
only to say 3 weeks later, after empaneling a scientific
expert panel, that the information was insufficient to
make that determination. Our submission is that that is
enough.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Frederick, I'm -- I'm
not clear on why you can draw a distinction between
materiality and scienter for purposes of the issue
before us here.
If, indeed, satanic effect is enough for
materiality, you say, well, it may not be enough for
scienter. Why? I mean, if the company knows that
satanic effect is material, then the company has --
knowingly withholds it because it thinks satanic effect
is irrational, why doesn't that company have scienter,
if it's material?
The scienter is withholding something that
is material, that is known to be material, and once you
say that -- you know, that Satan is material, if the
company thinks Satan is involved here, it has to put it
in its report, no?
MR. FREDERICK: And it would depend on what
kind of stock effect occurred.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So there's no difference
between the materiality issue and the scienter issue.
MR. FREDERICK: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You can't push this problem
off onto the scienter side of the equation.
MR. FREDERICK: It depends -- it depends on
this Court's application of its known precedent, which
my colleague here has not even referenced in his opening
argument, Basic, which says you look at the total mix of
the information. And all of these things go into play.
If the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. I get that. Can I
just ask you one question in response to -- just picking
up on the last -- what about the need for a, quote,
"strong inference of scienter," end quote, and does this
complaint show more than a borderline situation where it
doesn't strongly infer that the person intended to
mislead the defendant? What about that argument?
MR. FREDERICK: Well, we believe, and they
haven't argued that this complaint is not sufficient
under the PSLRA, which set the heightened pleading
standard for scienter that this Court articulated and
construed in the Tellabs decision, so we believe that
scienter is adequately pleaded here based on --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, page 49 of their
brief -- they have two pages on it -- it does not give
rise to a strong inference of scienter.
MR. FREDERICK: What I'm saying is that
there's already a heightened pleading standard, Justice
Breyer. I was not -- I misunderstood your question to
say, is there some other heightened pleading standard
other than the one --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, I mean -- I just
want to know why -- if their inference on materiality is
enough to survive the background noise reply, is it
enough to show a strong inference that they did do this
intending to mislead, a strong inference of scienter?
MR. FREDERICK: The key aspects here are
their treatment of Jafek when Jafek was going to go
public with his scientifically linked claim of anosmia
from the Zicam, and then subsequently when they issued
press releases saying it would be completely unfounded
and misleading to assert any causal link. That is
sufficient to establish a strong inference of scienter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Frederick.
Mr. Shah.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PRATIK A. SHAH
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE RESPONDENTS
MR. SHAH: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
For 35 years, this Court's precedents have
instructed that information is material for securities
fraud purposes if a reasonable investor would have
viewed it as having meaningfully altered the total mix
of information. Under the terms of their question
presented, Petitioners propose to depart from that
contextual inquiry in favor of a categorical rule that
deems information about an adverse drug effect
immaterial absent statistical significance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Shah, what do you
think --
MR. SHAH: To the extent --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What do you think about
Satan?
(Laughter.)
MR. SHAH: Let me try to unpack the satanic
connection hypotheticals a little bit.
Now, to be sure, if someone just called a
company and said, hey, I think you guys are affiliated
with satanic practices, surely a company would not have
to go and disclose that to all the investors. But this
is going to depend on what the actual reality is and
what the company's statements have been.
Now, if the company has made a statement
that, look, consumer confidence in our products is at an
all-time high and we expect sales to double in the next
quarter, and yet they are aware that there -- a consumer
boycott is being planned by, let's say, 10 percent of
their consumer base premised on the irrational notion
that their company is tied to Satan, then certainly, to
correct their affirmative representation that consumer
confidence is at an all-time high and that they expect
their sales to double, a reasonable investor would want
to know that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They haven't said that.
They haven't said our sales are going to double.
They're just rocking along at normal sales.
MR. SHAH: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they find out that
percent of nutty-nuttys out there are not going to
buy their stuff because of Satan. Okay?
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about that?
MR. SHAH: In that hypothetical, it depends
on what affirmative statements the companies have made.
Under the securities law -- and this is an important
point that I don't think has come through yet. Under
the securities laws, there is no baseline duty to
disclose for a manufacturer or a company. A company
creates a duty to disclose once they have spoken. So
it's going to depend on what the company has said.
Now, in your scenario, if a company has made
statements projecting their company's success into the
next quarter, for example, and they have a concrete
basis to know that, as your hypothetical submits,
percent of their computer -- consumer base is going
to leave the company's products, that is almost
certainly going to be material to an investor, and so,
yes, they would have to disclose that we have reason to
believe, however ridiculous it is and untrue it is, that
percent of our consumer base has decided to boycott
our product. That's certainly reasonable.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You would have --
you just said they would have a duty to disclose.
MR. SHAH: Yes, sir.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought you
earlier just said there's no affirmative duty to
disclose; it only is based on what they say.
MR. SHAH: It's based on what they said.
So, for example, if the company had simply remained
silent --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. SHAH: -- and not said anything about
its future sales, its prospects, then under the
securities laws there is no duty to disclose. Basic and
other cases have long made clear that there has to be
something to trigger a duty to disclose. That is, under
Rule 10b-5 it's only statements that are rendered
misleading by the omission of a material fact that can
trigger liability. If there is no projection about the
company's future success, then it wouldn't have to
disclose in that situation.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if the company makes
the kind of relatively common statements that were made
here, poised for growth in the upcoming season, very
strong momentum going into the season, extremely well
positioned for a successful season?
MR. SHAH: Sure, Your Honor --
JUSTICE ALITO: That's -- that triggers the
duty to disclose the satanic rumors?
MR. SHAH: In certain cases where there are
very generalized statements -- for example, we think our
product will do well -- that may close -- come close to
the line of puffery that is a non-actionable statement
that no reasonable investor would rely on. Petitioners
have never pressed that argument before this Court.
There is no dispute about whether the statements that
Matrixx made in this case are actionable, even though I
agree with you that some of them probably come close to
that puffery line.
Here, though, we don't just have those
statements about the company being well positioned for
future growth. There are additional statements, and
these were made to stock analysts that they expected a
percent increase in annual revenues, and, of course,
there are the much more affirmative statements that the
drug's safety had been well established and that the
rumor -- the reports of anosmia were completely
unfounded and misleading. Those statements certainly
crossed the line. And as I said before, there hasn't
been an argument in this case as to whether those less
specific and arguably puffery-type statements --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the Government's
position is that reports of adverse effects that have no
scientific basis, so long as they would affect
irrationally consumers, have to be disclosed, assuming
the company has said we're doing well, right?
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, yes, I think it
would depend, again, on the statements the company
makes. If -- if --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I mean, if Satan
comes in, surely lousy science comes in as well, no?
MR. SHAH: Okay. So -- so, for example,
if a company had been faced with a potential adverse
effect and it had assembled a blue-ribbon panel of
scientists, conclusively determined that there is no
causal connection between this purported adverse effect
and their drug, the question is, would they have to
disclose in that circumstance?
I think if the company had simply made
statements relating to the drug safety -- we think our
drug is safe; there's no reason to believe that it
causes any adverse effects -- then the answer is no,
because the reported adverse effect would not call into
question the accuracy of the company's statements
relating to the safety of the drug.
If, however, the company had made specific
statements relating to consumer demand for its products
and it knew -- notwithstanding the fact that there was
no causal connection, it knew or had good reason to
believe that a significant portion of its consumer base
would avoid the product, then, yes, a reasonable
investor would want to know that information, and under
Basic the company would have a duty to disclose that,
even though unfounded, these reports may lead a
significant percentage of our consumer base to leave the
product.
I think that falls squarely within the
definition of materiality, which is would a reasonable
investor want to have known that information?
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Shah, what deference do
you think that the SEC's understanding of materiality is
entitled to and why?
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, this Court in
both TSC and Basic accorded what it called due deference
to the SEC's views on the application of the materiality
standard. I think it's certainly true -- and -- and
those, by the way, were both -- the -- the Court was
deferring to the views of the SEC as expressed in amicus
briefs to the Court just like in this case.
I think the SEC is due a significant
deference based upon, one, its longstanding historical
practice in applying the materiality standard, which is
part of its own rule, Rule 10b-5, and its special
expertise in knowing what a reasonable investor would
want to know based upon its experience in this area.
So, I do think that, to the extent there is any
ambiguity remaining in this case, the Court should defer
to the SEC's views.
And back to Justice Breyer's questions about
what should the Court write simply beyond reiterating
the Basic standard, I think what the Court did in Basic
was it not only articulated the general standard, but it
laid out some factors. And in laying out those factors,
that's where the Court deferred to the SEC's brief. And
it laid out factors that a reasonable investor might
find relevant. In that case, it was the merger context.
And here, on page 28 of our brief, we lay
out several factors that we think bear on the
materiality question in this particular context; that
is, involving adverse drug information.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there any way
that consideration of those factors would support a -- a
summary judgment in favor of the pharmaceutical
manufacturer, other than the fact of having an extremely
poor lawyer drafting a complaint? Anytime you have a
variety of factors like that --
MR. SHAH: Sure.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- I think it's very
difficult for the judge to say anything other than
that's for the jury.
MR. SHAH: If you mean at the motion to
dismiss stage, Mr. Chief Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. SHAH: I think there would be some
cases. And, in fact, we know there are dozens of
(b)(6) motions granted in securities fraud cases, and
let me lay out a few scenarios for you.
One would be in the -- in the scenario where
the company has not made any actionable statements. It
has either -- statements to predicate a duty to
disclose. It either has been made --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, I'm talking
about -- I'm talking about materiality. In other
words --
MR. SHAH: Sure.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- based solely on
-- in other words, you're saying if they say anything
related, it's going to be enough --
MR. SHAH: Sure.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- whether it's a
scientific basis or not.
MR. SHAH: Sure. Two responses to that.
One, the PSLRA does have a safe harbor for companies
once they make forward-looking statements, that if they
add in meaningful cautionary language -- and this is in
the PSLRA itself, section 5(c)(1)(A) -- that if they add
in meaningful cautionary statements, then they cannot be
subject to liability. And I think there are a couple
other scenarios that would -- would trigger, for
example, if the product at issue is such a small
percentage of the company's income or expected growth
that no reasonable investor would care if it tanked,
then that might be a circumstance where a motion to
dismiss would be appropriate.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Hacker, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JONATHAN HACKER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. HACKER: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I'd like to return to Justice Kennedy's
question about the role of scienter here, which I think
absolutely is critical, as this Court emphasized
recently in the Merck v. Reynolds case.
Mr. Frederick correctly, I think, conceded
that there has to be a scientifically plausible basis.
And what you're talking about here is a company's
knowledge of a scientifically plausible basis. And he
has to make that concession in this case because of
what's alleged to be the material omission.
The material omission is not knowledge of
dubious scientific -- medical claims. It's not that we
got one phone call from a doctor. The real material
omission is that the adverse event reports told Matrixx
that Zicam causes anosmia. That's ultimately the fact
that -- that Matrixx supposedly did not disclose. And
so there has to be a basis for believing that -- there
has to be allegation in the complaint that's sufficient
to establish that Matrixx actually knew that Zicam
causes anosmia and yet willfully refused to tell
investors that fact.
And there's nothing in the complaint like
that. There's not -- you're not talking about a case
where there was a failure to disclose the doctor's
completely dubious untested claim. It's not a case --
it's not the Satan case where you're talking about a
media splash, a known fact that there's going to be a
major media splash, and the company knows for a fact
that that splash is going to have the adverse effect on
the stock. There's not even a claim here --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As I was hearing the
Solicitor General's argument, he wasn't actually even
talking about causation. He was talking about a
statement you made about the company poised to double
its growth. And I think he was saying that on the basis
of what you had heard up until that time, you had to
have known that that statement was misleading, as was
the statement that this drug -- that there was
absolutely no proof or connection of causation, which
was your scientific panel said you couldn't make that
extreme statement.
MR. HACKER: Well, two points, Your Honor.
First, if the claim was about, you know, the consumer
sales, you would need an allegation in the case that
consumer product sales were actually affected. There's
no allegation like that, and the truth is they weren't.
And so you're not talking about falsifying any prior
claim. There's not even an allegation that that
happened, Your Honor.
And, second, with respect to the -- the
statement, as I was discussing with Justice Ginsburg in
the beginning part of the argument, the statement was --
what the scientific panel was addressing primarily was
Jafek's claim that Zicam causes anosmia, and the company
said accurately that that is completely unfounded and
misleading because there's no scientific support for it.
You can't go out and claim that Zicam causes anosmia
unless you have a scientific basis for that. And the
scientific panel was saying that isn't true.
So the question is whether you can draw an
inference of scienter from the fact that -- from what's
alleged here, and there's simply no basis for an
allegation, supportable allegation, that the company
knew it causes anosmia and nevertheless refused to tell
investors that. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 10:59 a.m., the case in the
