IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER, GOVERNOR OF:
CALIFORNIA, ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 09-1233
v. :
MARCIANO PLATA, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, November 30, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:10 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CARTER G. PHILLIPS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Appellants.
DONALD SPECTER, ESQ., Berkeley, California; on behalf of
Appellees.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CARTER G. PHILLIPS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellants 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD SPECTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellees 37
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CARTER G. PHILLIPS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellants 76
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:10 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
in Case 09-1233, Schwarzenegger v. Plata, and the
related cases.
Mr. Phillips.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CARTER G. PHILLIPS
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
What this Court has under review today is an
extraordinary and unprecedented order issued by a three-
judge district court requiring the release of between
,000 and 45,000 inmates, currently incarcerated in the
California penal system, within a 2-year period.
The order in this particular case is made
particularly remarkable because it strikes me that at a
minimum it is extraordinarily premature. That -- it may
come at some point in this process that an order,
probably substantially smaller in scope than this one,
may become appropriate. But if this is supposed to be
an order or remedy of last resort, and what the district
court has done here is leapfrogged a series of steps
that should have been taken ahead of going this
particular route.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: One case, Mr. Phillips,
is pending for 20 years; is that not so?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, that's correct, Justice
Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So it seems to me -- and
there were something like 70 orders from the district
court, the single-judge district court in that case.
MR. PHILLIPS: That's absolutely true,
Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And no -- no change. So
how much longer do we have to wait? Another 20 years?
Longer than that?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Justice Ginsburg. I
think, obviously, the length of time you have to wait in
some ways depends on what the state of the remedial
phase is in the particular case. And in this case and
in recognition, frankly, of the substantial problems
that were inherent in the -- in the penal system as it
existed during the 1990s and up until the early 2000s, a
receiver was appointed, specifically in the Plata class,
but there was also connections between the receiver and
the special master even in the Coleman class before the
three-judge panel was convened.
And under those circumstances and given the
extraordinary powers that the receiver had been
accorded, what should have -- the most logical course,
if this is supposed to be a remedy of last resort, was
to allow the receiver an opportunity to implement the
extraordinary powers that were conferred upon him, and
then see -- because if it turns out that we aren't
making progress --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me. Could you
tell me -- from your briefs, I just haven't understood
what the alternative steps are. The court below talked
about some proposals like construction and said the
legislature has struck them down. There's -- the fiscal
crisis has gotten worse, so construction is really not
an option. I don't see how you wait for an option that
doesn't exist. They talked about hiring more staff, but
the conclusion was that even if you maximize the staff,
you don't have the facilities to add more staff, which
is what you need to cure the constitutional violation.
So tell me what specific steps outside of
this order should have been given time to be
implemented, because the receiver has basically said:
I've tried, and the small progress we made has been
reversed because the population just keeps growing, so
we can never get ahead of the problem.
MR. PHILLIPS: The -- the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So slow down from the
rhetoric and give me concrete --
MR. PHILLIPS: Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- details about what
the least restricted means would have been, other than
to say, throw it back to a receiver and special master
who are saying we don't have a solution outside
of reducing overcrowding.
MR. PHILLIPS: I don't think that's a fair
characterization of what the receiver said. The
receiver said that, at any population, he would in fact
get you to the point --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Oh, counsel, that was
one statement years ago. If that's all you're relying
on --
MR. PHILLIPS: No, no. That's not all I'm
relying on. All I'm suggesting --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That may be your weakest
argument. Tell me -- give me concrete steps that are
least -- less restrictive.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, if you -- all you have
to do is look at what the receiver has done over the
course of the period of time since his appointment, and
particularly when the second receiver was put in place.
First of all, A.B. 900 has been enacted. There is
significant construction. There has been ground broken.
There are substantial facilities in place.
Second, the receiver has had extraordinary
success in the hiring process. They are -- we are at
close to 90 percent --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there in fact less
overcrowding? Because I thought that the -- what this
case was all about was the receiver has said, the
special master has said, we can't make any progress at
all until there are fewer people; we have no place to
put clinics.
The first step, not the last step, but given
the -- given what we're dealing with here, the essential
first step is that we have fewer people so there is more
room for these health facilities, more room for staff to
operate.
MR. PHILLIPS: Justice Ginsburg, the
fundamental issue in this case seems to me as -- what is
the real cause of the constitutional violation here?
And the real cause of the constitutional violation here
has always been the culture of disregard for the inmate.
What the receiver was put in place for, the reason he
was appointed, and properly so -- this was with the
State's consent; this is not over our objection -- was
to change that fundamental culture and to provide, one,
construction, to provide increased numbers, to
provide --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but you can't -- you
can't provide construction when the State doesn't supply
the money for it.
MR. PHILLIPS: Except that since the
August 8th, 2008, period of time, you know, literally
hundreds of millions of dollars have gone to
construction specifically and more than $4 billion have
been spent on the provision of health care in this
particular system. And a great deal of that is because
of the receiver.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Then if you -- then if
there -- if there are these great changes in
circumstances so that now they -- medical care can be
administered in something approaching a decent way, you
could go back to the single-judge district court and
say: I'm moving under 60(b). Circumstances have
changed; it's no longer the case that it's impossible to
render decent health care.
MR. PHILLIPS: Justice Ginsburg, I don't
think we could get that relief from the single-judge
district court, unless you're asking me to actually seek
to remove the entirety of the claim. I mean, the order
that says that we have to get to 137.5 percent of the
design, the design capacity, within 2 years is a
three-judge district court decision.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So you go back to that
panel because it invited you to. It said if
circumstances change, come back.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right, but that will always
be the case, Justice Sotomayor. The fundamental
question here is: Congress shifted dramatically the
approach that you're supposed to take as a court of
equity in this context. This is supposed to be a matter
of last resort, which would mean that you would give the
receiver a full opportunity to do what the receiver --
JUSTICE BREYER: The receiver said the best
statement that seemed to me to summarize it. It's in
his brief on page 9. He has about two paragraphs. And
as you read that two paragraphs, it sounds as if
overcrowding is a big, big cause of this problem, which
is horrendous, which if you think it's accurately
described in the mental case in the first page, two
paragraphs -- now, if that's a fair description from the
record, it's a horrendous problem.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: What the receiver says is
overcrowding is a big cause of it. And then he says:
think we've discovered you actually can provide care,
and certainly our plan and turnaround plan believes we
can provide constitutional levels of care no matter what
the population is.
So then you look to the care and turnaround
plan and it says spend $8 billion building more
buildings. And then the legislature rejected it. Okay?
MR. PHILLIPS: And then --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, there we are. More
time; what's supposed to happen?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, but, Justice Breyer, the
legislature also approved a smaller but nevertheless
multibillion-dollar construction program.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, it was 2.31 or
something like that.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, I -- I mean, they
approved --
JUSTICE BREYER: And did they approve the
.3 -- is that in place, 2.35? 	 Did they approve that?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, they did approve that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So he said: We need
--
MR. PHILLIPS: -- and that money is being
spent.
JUSTICE BREYER: We need 8, and they
approved 2.35.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right, and the receiver --
JUSTICE BREYER: And is there any evidence
here that suggests that 2.35 is sufficient to cure the
constitutional violation?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, I don't know whether it
will get you there or not.
JUSTICE BREYER: So I take it from your
answer the answer is no, there is no evidence.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, there is the evidence
that the receiver asked for contempt for not getting the
billion and withdrew that motion. So, obviously,
there is some sense in which the receiver is reasonably
satisfied with 2.35 billion as an opening gambit.
But, again, all of this goes to what is, at
least from my perspective, the fundamental question the
court should have evaluated in the first instance, which
is: Are we ready yet to give up hope at this point?
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what he says -- what
the receiver says about the 2.35, that it is a
significant step farther. It is certainly better than
no construction at all. However, that is not equivalent
to a conclusion that that current compromise will result
in sustainable constitutional health care at current
population density levels.
That's what he said about it. So -- so we
have his views, and I'm back to my question: What else
is supposed to happen?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, there's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Which was your question
initially.
MR. PHILLIPS: Justice Breyer, when the
receiver says that -- now remember, he says at current
population levels. He doesn't suggest, and his brief is
very clear, that it doesn't urge this Court to affirm
the particular order in this case.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Phillips --
MR. PHILLIPS: Can I --
JUSTICE ALITO: Yes.
MR. PHILLIPS: -- just finish this?
And the reality is that the population
levels have dropped pretty significantly since August,
since the trial in this particular case. And given the
actions by the legislature in A.B. 18 and the actions of
the legislatures in A.B. 900, there are both a lot of
expenditures on the table and substantial reductions in
the population size. And so, therefore, even under the
receiver's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What -- do we have
information about that substantial reduction? I mean,
in this record, it just seems to be that it's -- no
matter how many efforts have been made, the population
goes up. And now you say that the population has gone
down. From what point in time and how much has it gone
down?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, it's down to around, as
I understand it, about 147,000 from a high of around 165
to 170,000, and it has dropped, as we know, because
there has been a change in the good time credits. There
has been a significant number of transfers. I mean,
that was the purpose of the governor's proclamation
declaring an emergency.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it's possible that
within the 2-year period, you're going to hit the mark
if you -- that's what the lower court's --
MR. PHILLIPS: I think it unlikely.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's what the
three-judge panel said, which is: If you implement most
of the proposals being made, you are likely to hit the
mark. So what you're saying is you're going to do it.
And if you don't, they invited you to come back and --
you really don't think that if you hit 140 percentage,
that the court is going to order an immediate release of
the 2.5 percent over the limit it set? It's going to
ask you: What have you put into place to reach that
level over what additional period of time?
MR. PHILLIPS: I mean, there's a core sort
of federalism answer and then a basic sort of factual
point to be made here. Let me make the second one
first, and then I want to come back to the -- what you
may regard as rhetorical, but nevertheless I think
important, which is that when we made our initial
proposal to the three-judge court suggesting what we
thought would be a reasonable reduction within a
reasonable period of time, it was met with both a motion
for contempt and summary rejection out of hand,
notwithstanding that there was improvement at the
time --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what are we fighting
about? Are we fighting about that the plan was wrong,
or are we fighting about that you're angry that you were
told to do it in 2 years -- in 22 years, as opposed to
do it in 25 years? Is that -- is that what you're
objecting to?
MR. PHILLIPS: No. I think the -- no, this
goes to the federalism point.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can -- can you do it in
years?
MR. PHILLIPS: I don't know. I -- you know,
if -- if balancing all of the policies that the State
has to take into account, can it get there and is that
in the best interest of the State of California? If it
is, yes, then we can get there.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, the best interest
of the State of California, isn't it to deliver adequate
constitutional care to the people that it incarcerates?
That's a constitutional obligation.
MR. PHILLIPS: Absolutely. And California
recognizes that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So when are you going to
get to that? When are you going to avoid the needless
deaths that were reported in this record? When are you
going to avoid or get around people sitting in their
feces for days in a dazed state? When are you going to
get to a point where you're going to deliver care that
is going to be adequate?
JUSTICE SCALIA: But don't be rhetorical.
MR. PHILLIPS: I'll do my best. Thank you,
Your Honor.
(Laughter.)
MR. PHILLIPS: I mean, first of all, let's
-- you know, if you look at the receiver's 2009 death
review which came out in September 2010, it specifically
says that there has been a significant downward trend
over the past 4 years. The suicides -- the 25 suicides
in '09 were 66 percent of the average for the preceding
years, and the 9 homicides were 60 percent of the
average. There have been significant improvements.
And the more important point in response to
your specific question, Justice Sotomayor, is that the
record in this case was cut off in August of 2008, and
so what we have are --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Of course, but the problem
I have with that, Mr. Phillips, is that at some point
the court has to say: You've been given enough time;
the constitutional violation still persists, as the
State itself acknowledges.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, I'm not sure we've
stated that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Overcrowding is the
principal -- overcrowding is the principal cause, as
experts have testified, and it's now time for a remedy.
The court can't -- has to at some point
focus on the remedy, and that's what it did, and that,
it seemed to me, was a perfectly reasonable decision.
MR. PHILLIPS: Justice Kennedy, I agree with
everything you say except -- and I even agree with the
last statement, because, you know, you needed a
significant remedy. There's no question about it. But
you got a significant remedy when the receiver was
appointed in 2005 and implemented a program in 2006.
mean, our --
JUSTICE KAGAN: How much time do you think
the receiver needed? I mean, how much time did --
should the court have given the receiver to develop his
plan and to try to implement his plan?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, there's no -- Justice
Kagan, there's no specific time frame. I mean,
obviously, we believe that we are entitled to a
reasonable opportunity to comply with the receiver's
orders and to bring ourselves ultimately into compliance
with the Constitution, and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, at some point the
State itself said that if it had, I think, 7 years, it
could get down to 137.5 and didn't seem to object to
that.
MR. PHILLIPS: No, that's --
Justice Kennedy, you know, given all of the other
constraints, et cetera -- again, there's a fundamental
difference between what you do under the hammer of a
district court order, which is what we have under these
circumstances, and what the State will do. That said,
the State is absolutely committed.
I mean, the -- again, to go back to what is
the root cause of the constitutional violation, it's not
overcrowding. I mean, when California violated the
constitutional rights of the mentally ill in the 1990s,
the prisons weren't crowded. It was because there was a
fundamental lack of attentiveness to medical care under
those circumstances. And that's unfortunate, to be
sure. More than that.
But that was the reason. To go back to your
point, Justice Kennedy, that's why the receiver, which
is an extraordinary remedy. To confer upon a private
individual the entire authority to run the California
Department of Corrections, not just simply a facility or
anything like that, but the entire Department of
Corrections' medical and -- medical health provision, is
incredible.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I thought that
officer himself said: I can't do this without as a
first step reducing the population; nothing else is
going to work until we reduce the population to the
point where there is room for clinics, room for medical
personnel to operate. I mean, that was the view of the
district judge, the special master in one case, the
receiver in the other case.
Everybody -- they all agreed reducing the
population is not going to cure it, not going to make
everything perfect, but without doing that as a first
step, nothing -- there will be no cure.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, Justice Ginsburg, even
if you accept that, and I don't think that's precisely
how I would interpret what the receiver said under these
circumstances anyway, but even if you accept that, the
idea of a 137-1/2 percent design cap that has to be
implemented within fewer than 2 years is a remedy that's
neither necessary nor sufficient. It is not aimed at
the specific class. It doesn't remedy the specific
Federal rights as required by the Prisoners Litigation
Reform Act.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I don't get the class
thing, because what -- you can't have a remedy just
limited to the class. The class wants to have clinics.
They want to have personnel who function someplace
outside of a broom closet. So you can't deal with this
problem by just dealing with the mentally ill and the
people with medical problems. You have to provide space
for facilities.
MR. PHILLIPS: I think, Justice Ginsburg,
the -- the fundamental point here is that it may
eventually be that you have to get to that stage, but if
you look at the receiver's reports since August 2008,
which consistently analyzed this issue, and they say:
And we have been able successfully to bring in very
qualified personnel, and we have significantly larger
numbers; we know there is construction in place; it may
not be as substantial as what I originally proposed; it
is nevertheless very significant.
And -- and Congress was very explicit that
the remedy of a prisoner release order should be the
remedy of last resort.
JUSTICE BREYER: What would I look at to
find this? It's a big record. What I did was I -- it
refers to on-line evidence, and I went and looked at the
pictures, and the pictures are pretty horrendous to me.
And I would say page 10 of the religious group's brief,
for example, shows you one of them.
And what they're saying is, it's -- it's
obvious. Just look at it. You cannot have mental
health facilities that will stop people from killing
themselves and you cannot have medical facilities that
will stop staph and tubercular infection in conditions
like this. And then you look at them.
Now, you've looked at them. I've looked at
them. And what is the answer to that? There's nothing
in here that -- the special master said $8 billion is
the answer.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: And they haven't come
close. So how can I -- or you if you were in my
position -- what would you say in an opinion that says
that these three judges who have 200 pages of
findings -- what would you say to -- as an answer to
what I just said?
MR. PHILLIPS: I would say that the
Prisoners Litigation Reform Act has a series of very
specific requirements that the Federal court has to
comply with, and that in deciding to go to a three-judge
district court in the first instance, you have to
examine the orders that are in place and whether those
orders have had a reasonable time within which to
operate. And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, but the State -- the
State did not claim that either order in either case has
succeeded in achieving a remedy. You've never claimed
that.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, it depends on what you
mean by --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And -- and just if I could
have your attention for a moment. I have this problem
with the case: Overcrowding is, of course, always the
cause. If I'm running a hotel -- if I'm looking at a
highway system, I need highways, what's the number of
cars? If the problem is bad service in a hotel, well,
it's the number of employees per -- per guest. I mean,
that's fairly simple.
Now, I recognize, of course, that Congress
has -- had imposed a special duty on us. But I think it
means that overcrowding must not be ordered unless that
is the only efficacious remedy in -- in a permissible
period of time. And it seems to me there is massive
expert testimony to support that proposition on the part
of -- of the prisoners.
MR. PHILLIPS: I -- I mean, it seems to me
that, first of all, I'm not sure that's consistent with
the language. It's the primary cause of the
constitutional violation, not the primary impediment to
the implementation of a specific remedy. So I think
that's still a difficult and open question as to how to
proceed.
But it still strikes me that the sequence
that Congress envisions and the one that would make the
most sense and ultimately the one that hopefully would
accommodate both the plaintiffs' interests and the
State's interests, and the Department of Corrections'
interests, is to allow the receiver to stay on a course
that candidly I think will in fact get you there.
I mean, again, one of the real flaws in this
case, Justice Kennedy, is nobody doubts for a moment
that there have been very significant violations of
constitutional rights years gone by and, indeed, a
failure on the mental health side ultimately to get you
-- get to the point where we are in fact providing a
significant remedy.
The reality is, is that in the course of the
last 3 to 4 years under the guidance of the -- of the
receiver, who coordinates with the special master on the
mental health side and does it with the cooperation of
the State of California, there have been significant --
there has been significant movement in the right
direction.
And if the court had not jumped the gun and
said, look, we're not going to -- we're not going to let
that part play itself out, we are going to leap ahead
and go to a three-judge court and go to the prisons --
to the prisoner release order, this process would have
played itself out and we wouldn't be here --
JUSTICE ALITO: All this talk about what the
receiver may think can be done seems a little bit
perplexing to me, because the receiver did not testify
before the three-judge court; isn't that correct?
MR. PHILLIPS: That -- that is true, Justice
Alito.
JUSTICE ALITO: You were not allowed to
question him.
MR. PHILLIPS: We were not allowed to --
JUSTICE ALITO: And now he has submitted
what is styled an amicus brief where he doesn't address
issues of law. He explains his views about -- he tries
to explain prior statements and supplement those prior
statements. Is that proper?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, you know, I'm a
long-time believer that amicus briefs are pretty much
open season in terms of anything you want to present on
them. But I mean, obviously, I -- I --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, is that true? Can --
MR. PHILLIPS: Clearly a better system is
one in which we could --
JUSTICE ALITO: Can a witness testify -- can
a witness submit an amicus brief that consists of an
affidavit?
MR. PHILLIPS: No, Your Honor, that's
obviously not appropriate, and one of the things we've
complained about --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the -- the --
that brief was filed because the -- there were -- in
your presentations, there were representations about the
special master, and he filed that brief to say: You
must understand this in context; I was making a speech
at the club.
So he wanted to put in context what you had
used. You had quoted his statements.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, to be sure, although,
candidly, we had -- we had referred to some of those
same statements even in the jurisdictional statement in
this litigation. This has been part of the case for
quite some time.
So I -- I don't know what motivated the
special master to file an out-of-time brief -- or I
mean, the receiver to file an out-of-time brief. But I
understand -- you know, we didn't object to it so long
as the Court was of a mind to hear from the receiver.
But I do think the most important part of
that, though, to keep in mind in this context is the
receiver didn't ask for this Court to affirm. The
receiver simply clarified certain statements that had
been made and tried to say, as Justice Alito described,
put them into some kind of context. And that's -- and
that's fine, and we obviously don't have any quarrel
with -- with that particular presentation.
But I do think to say that the receiver has
insisted that he cannot get to a constitutionally
permissible result without the order that has been
imposed in this particular case is -- is simply not
consistent with either the record and certainly not
consistent with that amicus brief.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but the experts
testified to that effect.
MR. PHILLIPS: I mean, experts made the --
certainly reached that specific conclusion. But this
Court has recognized --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And the strike force and
the governor's -- governor's commission reached the
same conclusion.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The strike team, I think
they called them.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right. But, again, it seems
to me that there is a very, very, very big difference
between what do you need to accomplish in order to
remedy whatever -- whatever the constitutional violation
is, recognizing in the first instance that the biggest
element of an Eighth Amendment violation is the
deliberate indifference prong, which absolutely seems to
me to have been completely eliminated by the conduct of
the State over the course of the last 3 to 4 years.
There is no evidence to support --
JUSTICE BREYER: What specifically will
happen? I mean, at the moment, you know, we could go
through -- we have all these briefs. I mean, there are
all these experts, all the reports. Everybody is saying
you need to spend the money. And we have -- if you
really want to cure the constitutional violation, we
have the legislature rejecting 8 billion but 2, which --
.35, and so -- and nothing, and a void, and give us
more time.
I mean, I read the newspaper. It doesn't
seem to me California has been voting a lot of money for
new programs. The -- the -- what is it -- what is it
specifically that would happen that would cure this
problem were we to say -- I mean, a big human rights
problem -- what would we say -- what would happen if we
were to say, no, this panel's wrong? What would happen
that would cure the problem?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, it depends I suppose on
some ways on how you --
JUSTICE BREYER: A constitutional problem
which the State itself admits --
MR. PHILLIPS: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is constitutional, a
State with a governor who has said publicly that there's
this tremendous safety and health problem in the
prisons. What -- what would happen?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, if the Court were to
conclude that the three-judge panel shouldn't have been
convened, that would be one outcome. If the Court
concludes that it was appropriate to convene it, but
7-1/2 percent is not narrowly tailored, it would be a
different one. Either way, it will go back, obviously,
to a court of equity. The receiver is in place. The
receiver has a comprehensive plan in place which he is
implementing as we speak.
I mean, you know, one of the things that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's one piece of it.
You said something about the 2.35 million. They didn't
come up with the 8 million, but they did come up with
.35 billion. And then I'm just looking at this brief
for the receiver, and there's a footnote, page 11,
footnote 3, that says: No, that money isn't there; it's
dependent upon several approvals that have not yet been
secured, and such approvals ultimately may not be
forthcoming.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, I mean, 400 million of
it has already been spent. The rest of it has already
been earmarked for this particular purpose, and there is
-- and the expectation from the State of California is
that money is -- is going forward. Construction is, as
we speak, under way. And the one thing we do know is
that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But not the --
MR. PHILLIPS: -- every time the receiver
asks for a check he gets one.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not the 2.35 --
MR. PHILLIPS: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean, I think you did
say earlier that this was a done deal, 2.35 billion.
But this is a note telling us it's not so.
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, the receiver is saying
it's not etched in stone. I understand that. But our
assumption and our expectation and our belief is that
that money is going to be used for construction. There
are projects that are finished, there are projects that
are under way, and there are project that are scheduled
to begin within the next 6 weeks, all of which will be
funded out of that $2.35 billion.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: On one project, the joint
legislative budget committee said, no, we're not going
to give you money for that.
MR. PHILLIPS: They asked for additional
information, to be sure. But the expectation, again,
from the governor, both this governor and the
governor-elect, is that that money will ultimately be
approved and that that facility would be built. And
we're moving along very rapidly to get that construction
under way, because we're talking about enormous
facilities under these particular circumstances, Justice
Ginsburg.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Phillips, my trouble
listening to you is that it seems as though you're
asking us to re-find facts. You know, you have these
judges who have been involved in these cases since the
beginning, for 20 years in the Plata case, who thought:
We've done everything we can, the receiver has done
everything he can; this just isn't going anywhere and it
won't go anywhere until we can address this root cause
of the problem.
And that was the view of the judges who had
been closest to the cases from the beginning and the
view of the three-judge court generally. So how can we
reach a result essentially without, you know, re-finding
the facts that they've been dealing with for 20 years?
MR. PHILLIPS: The -- there -- the
fundamental problem with the fact-finding in this --
well, there are actually two fundamental problems.
First of all, remember that the receiver gets appointed,
and then 3 months later you get a motion for a
three-judge court. The three-judge court convenes
itself before the receiver has even finalized the
comprehensive plan to bring everybody into compliance in
the first instance.
So the reality is that's -- that's the
fundamental legal error I'm asking this Court to
correct. But even if you get beyond that and you're
looking at the primary cause analysis, it seems to me
that's -- that's at most -- at best, a mixed question of
law and fact, and it's the kind of standard that this
Court ought to analyze to determine in the first
instance and on an independent review whether or not the
overcrowding is, quote, "the primary cause of the
violation."
And what makes that inquiry particularly
appropriate for this Court, as opposed to simply
slavishly adhering -- deferring to the district court in
this circumstance, is that the district court
arbitrarily cut off the record in August of '08 and
there have been enormous developments since then. And
there were enormous developments --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you explain me
something about that? It was confusing in the briefs,
Mr. Phillips. I thought that the State had said: We
don't want the plaintiffs to tour these facilities
anymore. We don't want to have discovery go beyond --
what was it -- some date in 2008.
I thought that it was the State that was
urging: We don't need any more discovery, we don't want
any more inspection tours.
So how could -- how could the plaintiffs
submit more than they did when the State said it's
enough, 2008 should be the cutoff?
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, there's a huge
difference between not allowing formal tours and all of
the rigamarole that goes with that, which is what the
State specifically objected to. But what the State
wanted to do and what the intervenors on our side in
even greater vehemence wanted to do was to bring forward
evidence that proved that in the interim period of time
there have been, in fact, significant improvements.
As I sit here today, Justice Kennedy, you
said it's conceded that we're -- that we're in
constitutional violation. It is conceded that we have
been in constitutional violation. I don't know whether
today we are in violation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But then don't you have
the burden? If -- if you have -- you concede that you
have been in constitutional violation, then it seems to
me you have the burden of showing that's no longer the
case. That's generally so in -- in --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, did you --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. Could
you answer Justice Ginsburg's question first?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. Justice Ginsburg, I
understand what the ordinary rule would be in a -- of a
court of equity dealing with a constitutional violation.
But we're talking about an order entered under the
Prisoners Litigation Reform Act, and it's quite clear,
the statute couldn't be any plainer, that it shifts the
burden significantly onto the plaintiff when you are
going to go for a remedy as extreme as insisting that
somewhere between potentially 36,000 and 45,000 inmates
be released within a -- within a 2-year period of time.
Again, if you go back, you know, the
receiver has not -- at the time that all of this took
place, the receiver had been appointed. The receiver
had devised a plan. The receiver is currently spending
an enormous amount of money, $4 billion on health care,
to get -- to get the system moving in the right
direction, with the right attitude, in order to bring
ourselves without question into constitutional
compliance. The truth is we haven't really had an
assessment of where we are in the constitutional
compliance spectrum.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, maybe -- you're
talking about one of the cases, but the other one -- and
it's the newer one, instituted in 2001. But what about
the one that started out in 1990?
MR. PHILLIPS: Coleman is obviously a
much -- a much more serious problem. I don't doubt
that. But it seems -- and if the Court were to conclude
ultimately that Coleman ought to go back for another
analysis based on the problems there, I could understand
that. And it would be a very different prisoner release
order under those circumstances because then you'd have
to take out all of the evidence with respect to Plata
and let that play out.
But even that, it seems to me, would be a
mistake under these circumstances where the special
master and the receiver have been in a sense joined at
the hip in a variety of ways. And it only makes sense,
because the -- the receiver is controlling the provision
of medical care in the CDCR and the special master is
taking care of or trying to promote a very small slice
of that.
So in the scheme of things, as you might
expect, the receiver consistently gets the ultimate
authority to make the decisions to help provide the kind
of resources, both in quality and quantity and staff and
construction and access to health care.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, this issue
about evidence -- did you proffer to the judge anywhere
in this record what the additional evidence it was that
you wanted to show? I know that the decrease in
suicides happened post-trial, so you couldn't have
proffered that pretrial.
MR. PHILLIPS: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you run the prisons.
I presume that you could have yourself without discovery
set forth a proffer for the court that says: We had a
wait time between diagnosis and treatment that was
days, 90 days, 120 days in the past, and we've
reduced that down now to 2 weeks or whatever the reality
MR. PHILLIPS: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why don't you -- you
keep saying we were blocked.
MR. PHILLIPS: Because the district court --
because the district court could not have been plainer.
And when the intervenor's counsel stood up in the
opening statement and said, I want to start talking
about the beneficial changes and where the status is
today as opposed to where it was way back when, the
three-judge court, or at least one member of the
three-judge court said: We have been as clear as we can
be that we are not entertaining any evidence on that
point.
So the notion of coming forward with a
proffer, while technically it might have been -- is
clearly a futile act, and we had already annoyed the
judges on our side by even making reference to it. So I
don't think it's an appropriate response to say that we
should have put forward more, because the truth is we
would have --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Except that the district
court invited you to proffer that evidence that went to
the appropriateness of the remedy. So you didn't have
to proffer it -- it viewed you as saying, we're no
longer violating, constitutionally violating the Eighth
Amendment. Instead, it said: We'll take whatever you
have to proffer to show that the remedy is
inappropriate.
MR. PHILLIPS: All right. But Justice
Sotomayor, there is, to my mind at least, a complete
disconnect by saying, I'm not going to tell you exactly
where the constitutional violation is today, we're not
going to get into that, we're just going to assume
there's a constitutional violation; now prove to me that
the remedy -- you know, what remedy will or will not
work under those circumstances. It seems to me the
exact opposite is the way to do it. You determine where
the constitutional violation is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: When does -- well, we'll
get back to Justice Kennedy's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, I see your
time is about to expire.
MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Specter.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD SPECTER
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLEES
MR. SPECTER: Thank you. Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
For 20 years, the overcrowding crisis has
caused prisoners suffering from psychosis and
life-threatening illnesses to languish in their cells
because treatment facilities have no room for them.
Prisoners are committing suicide at a rate twice the
national average, and more than two-thirds of those
suicides are preventable. The absence of --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you talking about
current figures or past? Tell us the date of the
figures.
MR. SPECTER: Sure. That's from the trial
court's opinion, Your Honor. That's from the record.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's what I thought.
How do you address your adversary's point --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, ma'am.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that the adequacy of
a remedy can't be measured unless you measure the state
of the situation at the time the remedy is imposed?
MR. SPECTER: Well, I think, Your Honor,
there was massive amounts of evidence about the
constitutional violations that existed at the time that
the remedy was imposed. And if we -- I can point to the
jurisdictional statement 1 appendix, page 30a, the court
said: "Nonetheless, as we describe below, fundamental
unconstitutional deficiencies caused primarily by
overcrowding continue to exist and" --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They didn't take any
evidence on the point, I thought.
MR. SPECTER: No, Your Honor. I'm sorry,
that's not correct, with all respect. They took massive
amounts of evidence up to the day of trial about all the
conditions as they relate to the remedy. And those
conditions were --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you give us the
record --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Current conditions?
MR. SPECTER: -- current -- current as of
the time of the trial.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What was -- what was your
friend talking about when he said that they rejected any
effort to show the current situation?
MR. SPECTER: Well, my friend and I have a
disagreement, but I think Justice Sotomayor accurately
captured it. What the three-judge panel said is: Look,
we're not going to -- you can't -- this isn't the place
for you to come in and say everything's fine, it's --
everything's constitutional.
What the three-judge court did say is: We
will consider -- and they did, in fact, consider -- all
the evidence from the State. They had experts from the
State, two of the prisons, in August of 2008. Those
experts wrote reports, they testified, and they've
testified about the conditions current. And one of
them from the mental health side said --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This was in 2008.
MR. SPECTER: And that was the time of the
trial, Your Honor. There were -- the discovery --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: They had a -- they had a
cutoff date of some 2 months before the trial --
MR. SPECTER: In August, and the trial
started in November.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that was a -- and --
but before that point, the experts that were -- had
testified were aware of the conditions that existed.
MR. SPECTER: Exactly, Your Honor. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And when was the remedy
imposed?
MR. SPECTER: The remedy -- well, the final
order came -- well, the close of evidence was in
December of 2008.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That was in the -- in the
one-judge court, in the district court, wasn't it?
MR. SPECTER: No, no. In the three-judge
court -- the three-judge court closed evidence in
December of 2008. We then argued the case after the
post-trial briefing in February of 2009. Then the court
came out with the tentative decision about 20 days
later, and then in August of 2009, it issued the
3-page opinion and the order that's at issue here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did -- I'm sorry.
Let me just keep track here.
The evidence was cut off when in 2008?
MR. SPECTER: The trial closed in December
of 2008, after all the parties had submitted all their
evidence.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All right. So --
MR. SPECTER: Then there was post-trial
briefing for a month. Then we had argument in
February of that year. And then a few weeks later, they
issued a brief summary of their conclusions in an
attempt to get the State and the parties to settle the
case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You -- you don't
dispute the statement I have -- it's in the response of
the intervenors -- that between October 2006 and October
10, the population of the adult facilities declined by
,832 inmates?
MR. SPECTER: Well, I -- I agree with my
friend Mr. Phillips that the population has declined by
about 10,000 prisoners. Most of that decline has been
due to a transfer to out-of-State prisons, and, true,
there's some -- some amount of it has been as a result
of the marginal increase in good time credits, which the
State elected to pursue on its own.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What about the argument
that there was evidence that should have been admitted
but that was not, with reference to new construction?
MR. SPECTER: Well, I don't -- there was no
evidence that wasn't -- that was offered that wasn't
considered by the three-judge panel, Your Honor. They
considered all the evidence. Their 183-page opinion is
scrupulous in considering all the evidence, both that
supported the order and they distinguished the evidence
and, in fact, made credibility determinations based on
the evidence that -- that was contrary. But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
MR. SPECTER: Yes. I'm sorry.
JUSTICE ALITO: Can you explain what the
connection is between the 137.5 percent figure and the
constitutional violations relating to the provision of
medical care in general and treatment for -- for mental
illness?
My understanding of the 137.5 percent figure
is that that has to do with the total number of
prisoners in the -- in the system in relation to design
capacity; isn't that right?
MR. SPECTER: That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, what does the ruling --
that doesn't speak to the number of personnel who are
available in the system to attend to medical needs or
mental illness. It doesn't speak to the extent of the
facilities that are available for those purposes. It
seems to be -- there seems to be a disconnect between
those two. Could you explain why that is narrowly
tailored?
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor. There was --
the court made findings that 137.5 percent was the
maximum number of prisoners that -- of the capacity, of
the design capacity of the prison, that the prison could
have that would enable the State to provide -- to have
all those things that you just mentioned -- staffing,
facilities, medication management -- be effective and
reach the actual prisoners who are ill, seriously ill.
JUSTICE ALITO: See, that's what I don't
understand. You can have a -- could you not have a
prison where the cells are somewhat crowded -- and 137.5
percent of design capacity is not --
MR. SPECTER: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- is not unconstitutional
in itself, is it?
MR. SPECTER: No, it remedies --
JUSTICE ALITO: You could have --
MR. SPECTER: It's a remedy, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: Or you could have a prison
where the -- the cells themselves are crowded, and yet
there are other facilities available for medical care
and plenty of staff to attend to those things. So
what's the connection?
MR. SPECTER: Well, that's -- that's -- and
you're right. If there were -- if the cells were
crowded but the prison had all the other facilities
available, then there might not be a problem. You have
to -- well, I hope you can understand that in this case,
the prisons were built to double-cell the prisoners, but
they weren't built to provide 200 percent of health care
needs. So as soon as they started to double-cell these
prisoners, they could meet their literal housing needs
in the space of the cell, but they couldn't meet the
needs of their health care.
And that's why, Your Honor, the
7.5 percent figure is reasonable, because the Court
went almost a third overcrowding above what all the
experts recommended.
JUSTICE ALITO: But why order the release of
around 40,000 prisoners, many of whom, perhaps the great
majority of whom, are not going to be within a class in
either of these lawsuits? Why order the release of all
those people, rather than ordering the provision of the
construction of facilities for medical care, facilities
to treat mental illness, hiring of staff to treat mental
illness? Why not go directly to the problem rather than
address what seems to be a different issue altogether?
MR. SPECTER: Well, I have two responses to
that, and they're both a little separate.
The first point: It's important to
understand that this is not a release order. It's a
population-crowding reduction order. The court is not
ordering the State to throw open the gates of its doors
and release people. They can reduce crowding through
more transfers to out of State. To your construction
point, if the State so chooses, it can construct new
facilities to increase the capacity. And the
three-judge panel said if you increase the capacity, you
can increase the population.
The point about --
JUSTICE ALITO: If all they do is to build
more cells, they're not going to address the problem.
So I --
MR. SPECTER: Exactly. So that goes to the
second part of your question, which is: Why don't they
try other things, like ordering the prisons to hire more
doctors, ordering better medication management, all of
those kinds of things? And the answer to that is in the
appendix to the Appellee's Coleman brief, which lists 70
discrete orders which the Coleman court, single-judge
Coleman court, tried over a period of 15 years, which
have proven singularly to be ineffective. And that's
why the court analyzed all those things; the trial court
analyzed all these things, and it made a finding of fact
that based on the statements by the special master, by
the receiver's reports, and by the general state of the
horrendous conditions which we have in these prisons,
that those discrete orders would not solve the problem.
And given the level of harm --
JUSTICE ALITO: I -- I still don't get it.
You're saying that they were ordered to do a variety of
things that directly address the problem and they didn't
comply. So as a --
MR. SPECTER: No.
JUSTICE ALITO: In order to -- in order to
provide some kind of a remedy, we're going to order
something else that doesn't address the problem --
MR. SPECTER: No, that --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- that these lawsuits aim
at addressing.
MR. SPECTER: No, Your Honor. To the
contrary, Justice Alito, we -- I think the court
believes based on the facts that it found that this
would be an effective remedy. All of the testimony that
they heard from experts from Texas, from Pennsylvania,
from Washington State -- all of whom had suffered, had
dealt with crowding in their prison systems, have said
that when you reduce the crowding, that's the critical
thing that you have to do now, because unless you reduce
the crowding, nothing else is going to work. And the
court found that that was exactly true.
Nothing else over 20 years in one case and
over 8 years in another case has worked. And -- and
all -- as Justice Kennedy said, massive amounts of
evidence show that the primary reason it hasn't worked
is one singular word, overcrowding; and when you reduce
overcrowding, the prison will be able to operate and
will be able to provide those services that it can't
provide now, so the doctors will have room to be able to
work, which they don't have now.
There will be less prisoners, so officers
will be able to take them from one place to another to
get treatment. There won't be so many lockdowns, which
inhibit care.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
JUSTICE ALITO: That's a very indirect way
of addressing the problem, and it has collateral
consequences. If -- if I were a citizen of California,
I would be concerned about the release of 40,000
prisoners. And I don't care what you term it, a prison
release order or whatever the --
MR. SPECTER: Crowding --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- terminology you used was.
If 40,000 prisoners are going to be released, do you
really believe that if you were to come back here 2
years after that, you would be able to say they
haven't -- they haven't contributed to an increase in
crime --
MR. SPECTER: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- in the State of
California? In the -- in the amicus brief that was
submitted by a number of States, there is an extended
discussion of the effect of one prisoner release order
with which I am familiar, and that was in Philadelphia;
and after a period of time they tallied up what the cost
of that was, the number of murders, the number of rapes,
the number of armed robberies, the number of assaults.
You don't -- that's not going to happen in California?
MR. SPECTER: Your Honor, this trial court
found, based on 50 pages of its opinion, based on expert
testimony not only from our experts but from the State's
experts, from the intervenors' experts, they all came to
the unanimous conclusion that there are methods that --
by which you can reduce crowding which will not increase
crime and that are safe.
The Secretary of the Department of
Corrections who was the secretary at the time of trial
so testified that he was in favor, for example, of
increasing prisoners' good time credits. That's one way
to reduce crowding.
And, moreover, there was statistical
evidence saying -- looking at all the other States that
had reduced their prison population over a period of
about 15 years, and they all came to the same
conclusion, all of those studies came to the same
conclusion, which is there's no -- there is no increase
in the crime rate. In --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that's not what
-- that is not what the three-judge district court
determined. The Prisoner Litigation Reform Act requires
that court to give substantial weight to adverse impact
on public safety.
MR. SPECTER: Yes. Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And when -- and then
it said to the State, look, you come up with a plan that
gets you to 137.5 in 2 years.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The State did --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and the State did
not say -- emphatically did not say this is not going to
have an adverse impact on public safety.
MR. SPECTER: Right, but the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you follow the
double negative there. But -- and what the district
court said -- it didn't examine that. It said, well,
we're sure the State's not going to do anything that has
an adverse impact on public safety. I'm looking at page
a of the jurisdictional statement.
MR. SPECTER: Right. I know it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It said -- and so it
did not make those determinations, but the PLRA requires
it to determine that what it's ordering -- or at least
give substantial weight to the public safety issue. So
isn't that a basis for overturning the remedy that's
imposed here?
MR. SPECTER: I would respectfully disagree
with that, and I'll tell you why --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought you would.
(Laughter.)
MR. SPECTER: At least it's respectful.
(Laughter.)
MR. SPECTER: I'll tell you why I think
that. The court examined all of the methods that are
commonly used and that the governor himself has proposed
to reduce crowding. The governor himself wanted to
reduce the prison population by 37,000. That was in one
of his legislative enactments, and the secretary of
corrections testified that those proposals were safe.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did he want to do it
within the 2-year period the district court ordered?
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor, he did. He
submitted legislation to the legislature for that, and
the legislature wouldn't -- wouldn't take it. And the
governor actually said, reacting to that, after a riot
at Chino which was partly -- at one of the -- Chino is a
prison in California -- a riot; he said, and the quote:
"And the politicians in Sacramento have swept the
problem under the rug."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. Right. No,
my -- my question is specifically with respect --
MR. SPECTER: And I'll get to that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- to the 2-year
plan --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and I'd like an
answer to that --
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- because I look at
this record; I don't see that the district court did
what was required by the Act with respect to the plan
that it's ordering.
MR. SPECTER: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It just simply said,
oh, we're sure -- I'm sure the State wouldn't do
anything to hurt public safety -- after telling the
State you've got to give me a plan in 2 years that gets
to 137.5.
MR. SPECTER: Right. Well, I think all of
the -- it didn't -- it didn't analyze the plan, because
the court was trying -- well, there was no plan.
The court, what they -- what the court did
was it said, we want to give the State the maximum
flexibility, for comity reasons, to determine how best
to remedy the constitutional violations.
Now, on cert, then they said -- they also
said that we're sure the State can do it in a safe way,
but it's not our job --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, they said
we're sure, because -- but --
MR. SPECTER: Because there are methods --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- because we
trust -- I'm just quoting from 4a --
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: "We trust that the
State will comply with its duty to ensure public safety
as it implements the constitutionally required
reduction."
The State is saying it cannot meet the 137.5
in 2 years without an adverse impact on public safety.
MR. SPECTER: Right. And the -- that's the
State's position --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. SPECTER: -- and had been the State's
position all along. The court's findings that a
population reduction of this magnitude were clear, and
they're not shown to be clearly erroneous here. They --
the court said point blank that we're -- we're -- we --
it's our finding that the State can reduce the
population to its current levels -- from its current
levels to 137.5 safely. They made that finding --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, didn't
the court --
MR. SPECTER: -- and it has not been shown
to be clearly erroneous. So they didn't have to look at
particulars. In an effort to give the State the maximum
flexibility, they wanted to allow the State to choose
the methods that it wanted. If the State -- if the
court had ordered --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, what do you mean they
can do it?
MR. SPECTER: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, they could do it
safely if they built, you know, umpteen new prisons, but
that --
MR. SPECTER: But they can also do it
safely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's -- you know,
that's pie in the sky. That's not going to happen.
MR. SPECTER: No, it isn't, Your Honor,
because they can also do it safely by good time credits.
They can do it safely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- doesn't good time
credits let -- let people out who would not otherwise be
out?
MR. SPECTER: Just a -- you know, the -- the
evidence was at trial, and the court's finding about
that evidence was, and the State officials so testified,
that giving prisoners good time credits is not a threat
to public safety.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, didn't --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Why wouldn't it have been
the better course, for the State -- excuse me -- for the
court to say, you know, the State said it can do this in
years --
MR. SPECTER: Right.
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- without any public safety
problem? So why don't we let them take those 5 years?
MR. SPECTER: Because, Your Honor, as
Justice Ginsburg and others have been saying before, the
constitutional violations have been ongoing for
years. We're dealing here with cases of life and
death and serious injury. And after all these years, in
-- when they -- when they heard the evidence that said
that population could be -- and they made the findings
which the State doesn't argue are clearly erroneous --
when they made those findings, that it could be reduced
safely, they had an obligation to provide a remedy that
would provide constitutionally adequate care in the
safest manner possible -- in the quickest manner
possible.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think Justice
Sotomayor has been patient.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I have several
questions, but I'm -- I'm not sure why you have not been
responding to Justice -- to the Chief Justice. Didn't
the district court discuss different safe ways --
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- of reducing the
population --
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- and said we're not
imposing them because we want the State to do -- to
choose among them?
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As I've looked at the
State's final plan, I thought that they had in fact not
only accepted all of the recommendations, but they added
a couple of additional remedies that the court had not
suggested.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is it a fair statement
that the district -- that the three-judge panel was
saying, if you do these things -- that's their
finding -- you can do it without affecting public
safety? Wasn't that what they were saying?
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor. If I didn't
make that clear, I meant to.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but I thought
the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The second and more
important question is going back to something that
Justice Scalia asked you, which was: You made the
statement that no one was stopped from proffering
evidence about prison conditions --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- up till 2 months
before the trial. So what evidence was excluded?
MR. SPECTER: Nothing. Nothing.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What point is the other
side making that they were excluded from making?
MR. SPECTER: Well, as we said in our
briefs, Your Honor, there was no evidence that was
excluded, and, in fact, the State's witnesses testified
about conditions, some of the conditions current as of
the day of the -- of the testimony. So it was very
current, and nothing was excluded. That way, even if
the court made a ruling which was error, which we don't
believe it was, there was absolutely no prejudice.
JUSTICE BREYER: What is -- what is the
number? I mean, I -- I was puzzled by the same thing
that Justice Sotomayor was. I read, on page 253 of the
appendix, a conclusion where the district court said it
is our conclusion that they can reduce this by how many
people? What is it -- 30,000? It's a lot.
MR. SPECTER: Thirty-five thousand.
JUSTICE BREYER: Thirty-five thousand. That
this could be done safely.
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Preceding page, whatever
that was -- I have it -- it was 253.
MR. SPECTER: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: There are about six pages
where they summarize evidence from all kinds of
criminologists that say, for example, there are 17,000
technical parole violators that are being sent to prison
who haven't committed additional crimes, and they could
perhaps be released from some of the time that they're
spending in prison. Then they go on to this good time,
which would, I guess, lead to people who are 50 years
old or 60 years old who have been in prison for 40 years
would be released at age 55 instead of age 75. I guess
there's some category there.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Then they had several other
things. Okay. Now, what are some facts about that?
MR. SPECTER: There was also -- and there
was also testimony that the Department of Corrections
was using a risk assessment instrument to identify the
low-risk prisoners. So --
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't it true that one of
the main programs that they were -- that was cited as
providing a safeguard is evidence-based rehabilitation
programs?
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor. All the --
all the witnesses from the State, the intervenors, the
local witnesses, our experts -- they all found that
those would help reduce crime and that they would be
most effective if used in the community, but they would
be effective also if they were implemented --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's the general record of
the success of rehabilitation efforts?
MR. SPECTER: Well, different -- you can't
say generally because different programs have different
records. But do we --
JUSTICE ALITO: What did Congress think when
it enacted the -- the Sentencing Reform Act?
MR. SPECTER: I don't know, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have this question, and
this goes just to remedy.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I recognize the district
court has to be given considerable discretion.
It shows the 137.5 figure because it's
halfway between 145 and 130.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I think that certainly the
Prison Litigation Reform Act means that you have to, if
you -- if there's going to be a release order, it must
be releasing the minimum amount --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- that will effect the
purposes of the remedy order. There was substantial
expert opinion that 145 -- 145 percent would be
sufficient. Isn't -- doesn't the evidence indicate to
you that at least 145 ought to be the beginning point,
not 137.5?
MR. SPECTER: Well, I -- I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That there was no -- and I
understand --
MR. SPECTER: May I make this --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There were more -- correct
me if I'm wrong -- there were more experts that
testified that 145 would work than there were that 130
was necessary.
MR. SPECTER: No, I -- I respectfully
disagree with the record, Your Honor. The 145 figure
came from a report by the former governor, Deukmejian,
and a group that he organized, and they said that they
could operate a crowded system at 145 percent of
capacity. And that figure was high, the district court
found, because it didn't take into account health care
needs.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And --
MR. SPECTER: It didn't take into account
health care needs, which is the issue here. And our
experts testified that, because it didn't take into
account health care needs, 130 percent was the -- was
the better number. It's the number that the strike team
had thought of, the -- the administration's own strike
team. It is the number that these professional experts
believed would be sufficient to remedy the population.
And back to my answer to Justice Alito's
question is the health care facilities themselves were
built to provide services to only 100 percent of --
health care services to only 100 percent of the
prisoners. So --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the experts --
MR. SPECTER: -- 137 --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The experts that -- who
were testifying were quite aware of the fact that
overcrowding related to the constitutional violations.
That was their whole theory.
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And any number of them
suggested that 145 would be sufficient.
MR. SPECTER: I think there might have been
only one; one expert suggested 145. Most of -- I think
most -- the majority of the experts suggested 130. The
court found -- and it has not been challenged here as
clearly erroneous -- that the weight of the evidence
went to 130. They wanted to do what you're saying,
which was minimize the intrusion, maximize the
population. So to -- even though they -- the court had
ample basis to issue an order saying it should be 130,
they said in an abundance of caution and to give -- to
give the State the benefit of the doubt and to make
sure, we're going to bump it up an extra 7.5 percent.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I see no evidence in the
record that the State -- that the -- pardon me -- that
your clients said that 145 wouldn't work.
MR. SPECTER: I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe you can
answer.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Did the expert who
gave --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe you can
answer, counsel, please.
MR. SPECTER: Thank you. My recollection of
the testimony was that our experts said it had to be --
get down to 130 in order for the other remedies to be
effective, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The expert who gave the
5?
MR. SPECTER: Pardon me.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The expert who gave the
5 --
MR. SPECTER: There was no expert -- well,
there was one expert who said maybe in the best of
circumstances it could get to 145. All the others
talked about 130 percent.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Let's go to the one who
has used the 145 figure.
MR. SPECTER: He was a psychologist, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He was a what?
MR. SPECTER: He was -- he was a
psychologist who has expertise in prison health care.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And did he say that at
5 you could deliver health care safely?
MR. SPECTER: He was equivocal on that
point. He thought -- he said that at the outer reaches
it might be true.
But I want to emphasize that the district
court has allowed the State to come back in at any time
to modify its order and to modify this percentage point
if the circumstances changed. So, since the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Specter, there --
there has been at least two significant changes. One is
the good time credit. The California legislature did
pass the law that upped the good time credits and also
addressing the probationers and the parolees --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- and the technical
violators to divert them from the system. Do you have
any information about what effect that legislation that
was passed January?
MR. SPECTER: It was passed, I think, last
year. I think it went into effect in July of last year,
I believe, if that's what -- what you're referring to.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, do we -- do we know
at all what effect it has had?
MR. SPECTER: It has had a marginal effect
on reducing the population. There have been no reports
that it has led to an increase in crime.
But to get back to my earlier point and your
point, Justice Kennedy, about the -- the remedy and that
it should be the least intrusive possible. This order
is set to take effect over a 2-year period, and during
that 2-year period, if Mr. Phillips is correct that the
conditions are constitutional and that they can deliver
services at 145 percent, then the State is free to come
in and make a motion to -- to bring those changed
circumstances to the court. And, if anything, this
court has been incredibly sensitive to the -- to the
needs and desires of the State, and it -- it was
extremely reluctant to enter this order in the first
place, and it would -- and it would bend over backwards
to give the State discretion while attempting to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I don't see a finding
by the three-judge court that 145, is it, would not be
an efficacious remedy. I know that it --
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I know that it would for
7.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor. I don't
think -- I don't think it's explicitly said 145, but I
think it discussed the 145 figure in the context of the
-- of the fact that it didn't provide for health care
services. So it discounted that a little bit and went
down about 7 percent. But it came close to that figure,
I believe.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can I ask you a
hypothetical question that I know is not your case? But
let's say you had the district court entering an order
saying you have to bring it down to 137.5 in 2 years.
That will, as a practical matter, result in the release
of 40,000 prisoners. The State comes back and makes a
showing supported by experts saying, look, if you give
us 4 years, we can reach the figure without releasing
any prisoners.
Do you think it would violate the Prison
Litigation Reform Act for the district court to say:
No, I want this done in 2 years, not 4 years, and we'll
just have to deal with the fact there are going to be
,000 prisoners out on the streets.
MR. SPECTER: Well, the Prison Litigation
Reform Act requires the court to give substantial weight
to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. SPECTER: -- the public safety
implications of its decision. So, under those
circumstances, it's -- under those hypothetical
circumstances, there's always the possibility that, in
those cases, the degree of public safety problems might
outweigh the harm.
That -- as you said, that's not this case.
They found that we could do it. And they -- the
three-judge panel found that the State could reduce the
population safely. And there was no suggestion in -- in
the record that this 2- or 4-year period would make that
much of a difference.
You have to put the 40,000 or 35,000 figure
in context. California releases 120,000 prisoners every
year on parole. That's a lot of prisoners. And the
findings of the district courts are, even when
California increases the number of parolees in the
communities, that doesn't increase the crime rate.
JUSTICE ALITO: What's the recidivism --
what is the recidivism rate for those parolees?
MR. SPECTER: Well, it depends on the risk
of the parolees. The high-risk ones --
JUSTICE ALITO: In general, what is the
recidivism rate?
MR. SPECTER: Well, overall, the risk is
around 70 percent, but if you -- for low-risk prisoners,
the risk is 17 percent who re-violate, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I
couldn't -- what was the first --
MR. SPECTER: The first number, when you
take all parolees, all together, it's 70 percent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Seven-zero?
MR. SPECTER: Seven-zero, because -- within
years. That's what -- the situation we have now, and
that's the situation that the governor, the secretary,
the court described as a failure. With parole reform,
you could reduce that number in many ways, and the court
described how you could do that. But for the low-risk
prisoners --
JUSTICE ALITO: But for the -- for the
low-risk prisoners, it's 17 percent?
MR. SPECTER: Seventeen percent, and
California has a risk-assessment instrument which the
court found could be used to make sure that what
happened in Philadelphia doesn't happen again. If I
understand it --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, I understood that of
the low-risk -- if only the low-risk people are
released, around 3,000 of them are going to commit
another crime.
MR. SPECTER: They -- but they don't have to
be released. First, I want to make sure I emphasize the
point that this is a crowding-reduction measure. You
don't have to release 35,000 prisoners.
JUSTICE ALITO: They -- they don't have to
be released if you can build enough cells --
MR. SPECTER: Or you can divert, or you can
improve the parole system so that parole violators don't
commit so many crimes, if you offer rehabilitation
alternatives, if you provide a number of -- diversion
into the community. There are a number of other options
short of releasing prisoners.
And the 70 percent figure includes the --
JUSTICE ALITO: The 17 percent figure -- and
the 17 percent figure goes to exactly my concern. This
is going to have -- it seems likely this is going to
have an effect on public safety. And the experts can
testify to whatever they want, but you know what? If
this order goes into effect, we will see.
MR. SPECTER: But the --
JUSTICE ALITO: We will see, and the people
of California will see: Are there more crimes or are
there not?
MR. SPECTER: Well, based on the experience
in other jurisdictions, the court found we wouldn't.
And I want to just -- I want to clarify one
point, Your Honor: The 70 percent figure includes --
doesn't always include crimes. It includes lots of
technical parole violators, people who have missed their
appointments, for example. So it's not as grave as some
of the figures that are -- been thrown by the -- by the
other side.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any likelihood --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is -- is there any other
case where the prison reduction has been done under the
PLRA, or is this the first -- the first one?
MR. SPECTER: It's the first one to reach
this Court, obviously. There have been a few others
that have been resolved by consent, as I understand it,
or not appealed, but just a few.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any evidence on --
I -- I see their suggestions that the technical parole
violators go elsewhere --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that the elderly and
infirm prisoners --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- some of them be
released.
MR. SPECTER: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: The good time credits for
older people would have effect, be increased, and also,
halfway houses and other kinds of prison facilities
which used to be called less -- less physically
restrictive punishments, or taking the money you save
and building new prisons. Okay, that seems to be the
gamut.
Is there any evidence, statistically or
otherwise -- because it used to be that States did rely
on halfway houses, that relied upon -- they relied upon
certain camps -- prison camps --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- for example, and some of
them were pretty tough. And there were a whole range of
what used to be called intermediate punishments.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Is there any
statistical evidence on the part -- on the point that is
-- that Justice Alito raised --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor, there's --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- as to whether these did
or did not result in higher crime rates?
MR. SPECTER: Well, the evidence was, and
the court found -- and, again, it's not clear error --
that these programs were not -- were more effective than
prison in reducing recidivism, and they were less
expensive. And -- and that's part of the reason why the
three-judge panel concluded that a reduction in the
prison population wouldn't increase crime.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, one of the
thing that concerns me about this type of institutional
reform litigation --
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- is that the State
is responsible for a lot of different things.
MR. SPECTER: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And what happens
when you have this case, another district court ordering
the State to take action with respect to environmental
damage, another court saying, well, you've got to spend
this much more on education for disabled, another court
saying you've got to spend this much more on something
else? How does the State sort out its obligations?
Does it say --
MR. SPECTER: We would prefer --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- well, I'll spend
more money to build prisons, but I'll violate this other
district court order saying I have to spend more money
to build water treatment plants?
MR. SPECTER: Well, Your Honor, in this
particular case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I know you like your
particular case --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and you want the
State to say this is where I'm going to put my money.
MR. SPECTER: No, we're not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the point is
it's a budget prioritization that the State has to go
through --
MR. SPECTER: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- every day, and
now it's being transferred from the State legislature to
Federal district courts throughout the State.
MR. SPECTER: Well, I believe the Federal
courts have an obligation to enforce the Constitution
and the laws of the United States.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. I believe
that as well, counsel.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What I'm saying is
that you have conflicting orders from different district
courts telling them you've got to comply with the
Constitution by spending 8 billion here; and another
court saying, I've got another constitutional problem of
my own, and you've got to spend 8 billion over there.
What is the State supposed to do in that situation?
MR. SPECTER: Well, my simple answer to your
question, Your Honor -- and I don't mean to be
flippant -- but they're -- they have an obligation to
follow the Federal law, constitutional law and other
laws. And if they're not, then the Federal court has an
obligation to impose a remedy.
In this particular case, the State has a
choice. It can either incarcerate 140,000 prisoners in
a system built for 80,000, or it can incarcerate a -- a
lesser number. If it chooses to incarcerate 148,000
prisoners in a space built for 80, it's going to incur
certain obligations. And we believe, as I said in
answer to Justice Breyer's question, the State could
choose to use less restrictive punishments, alternative
punishments, get a better bang for their buck, have more
public safety.
But that's -- if we -- if the court imposed
that kind of a rule, then the State would be here saying
it's -- it's violating comity provisions and making
policy choices for the State which it shouldn't. I
believe in this case, the court gave the State the
maximum degree of flexibility to make all the policy
choices surrounding -- surrounding the incarceration of
these prisoners. You just -- the Constitution prevents
the State from incarcerating somebody and then not
providing them the basic medical care they need to
escape from the prison and not die before their sentence
is out. And that's what we have here.
Thank you.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If you take the State's
concession that it can meet a goal in 5 years and the
Federal court order is 2 years, we're talking about 3
years. Is there any indication of how fast the State's
remedy would click in? Are we talking maybe about a
percent differential for the last 3 years, or --
MR. SPECTER: Well, there are a lot of
things the State can do quickly. For instance, it can
reform its parole system; it cannot re-incarcerate
technical parole violators. It can --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no. I'm saying,
assuming --
MR. SPECTER: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Compare what the State
concedes that it will do with what the court has ordered
it to do.
MR. SPECTER: The State -- well, I just want
to remind you that the governor proposed to the
legislature that he reduce the prison population; he
said it could be done safely by the same amount, roughly
,000 prisoners, in 2 years. So what the court found
was basically what the governor had believed was safe.
The 5-year -- the 5-year period is longer,
and the 5-year period is longer because it takes time to
construct the facilities that the -- that the State
wants to construct. I believe that's the major
difference between the two remedies. But the other
methods -- the good time credits, parole reform,
diversion -- those can be implemented very quickly, and
those substantial reductions can be accomplished safely
in that amount of time.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So should the court have
said 2 years for everything but construction? Wouldn't
that have been a more narrowly tailored remedy?
MR. SPECTER: Well, the State --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Except that they --
MR. SPECTER: Well, I was --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- there was going to be
no construction adequate, because there was no money.
MR. SPECTER: Right. And the State has --
has not really put up the money to construct those new
prisons. This case has been ongoing since 2006, and
they've hardly constructed anything. Even if it was a
more narrow remedy, the court found that construction
wouldn't be a viable alternative.
My time is up.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Phillips, you have 3 minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CARTER G. PHILLIPS
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
MR. PHILLIPS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Just a few points. First of all, with
respect to the state of the record and what was
proffered and what was not proffered, if you look at the
joint appendix at 2085, there's a specific proffer that
is made by the intervenors in that context -- or I
mean -- I'm sorry. There's a specific proffer made by
the State of the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. What page
was that?
MR. PHILLIPS: 2085. That's volume 6 of the
-- and it is at that point where the plaintiffs, the
intervening plaintiffs say we'd like to put on evidence
of constitutional violations. And Judge Karlton says:
Twice this court has said we will not receive that
evidence. You've made a clear -- as clear a record as
you can; please don't waste our time.
And then later, at 2338, which is again in
volume 6, where we enter Mr. Dezember, who is the
assistant secretary of CDCR in charge of health care, he
specifically said -- I've read the -- I've read the
Dezember declaration, and it will not be received to the
extent that it says the State is in compliance.
So we've made our efforts --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry --
MR. PHILLIPS: -- and we were rebuffed.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't know what the
declaration said. Is the actual declaration in the
record somewhere?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes, I believe the actual
declaration is in the record, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Phillips, sorry, but on
a -- on a different subject. Does the State stand by
its representation that it can do this without any
public safety impact in 5 years?
MR. PHILLIPS: Yes. I mean, we made that
submission to the court, and we -- we believe that we
could comply with it. That said --
JUSTICE KAGAN: That remains true --
MR. PHILLIPS: We --
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- notwithstanding budget --
MR. PHILLIPS: Well, it's --
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- economic differences,
budget differences?
MR. PHILLIPS: Look, I mean, the plaintiffs'
counsel talks about all of the things that you can do,
and if you -- if you look at 70a of the -- the
jurisdictional statement appendix, it specifically says
there's a line; above the line we can implement, and
that will get you about 16,000 inmates, and below the
line you need legislation in order to implement these
things. But the reality is that anytime you say you're
going to release 30,000 inmates in a very compressed
period of time, I guarantee you that there's going to be
more crime and people are going to die on the streets of
California. I mean that -- there's no way out of that
particular box.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But if there were 5 years,
you think you could do it without any public safety
impact in the way that you told the court you could?
MR. PHILLIPS: I think so, but I'm still
concerned, because the district court in this specific
says -- said: We have not evaluated the -- the safety
impact of each of the State's -- of the elements of the
State's proposed plan.
And it seems to me they had an obligation to
do that.
The other point I want to make with respect
to Justice Kennedy's question is that there is not a
shred of evidence that 137.5 makes any sense whatsoever.
That is a pulled-out-of-the-air number. Theirs was
aspirational. None of that is based on what is the
constitutional violation that exists at the time you
adopt that particular percentage.
And it seems to me that's the entire problem
with this -- this exercise, which is to say we're going
to fix this across the board, rather than what would
make much more sense, which is to evaluate these matters
facility by facility, to evaluate these matters on the
basis of the various elements discrete elements of how
you can reduce the prison population, and to do it in --
in conjunction with a receiver who is in place who can
help to implement this in a very systemic way and that
will get us to where we want to get to.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why didn't you give
the court that as your plan? The court gave you
absolute discretion to implement the plan that you
wanted; it said we don't want to do facility by
facility, because we want you to figure out where you
need to implement.
So, your plan didn't do that; why? Either
in your 5-year plan or in your 2-year plan.
MR. PHILLIPS: Because the district court's
order said you're going to have to reach 137.5 percent
in 2 years, period. That's the categorical rule. And
the first time we went in to suggest something above
7.5, Judge Henderson said: I'm not hearing that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Phillips, Mr. Specter.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the case in the
