IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
RENT-A-CENTER, WEST, INC., :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 09-497
ANTONIO JACKSON. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, April 26, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ROBERT F. FRIEDMAN, ESQ., Dallas, Texas; on behalf of
Petitioner.
IAN E. SILVERBERG, ESQ., Reno, Nevada; on behalf of
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ROBERT F. FRIEDMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
IAN E. SILVERBERG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ROBERT F. FRIEDMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 55
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear
argument first this morning in Case 09-497,
Rent-A-Center West v. Jackson.
Mr. Friedman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT F. FRIEDMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FRIEDMAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The agreement between Antonio Jackson and
Rent-A-Center should be enforced as written. There is
no statutory impediment to the enforcement of the clear
and unmistakable agreement that gives the arbitrator
exclusive authority to decide Jackson's challenge to
enforceability, nor is there any language in the Federal
Arbitration Act that would prohibit the court from
making the determination -- prohibit the arbitrator from
making the determination of Jackson's challenge to
unconscionability.
Through frequent holdings of this Court
going back 50 years to the Steelworkers trilogy, this
Court has plainly recognized that parties may delegate
issues as to scope and validity to the arbitrator in the
first instance. The district court and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But not to the
question of which parties have agreed to arbitrate?
MR. FRIEDMAN: I'm sorry, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Not the question of
which parties have agreed to arbitrate?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Which parties can be
potentially scope issues and which parties potentially
as well. In this case, the issue is enforceability.
And through the holdings of First Options, Howsam, and
Bazzle, going back to previous decisions, this Court has
held that parties through clear and unmistakable
delegation can give that to the arbitrator in the first
instance.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if -- if fraud in the
inducement, I take it, is considered -- even if you have
a very broad arbitration clause, as we do here, fraud in
the inducement is considered a question for the court,
not the arbitrator; is that right?
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So why should
unconscionability be treated differently?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Ginsburg, fraud in
the inducement, pursuant to Prima Paint, goes to the
making of the agreement, and under section 4, the court
retains decisions over the making of the agreement.
Unconscionability is a post-formation attack. It does
not go to the very limited inquiry that is anticipated
under section 4, of the making --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why is it post-formation?
Arguably, the -- one of the parties has such a strong
hand that it forces the other party just to decide.
It's almost like -- duress would certainly be for the
court, would it not, if it’s a formation issue like
Justice Ginsburg indicated?
MR. FRIEDMAN: In some instances,
Justice Kennedy, duress could be; for example, a gun to
somebody's head. But procedural unconscionability does
not go to the same issues of making. And, in fact, under
Nevada law and this State's laws --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm not sure what
procedural unconscionability, but this is -- as Justice
Ginsburg indicates, it's not clear to me why this isn't
a formation issue.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Formation is a very basic
existential analysis. It goes to mutual assent. Did
the parties sign the agreement and indicate the desire
to be bound by the agreement? Though --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess you could argue
that on its face the agreement is so one-sided, so
unconscionable, that one of the parties must have been
coerced into signing it. I guess you could make that
argument, can't -- couldn't you?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Scalia, you could
make that argument --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Has -- has that argument
been made here?
MR. FRIEDMAN: There was an argument made
that it was one-sided, but it was the same type of
argument that pertains --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Was the argument made that
because it was so unconscionable, the employee must have
been coerced into making it?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, Justice Scalia. That
argument was not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I didn't think it -- it had
been made.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Getting back to
Justice Ginsburg's question about making --
JUSTICE STEVENS: I'm a little puzzled.
What was the argument that was made? Why was it
unconscionable, if not for that reason?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Stevens, the argument
was that there was unequal bargaining power because
Mr. Jackson was the -- a putative employee and Rent-A-Center
was the employer. He also complained about a couple of
the provisions in the agreement, one pertaining to
discovery, one pertaining to an alleged fee-splitting
provision in the agreement. He did not complain as to
the terms that Justice Scalia just referred to.
With respect to making, it is a very limited
inquiry, and section 4 is the provision in the Federal
Arbitration Act that gives a court the power to
enforce the arbitration agreement. Once the court is
satisfied that the making is not an issue and the making
is a very basic issue, the court, pursuant to the plain
language of section 4, must submit the dispute to
arbitration.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You have --
MR. FRIEDMAN: Now, in some instances, the
courts will make decisions as to attacks such as
unconscionability. But in this sense --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, is your problem
with unconscionability being -- as described by the Chief
Justice or Justice Scalia, being forced to or coerced
into signing something -- that's okay for the courts, but
this type of argument that goes to the unfairness of the
process, that's for the arbitrator; is that your
position?
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's -- that’s right, Justice
Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why -- isn't that an
unwieldy rule? Isn't your quarrel with what the court
defined as remissible unconscionability as a legal
matter, as opposed to trying to parse out what
unconscionability means otherwise?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Well, Justice Sotomayor,
unconscionability and fairness attacks go to
post-formation issues that -- that are --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We just gave you one
that didn't: If someone was forced into signing the
agreement in an unconscionable way.
MR. FRIEDMAN: But, Justice Sotomayor, if
for example it's fraud in the inducement, such as in
Prima Paint, that does go to the section 4. It does go
to the making of the agreement because there would not
be mutual assent if somebody was forced to enter into
the agreement.
In contrast, unconscionability, and
certainly the allegations we've seen here against the
agreement, go to post-formation complaints, complaints
about the fairness of the agreement. They do not go to
the actual, very limited making of the agreement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But I suppose that
the substance of the agreement -- maybe this is just the
same question as Justice Scalia's. I suppose the
substance of the agreement is evidence -- could be
evidence on the unconscionability at formation.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And that is for the
court.
MR. FRIEDMAN: If -- if there is something
in the agreement that would indicate that there was not
mutual assent, as in somebody put a gun to somebody's
head, somebody forced them to do it, that would be for
the court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, the point is --
it's not that. It would be the -- the provisions are so
one-sided that you may assume from that that the
formation was not voluntary.
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, Mr. Chief Justice.
Attacks on the fairness and simply pointing to
provisions and saying, well, these are very unfair; it
must be an indication of it being forced -- no, that would
be for the arbitrator to decide, because it’s simply an
attack on the fairness and there’s speculation as to why
somebody entered. And in this agreement --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't agree with that. I
mean, if -- if the argument is made -- I gather it
wasn't made here, but if the argument is made that this
agreement was not voluntary, and the evidence of that
involuntariness is how outrageously unfair it is -- now,
I'm not sure that that's enough evidence. You may need
some other stuff as well to -- to persuade a court.
But if that is the argument, that the
one-sidedness is evidence that the agreement was not
voluntary, I don't see how that's for the arbitrator.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Scalia, under the
section 4 analysis, in the making there needs to be some
evidence that it was forced, the gun to the head
example. Simply pointing to the language in the
agreement as evidence of that would not be enough. That
is an attack on the language of the agreement after it's
been formed.
The section 4 analysis is very, very limited,
and it goes to these most basic elements. So the
language of the agreement, while certainly the party
opposing it will have the opportunity to make the
argument it's unconscionable, but that would be for the
arbitrator.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't think that could
be used along with other evidence? I think all you’re
saying is that it is not in and of itself enough, that
every unfair agreement is not a coerced agreement.
MR. FRIEDMAN: It certainly would not in and
of itself be enough --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you could use it as
evidence if there’s other evidence supporting that.
Couldn't you?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Your Honor, you would have to
look at the objective manifestation of mutual assent.
For example, in this agreement --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you can answer that
yes or no. Can you use that in addition to other
evidence to show that the agreement was not voluntary?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Scalia, I don't think
so. I think you would have to look to what transpired
at the time the agreement was actually entered into and
was made.
JUSTICE STEVENS: And that's no matter how
one-sided? I mean, suppose the agreement provided that
the employee shall pay all the costs of arbitration no
matter who wins and also at the end of the arbitration
shall pay a penalty if he fails to -- it seems to me you
could have a really one-sided -- that would not be
admissible on the issue?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Stevens, if there is
an issue about arbitral access, as in there is a block
at the door, you cannot get a ticket to the show,
because of some impediment in getting to arbitration in
the first place, under the Court's principles announced
in Randolph and in First Options, you must have access to
the arbitrator. So in your example, if there is
something prohibiting access to the arbitrator, that
would be a different story.
Getting back to Justice Scalia's question
about the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about the specific
examples he gave, that the -- just take that the -- that
the employee must bear all the costs of the arbitration,
win or lose, that's the provision. Would that provision
be enough to make the issue one for the court rather
than the arbitrator?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Ginsburg, if it's
simply a complaint about the fairness, it would not be.
If the parties --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But is it? We don't need
the "if." Tell me whether you think a provision saying
the employee under any and all circumstances pays all
costs -- would that provision make this question of
unconscionability one for the court rather than the
arbitrator?
MR. FRIEDMAN: It could, Justice Ginsburg.
It would not be a question of arbitrability if the party
opposing arbitration can meet the very heavy burden
established in Randolph to show that the fees would
be -- would prohibit them from actually getting to
arbitration. It would not be simply an attack as we saw
here, with no evidence, that we think a term is unfair.
The party opposing arbitration would have to
meet their burden. They would have to put evidence in.
And, for example, in Randolph the Court stated that in
certain instances Mrs. Randolph could have put evidence
in, and had she put evidence in, which she did not, much
as in this case, if she had met her burden to show that
she could not have access to arbitration -- in other
words, if arbitration is an illusory remedy -- that
could be for the court to decide, because, after all,
even in the First Options decision, the anticipation is
you have a clear and unmistakably delegation that the
arbitrator will make a decision, and implicit in that
that there is an arbitrator to make that decision.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, that's -- that’s true.
The thing I was wondering in this case is there's a -- a
dispute that's about racial discrimination and so forth.
There’s a clause, and the clause says this is
arbitrable, but that is being disputed because the
plaintiff in the case says that's an unconscionable
provision, so it doesn't really apply. And then you say
but now that dispute is referred to the arbitrator to
just read the language. But the plaintiff says that
that language, too, is unconscionable, and as long as
that language is unconscionable, then how is it clear
and unmistakable that they, he, agreed to do it, because
an unconscionable provision is not a provision?
So if we apply First Options -- I mean, it's
complicated because of the language; it's not
complicated once you think it out, and -- I hope. But
just applying it very literally, it would seem to say
that you do not have clear and unmistakable evidence
that they agreed to submit this kind of dispute to
arbitration for the reason that what you point to is
itself according to them a product of unconscionability.
How do you -- how do you respond to that?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Breyer, under section
, which is the enforcement mechanism, the court is
limited to make decisions about the making. Once the
making issue is not an issue -- and it has never been an
issue in this case; there has never been an allegation
the making has been affected -- the court at that
point should enforce the agreement pursuant to its
terms.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, making itself
could be, but I think that's a harder question,
whether a -- certainly if the person says you see my
signature there; that's not mine; that's Joe Banana's,
who tries to imitate me -- there is no contract, and no
matter what it says, it doesn't go to the arbitrator.
All right?
Now, we can argue about whether it is or is
not analogous to that when he claims it's
unconscionable. There's a very good argument it is
analogous. There's a very good argument it is like
fraud in the inducement, and there are some arguments
the other way.
But First Options I think cuts through that,
by saying whether that's true or not, unless it's clear
and unmistakable that they wanted this matter, the
matter of whether the arbitration clause itself is
unconscionable referred to the arbitrator, whether or
not they wanted that referred to the arbitrator has to
be clear and unmistakable. And they are claiming no,
because the lack -- the provision that says that is
itself a product of unconscionability. That's to repeat
my question. But, having repeated the question, why
isn't that the simplest, most direct, and four-sentence
ground for deciding this case?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Breyer, Jackson, first
and foremost, did not ever complain that the arbitrability
provision, the clear and unmistakable delegation provision,
is unconscionable.
JUSTICE BREYER: He’s not saying that this
whole arbitration clause is unconscionable?
MR. FRIEDMAN: He’s complaining that
generally it's unconscionable --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, all right. So he's
-- he’s complaining the whole clause is unconscionable,
and that's part of the clause.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Breyer, this is really
very similar to First Options, in which the party said:
I'm not party to the agreement; the scope does not
cover --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, and in First Options, we
said it wasn’t clear and unmistakable.
MR. FRIEDMAN: The Court said it was not,
but in First Options the Court set out the rule --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the rules were what I
just described.
MR. FRIEDMAN: The rule is -- in this case,
there is language that has never been contested, and that
language clearly and unmistakably says that the
arbitrator has exclusive authority. That language has
never been attacked.
And as to the issue of unconscionability,
pursuant to section 4, which gives the court the
authority to send the arbitration to the arbitrator, the
court should do exactly that. It should send it to the
arbitrator once the making issue is satisfied, and then
the arbitrator can make that decision.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your position is
that the arbitrator gets to decide questions of
unconscionability, but the court gets to decide whether
the arbitrator can do that?
MR. FRIEDMAN: In some instances, Justice
Roberts -- Mr. Chief Justice, that is correct. The court
must decide whether the agreement is made. The court
must also decide whether there was a clear and
unmistakable delegation. So under First Options and the
cases that interpret it and the cases before it, the
court must make the initial determination of whether
there is a clear and unmistakable delegation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, do you understand --
and we can ask the Respondent. But, as you understand
Jackson's case, is he saying that part of the clause,
part of the arbitration clause, is unconscionable, that
the whole clause is unconscionable or that the whole
contract is unconscionable?
MR. FRIEDMAN: He has made generalized --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because the complaint is a
bare-bones complaint, and I don't know if there’s
anything in the pleadings that reflects what his answer
to that question would be.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Kennedy, he has
attacked certain provisions specifically of the
agreement. He is arguing about the discovery provision.
He is arguing about the fees provision. And he is arguing
about certain terms excluding claims, that bilaterally
exclude claims. So he has attacked about three
provisions of the agreement specifically.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But all of the
arbitration agreement, not the employment contract as a
whole.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Ginsburg, it is a
stand-alone four-page arbitration agreement. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: So let's go back to that.
Maybe the other way is simpler. You say you agree that
if my defense to this contract, which you are trying to
enforce against me or which gives me a right to sue you,
look at the argument, you put up this four-page
document, and I say: Look, that is not my signature;
that is the signature of Joe Bananas. We agree that's
for the court.
MR. FRIEDMAN: We agree, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Now, we agree it's
for the court if my defense is, what he did is he got me
drunk, told me a bunch of lies, and I signed it. I
grant it's my signature, but look at how squiggly it is.
And my will was not a free one because I was under the
influence of alcohol and lies.
MR. FRIEDMAN: We agree --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Same. Okay.
That’s Prima Paint.
MR. FRIEDMAN: -- because that’s part of
the fraud issue.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay? Now, he
says the reason that I did not sign this contract -- I
agree it's my signature; I agree it is not squiggly -- but
still my will was overborne. What was it overborne by?
It was overborne by those very situations that lead
courts to label contracts unconscionable. The reason we
don't enforce unconscionable contract is because the
person who was the victim had no free will. He did not
sign it of his own accord. And that doesn't -- there’s
no other reason, and that's the basic reason, and
therefore assimilate it to the other two. What's your
response?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, Justice Breyer, that
would be a very different situation. That would be
allegations of procedural unconscionability, unequal
bargaining power, and in fact --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you agree that a
contract cannot be unconscionable unless it was coerced,
that a finding of unconscionability is the same as a
finding of coercion? You don't agree with that, do you?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, there could be other
types of unconscionability.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but that's what I want
the answer to. I know you don't agree with it. What I
want is a list of reasons why.
MR. FRIEDMAN: With respect to procedural
unconscionability, issues of unequal economic bargaining
power, which is essentially what we have here -- those are
non-issues that cannot be addressed by the arbitrator.
And, in fact, under Nevada law, Justice Breyer, an
allegation of procedural unconscionability, no matter
how procedural --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm not interested in
arbitration law. I’m interested in contract law, and I
want to know why as a general matter of contract law an
allegation of unconscionability, defense of
unconscionability, is why is it not enough like the
coercion defense or the inducement defense or the "I was
in Alaska" defense? Isn't it enough like that that they
should be treated alike? And now you're going to say no,
and I want to know why not.
MR. FRIEDMAN: It does not rise to the same
level as something that's fraudulent or something that
is forced with a gun to your head.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I would have thought
the answer to your -- the answer to your answer would be,
well then, the -- you’re more likely to win on that
question. Obviously, you are going to lose on the gun to
the head, but if it’s simply the economic inequality or
whatever, under the State law you’re probably going to
prevail, and they will say there is a valid contract. I
thought the -- your -- your whole point was simply it's
all or nothing.
The courts get to decide is there a valid
contract or is there not. And once they decide there
is, then everything else about unconscionability of
particular clauses is for the arbitrator.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, most
everything is for the arbitrator, and I want to
distinguish between unconscionability, as Justice Breyer
is referring to, and access issues and issues that go to
the making, because there is a very bright line. Making
issues go to the actual formation, mutual assent, and
there is obviously no mutual assent if you have a gun to
your head.
But issues such as, well, this is unfair, I
may have to do this, speculation is simply not enough
to -- to pertain to the making of the agreement, nor is
an issue about an impossibly burdensome access to the
arbitration.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can you --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Friedman, this
contract is -- is unusual in that, as Judge Hall said,
it was more employee-friendly than most. It had a
clause -- it had a provision for back-end review with
the court. The review -- at the end of the line, there
was to be court review, and as the parties said, it
should be just like review of a district court decision,
a much -- much more focused review than would be in the
case of an arbitration agreement.
Now, that clause comes out because of our
decision in Hall. That leaves the -- the arbitration
agreement in -- in an imbalance. There was court review
assured at the back end. So why isn't it reasonable to
say the parties contemplated vigorous court review; if
it can't be had at the back end, it should be had at the
front end?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Ginsburg, there will
be court review at the end pursuant to section 10. As a
result of Hall Street, section 10 is now the exclusive
basis on the tail end --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it was very limited
review. But the parties to this agreement put in a
clause that provided for the standard review, not the
very limited review that the Arbitration Act calls for.
MR. FRIEDMAN: That's correct,
Justice Ginsburg. But by operation of law and because
of this Court's decision in Hall Street, now the parties
will receive the section 10 review, much as they would
in the First Options case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Once again, has this
argument been made here? I thought that the only basis
was unconscionability. I suppose you could have made
the argument that the contract is void because one of
its essential provisions has been rendered unlawful and,
therefore -- and is not severable, and, therefore, the
whole contract fails. I suppose you could make that
argument. That hasn't been made, has it?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Scalia, that's
absolutely correct. There has been no argument, in
fact, at no time -- and it would have -- the proper
place would have been the district court -- was any
evidence ever put into the record --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How could it be in the
district court? We didn't decide Hall Street until
after the district court was finished in this case.
MR. FRIEDMAN: But, Justice Ginsburg, at the
district court no evidence of any sort attacking any
provision. The only attacks here on the provisions are
the arguments that were made by my colleague in the
brief --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought you were
making, in answer to Justice Scalia, the question -- he
said, well, they didn't raise it. They didn't raise
that with this provision out, it was an essential
provision, so the contract was void. They had no reason
to make that in the district court because Hall Street
was not yet decided.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Ginsburg, my point
simply is they put in no evidence of any sort attacking
anything. We’re simply --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can they make it here now?
Can they make -- I mean, even if they had -- you know,
even if there was no reason to make it in the district
court, is the law --
MR. FRIEDMAN: I -- I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that since they didn't
have an opportunity to make it in the district court,
they can make it in the Supreme Court?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Scalia, they could
make that argument before the arbitrator, and the
arbitrator could make that decision. Under the clear
and unmistakable delegation, that issue, like other
issues, should be decided by the arbitrator.
Nobody is contesting -- at least certainly
nobody contested prior to us getting to the Supreme
Court -- both the district court and the Ninth Circuit
held that the language was clear and unmistakable.
There was never any contest to that issue until we got
here. And because of the clear and unmistakable language
and because the agreement does not implicate the making,
we asked the court to enforce the terms of the agreement
as written and pursuant to Bazzle and Howsam. In
particular, in Bazzle the Court recognized that issues as
to scope and issues as to validity can go to the
arbitrator in the first instance.
Here, there can be no doubt -- and certainly
there was no doubt at the district court level and Ninth
Circuit -- that the parties clearly and unmistakably gave
the arbitrator exclusive authority. And we’re asking
the Court to give effect to that language.
The -- the -- the primary purpose of the
Federal Arbitration Act is to enforce arbitration
agreements pursuant to their terms. Here, there's no
real dispute about what the terms are. Under section 4,
a limited inquiry, once we have satisfied section 4 the
court should proceed to send us to the arbitrator.
Nobody is arguing that Mr. Jackson can't
make these challenges once he gets to arbitration. In
fact, he certainly can. And the arbitrator will make
that decision. And the arbitrator may decide that it is
unconscionable, in which case he’ll set it down. Or
he may decide -- or he or she may decide that it’s not
unconscionable, or he or she may decide that certain
terms are problematic and to sever those.
At this point, if there’s no other
questions, I’d like to reserve my remaining my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Silverberg.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF IAN E. SILVERBERG
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. SILVERBERG: Thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court:
The Petitioner would have the Court adopt a
rule whereby agreements to arbitrate are presumed
enforceable before their validity has been determined by
a court under section 2 of the Federal Arbitration Act.
They would have people like Mr. Jackson waive their
right to go to court through the use of a clause
delegating this judicial function to the arbitrator.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you describe for
us what is unconscionable about this contract? What is
your claim of unconscionability? He says it's not
arbitration per se; it's just certain of the provisions
here; if you change the provisions, I'm happy with
arbitration.
Is that your position?
MR. SILVERBERG: Yes, Your Honor, that --
that what is unconscionable about this is it's unusually
one-sided in that the issues that are most important to
Mr. Jackson, such as his racial discrimination case, he
is required to arbitrate, but those issues that might be
most important to the Petitioner, such as trade secrets
and unfair competition, they are not bound to arbitrate.
So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I would have thought
the issue would be -- it's odd to say, I think, that if
you have 10 provisions, some are unconscionable and
some are not. The issue would be whether there is
unconscionability in the making of the whole contract.
In other words, it's the same question I asked your
friend: Why isn't it all or nothing? If it was -- if
there was no unconscionability in the making, then the
arbitrator decides. If there was unconscionability in
the making, then -- then the arbitrator doesn't decide
anything. Questions 1 through 10, not simply, you know,
, 8, and 9.
MR. SILVERBERG: If I understand Your
Honor's question, the -- the threshold determination
must first be made by the court under section 2 as to
whether there is unconscionability either of the entire
agreement or any of the provisions. It would then,
assuming that were found, that some provisions were in
fact unconscionable, it would be on State law to
determine whether or not the entire agreement gets
thrown out --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, my point is that
once you get past that gateway question of whether the
formation of the contract was not unconscionable, then
claims that particular provisions were unconscionable
are by definition for the arbitrator to decide.
MR. SILVERBERG: No, we would disagree with
that, and here's why, Your Honor, and I think this goes
to something that Justice Sotomayor asked, which is it
creates a very difficult rule to deal with. The
Petitioners here, one, they have made a huge concession,
we believe, in their reply brief by saying that if there’s
an illusory remedy, that that is a section of
unconscionability that the court can hear and must hear.
But all these other --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why is that -- why is
that a big concession, because I thought, as the First
Circuit said, if argument is the -- the contract is
illusory, that goes to the court, but here the only
claim is unconscionability. That's a question of
fairness. It doesn't go to the court.
MR. SILVERBERG: The -- the reason it's a
concession is because that's not their original position
and that's not the question that they presented to this
Court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But if they -- if they
made that concession, so what, under the First Circuit's
reading?
MR. SILVERBERG: The First Circuit, Your
Honor, we believe did not interpret this correctly.
They have, we believe, carved out a section of
unconscionability law at the exclusion of all other
unconscionability law.
We know that States and Federal courts have
routinely applied State unconscionability law, and they
would have a rule whereby all this jurisprudence of the
States delineating unconscionability law would in
essence be preempted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that -- is that right?
Is the arbitrator free to decide unconscionability in a
vacuum without taking into account State law at all?
And doesn't he get reviewed afterwards by the State
court on the basis of a much more lenient standard
than -- than if the court decided it de novo. But can
he really disregard State law regarding
unconscionability?
MR. SILVERBERG: Well, the problem is, Your
Honor, and if I understand Your Honor's question
correctly, that determination must of course be made by
the court, because the arbitrator doesn't have any
authority to do anything until the requirements of
section 2 are met. And I hope I’m understanding Your
Honor's question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No -- I mean, you -- I
thought you were saying that if we allow this to go to
the arbitrator, the arbitrator can simply disregard the
question of unconscionability.
MR. SILVERBERG: That -- in essence, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's not my
understanding. My understanding is that he's -- he is
obliged to take account of State law regarding
unconscionability, but it's going to be his call, as it
would be the district judge's call if this had gone to
court, whether in fact this is unconscionable.
Afterwards, there will be court review. And if he has
totally disregarded all State law regarding
unconscionability, wouldn't -- wouldn't you have a basis
to set aside the -- the arbitration?
MR. SILVERBERG: Respectfully, I -- I
disagree with that, and here's why, Your Honor: The
back-end review -- presumably it would be, I believe,
under section 10(a)(4) that he exceeded his authority.
And once the arbitrator is empanelled under the
Federal -- under section 2, once he is authorized to
make any decisions at all, including the issue that the
Petitioner would have him decide of unconscionability
and arbitrability, it would be impossible for anyone to
say he has exceeded his authority.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That doesn't mean -- does
that mean he can disregard -- let's assume the contract
is a contract to maim. I mean, it -- you know, it's --
it's like -- it's a Shylock contract, okay? He's going
to be able to exact a pound of flesh. Now, there are
State laws which invalidate contracts to maim. Do you
think that the arbitrator can ignore that, and say,
well, you know, I don't really think it's so bad; a
pound of flesh sounds reasonable to me?
MR. SILVERBERG: I think the concern is,
Your Honor, and it's hard to draw the line --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can he ignore the State
law?
MR. SILVERBERG: I think there’s no
adequate review if he chooses to without the court's
review of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that right? You don't
think a State court would in the blink of an eye set
aside an arbitration that allowed a -- a pound of flesh?
MR. SILVERBERG: Your Honor, I would hope
they would, but I -- in reading the narrow review of
section 9, 10, and 11, I don't think we have that
guarantee.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you have a
misunderstanding of the law, then, if that's what you
believe. I -- I think there’s no doubt what would
happen in that case.
JUSTICE BREYER: What is -- what I'm not sure
about what you are arguing now is my -- as I came into
this, I thought there were three situations. Situation
is common in labor arbitration. It's an arbitration
agreement that says wages, hours, and working conditions
disputes will be arbitrated, and we have a question
about whether a particular dispute is or is not full
within the definition.
MR. SILVERBERG: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: As to that one, we assume
that the parties intended the question of arbitrability
to be arbitrated; we assume it. Normally, that's the
rule. It's the scope of the arbitration agreement.
That's a little hard to distinguish, but sometimes
that's not the argument. The argument could be: Well,
there are four different provisions in the arbitration
section, and we think one of them is void because it's,
say, unconscionable, but the others are okay. Now, that
one, I mean, normally, you could if it's clear enough
say I want that one to go to arbitration.
And the third one is that you have a
contract, and it's an arbitration contract, and it's on
four separate pieces of paper, and what you’re saying
is, I was in Alaska, or the equivalent, and maybe
unconscionability is the equivalent. On that one I'm
with you.
I don't see how you can submit -- agree to
submit that to the arbitrator, because there’s no
agreement, or at least no valid one, at least no valid
one under State law.
But what are you arguing? That this is that
case or this is the other case I just mentioned, that
middle case where you have 10 provisions and you’re
saying that this one over here is unconscionable but
that one isn't; and -- but I did sign a valid
arbitration agreement. I agree with that. It's just that
certain provisions of it are invalid because they’re
unfair. What are you arguing in this case?
MR. SILVERBERG: That -- Your Honor, it
would be the second one. That there are issues --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the second one -- I
don't see how you get there, because if it's the second,
one you concede that there is an arbitration agreement
that’s valid. And if you concede that there is a valid
arbitration agreement between you and your client, and
you’re arguing over the scope of different provisions
or whether certain provisions within it are valid or
invalid, why can't you submit that to an arbitrator if
it’s clear enough?
MR. SILVERBERG: But we don't concede that,
Your Honor. That's the whole point, is that the court
must make that threshold determination.
JUSTICE BREYER: As to each provision? As
to each bit of -- why?
MR. SILVERBERG: Because that's the mandate
of section 2. The arbitrator derives his authority --
JUSTICE BREYER: But suppose you and your --
your client -- rather, your client and the other side have
absolutely agreed, clear as could be, under the
arbitration agreement: We want arbitrated too whether
the provision that these words are contained in is
unconscionable. Can't they agree to that?
MR. SILVERBERG: Your Honor, the parties are
-- don't necessarily have to take every issue to court,
but should a party challenge that issue as
unconscionable, that door should remain open.
This case is not so much -- it is about our
case here, but there’s a bigger picture here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Let me say it more
easily. We have agreement number one, four pages, and
within it is a question of -- which just looks like this
one. Agreement number two: The two parties agree that
if any dispute should arise as to whether any words in
agreement number one are unconscionable, they will go to
the arbitrator. Agreement number two is concededly
valid. Now do you want to say that agreement number
one -- those words have to be decided by the court?
MR. SILVERBERG: Your Honor, it is our
position that -- that the threshold determination as to
the validity of the contract --
JUSTICE BREYER: Right, but if you’re going
to say yes --
MR. SILVERBERG: -- would go the court.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- then I think if you’re going
to say yes to that, then it’s contrary to First Options, I think.
I'm not sure, but I don't see why not.
MR. SILVERBERG: Well, Your Honor, I think
that what Your Honor is describing is the first part of
First Options that looked -- and that's what the
Petitioner would like to rely on, is objective contract
language. But then the Court adds the entire other
section which says we don't presume that parties intend
to arbitrate certain matters and -- because we’re not
yet at that scope -- but we want clear and unmistakable
language, not just objective language in the contract.
And there's an important reason for that,
because it's impossible to draw the line. You’re
carving out certain issues of unconscionability --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: After this --
MR. SILVERBERG: -- saying both --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: After this suit was filed
and both parties are going up the steps to the court,
could the attorneys and the parties stop and say let's
arbitrate this issue of unconscionability and pick an
arbitrator? Could they do that?
MR. SILVERBERG: They -- I think the answer
there would be yes, but the door needs to be open in
case there is a challenge, Your Honor. Certainly,
nobody is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, then -- then the --
MR. SILVERBERG: -- required to go to court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Then the employee loses.
He says: Oh, you have to have an open door; this was --
this was not properly before the arbitrator.
MR. SILVERBERG: I think if Your Honor is
asking --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because, you see, if
you say yes, that they can arbitrate this, then the
question is why can't they do it when the contract's
signed?
MR. SILVERBERG: Again, Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let's assume that the
answer to my question is yes, they can put that to an
arbitrator. If that's so, how can you prevail in this
case if the agreement clearly comprehends submission of
this issue to the arbitrator?
MR. SILVERBERG: Well, we don't concede that
it clearly does that. We -- what our position is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm -- I'm asking, assume
you do?
MR. SILVERBERG: I don't think that gets us
around the requirements of section 2, Your Honor, that
says the court and the doors to the court must always
remain open for that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your --
MR. SILVERBERG: I hope I’m understanding your
question.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Silverberg, the
section 2 on which you place much emphasis just says
that agreements are enforceable save on such grounds as
exist in law or equity for revocation of a contract.
But the section 2 doesn't say any -- anything about who
decides that question.
MR. SILVERBERG: That's true, Your Honor,
the -- but the logical reading of that statute would
indicate that these three elements -- a writing, in
interstate commerce, and not revocable at law and
equity -- would have to be met before the arbitrator has
any authority to do anything.
And as Your Honor mentioned in the -- in the
Doctor's Associates case, there are certain issues that
are certainly involved, and unconscionability is one of
those issues that can be presented to the court without
violating section 2, as well as fraud and duress, I
believe, were the other ones that the Court had -- had
delineated in that case.
JUSTICE BREYER: I read your -- I promise
you I’ll go back to First Options, which I thought was
of gem-like clarity --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: And I am apparently the
only one in the world --
MR. SILVERBERG: That's because it was well
argued.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- the only one in the
world who thinks that. And I’ll go back to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You wrote that, didn't you?
Didn't you write that opinion?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: I’ll go back to that and
look at it. But the -- the --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Looking at your response to
their motion to arbitrate --
MR. SILVERBERG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- it seemed to me you
said here that -- that because of your -- your position,
your client's position, that the whole thing is
unconscionable. You didn't say that?
MR. SILVERBERG: Well, we said that -- it
was certainly my position that the entire agreement was
unconscionable based on Nevada law --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. SILVERBERG: And that it was so
incredibly one-sided, and also the limited discovery
provisions, and also because, frankly, we are not
looking to treat this anything other than like we would
ordinary contract law that also strikes one-sided
provisions in -- for example, in Nevada, the Fick case,
which would strike down a one-sided prenuptial
agreement, or lease agreements that have one-sided
attorney fee provisions are routinely struck down as
one-sided. So their position --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But which is the stronger
case for arbitration? Case one, you attack the
arbitration clause only, part of the arbitration
contract only, as being unconscionable. Case two, you
attack the whole agreement as being unconscionable. Do
those both stand on the same footing, or is one a
stronger case for submission to the court than the
other?
MR. SILVERBERG: I think this Court has made
clear in the severability cases that challenges to the
contract as a whole would go to the arbitrator to
decide. We have here, as Petitioner admits to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I find that somewhat
paradoxical, but I -- I agree that that -- that that's
the law.
MR. SILVERBERG: So the stronger one would
be an -- as this case, which we believe is very
strong, an attack --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So if you do go to the
State court, suppose the State court says: I can't
really decide this question about the one clause unless
I determine the conscionability or the unconscionability
of the entire contract, and I now proceed to do that.
Do you have to wait and say: Stop, you
can't do that?
MR. SILVERBERG: I think that’s what
sections 3 and 4 contemplate, is for -- and they have
been in existence since the passage of the Act -- for
parties to come in and make their case as to whether or
not the FAA would apply or not apply.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But suppose the State
court judge says that he has to look at the whole
contract. Do you say: Oh, I'm sorry to bother you; we
have to go back to the arbitrator now?
MR. SILVERBERG: That's not the situation in
this case, but assuming it were --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What's your -- no, it's a
hypothetical case.
MR. SILVERBERG: I understand.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What would your position
be in the hypothetical case, representing your client?
MR. SILVERBERG: Representing my client, who
is Mr. Jackson, I would want the court to look at the
whole thing, but if I were in the Petitioner's shoes I
think I would have an argument that, based on this
Court's precedent --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And what do you think the
judge should decide as between those two possibilities?
MR. SILVERBERG: If it's an attack on the
contract as a whole, it should go to the arbitrator. I
think that's clear from many of the Court's cases;
whereas, if the attack is to the arbitration clause
itself, that is something for the court to decide and
determine.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I think I heard
Justice Kennedy's question to be -- let's not confuse
the contract as a whole. There’s only one contract
here.
MR. SILVERBERG: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's an agreement to
arbitrate.
MR. SILVERBERG: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So an attack on the --
as I think Justice Breyer noted, you -- an argument that
it's one-sided goes to the entire arbitration agreement.
I don't want to arbitrate because that's not what I
chose to do freely. Correct?
MR. SILVERBERG: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That, you say, is for
the court.
MR. SILVERBERG: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The difference here is
that there are provisions within how the arbitration is
going to be held that, standing alone, you think are
unconscionable, even though the agreement to arbitrate
is not. Am I correct in understanding your allegation?
MR. SILVERBERG: No, Your Honor.
Respectfully, it’s our position that both are present.
There are certain elements of the arbitration agreement
that are unconscionable and, under Nevada law, which
would render the entire arbitration agreement
unconscionable.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You see, that's what I'm
confused by, because when I first asked you this
question, you said: I would be happy to arbitrate if
the court struck the discovery provision and, I guess,
the fees provision. Which answer are you giving me?
MR. SILVERBERG: I’m giving you the one I
just gave you, I think, Your Honor, which is we’ve got
both certain provisions that are unconscionable, that
under Nevada law render the entire agreement
unconscionable --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay. Let’s assume --
MR. SILVERBERG: -- and that's what the Court
is to rely on.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay. That -- now I
understand that part of your argument. But let's assume
that that wasn't Nevada law, that Nevada law would say
severability works, and there is an agreement to arbitrate,
and all we have to or could do is strike the unfair provisions.
Let's assume that situation. Who decides
whether to strike the unfair provisions?
MR. SILVERBERG: That would be the court
under our position, Your Honor, and that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, that can't be
right. The -- how can you say there's no problem
agreeing to arbitrate, no imbalance in bargaining
authority whatever, but then say, oh, but these
procedures are unconscionable?
It seems to me that the procedures are
there, and the party, the employee, whatever, can look
at those. And if he says, well, that's unconscionable,
you don't sign the agreement as a whole. But once you
are -- in for a penny, in for a pound. If you agree to
arbitrate, then it's at least for the arbitrator to
decide particular provisions, whether they’re
unconscionable.
MR. SILVERBERG: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I know you’re
arguing in the alternative. But the one argument that
we get to pick out the provisions we don't like and say
those are unconscionable, but the agreement as a whole
is not -- that seems to me illogical.
MR. SILVERBERG: Your Honor, that is our
position. I hope I am understanding your question. But
this is a matter of State law as to which provisions
would render the entire agreement unconscionable. And I
think that body of unconscionability law is not so
varied that we would have unwieldy results. I think
State --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it's a matter
-- it may be a matter of State law, but the open
question is who gets to decide it.
MR. SILVERBERG: Right, and our --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Arbitrators decide
matters of State law all the time.
MR. SILVERBERG: Certainly, they do.
Certainly, they do. But before they have that authority
to even do that, the requirements, again, of section 2
have to be met. And that is our position in this
matter. That’s --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's assume Nevada law
says you cannot -- you cannot fire somebody for coming
in late to work any fewer than 10 times, all right?
And an individual is fired. He goes to arbitration, or
at least the company tries to take him to arbitration on
it. And he says, no, because I was fired in violation
of Nevada law.
Now, is it your position that that -- that
that case would have to go immediately to court and
could not submit to the arbitrator the issue of whether
indeed he was fired for coming less than 10 times, and
indeed whether if he was coming in less than 10 times,
that would be an invalid basis for a dismissal?
MR. SILVERBERG: No, Your Honor, and here's
why: I think Your Honor has described a situation
similar to -- I believe that was the Green Tree
situation, where there was an allegation that the entire
contract was illegal, the usurious contract. But there
was no question as to the making of the agreement to
arbitrate.
So, in Your Honor's hypothetical, if there is
no dispute as to the arbitration agreement being subject
to a ground of revocation at law or at equity as
defined in section 2, then I would -- I would concede
that that was something that would go to the arbitrator,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, your -- your position
seems to be that unconscionability is the same as
coercion in the making of the agreement. And I don't
know that that's true.
MR. SILVERBERG: Well, Your Honor,
respectfully, in Doctor's Associates, I think the Court
spoke very clearly that fraud, duress, and
unconscionability are there and are part of something
that can be raised under section 2. And also the
Court's hold in Prima Paint --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, I don't care what we --
MR. SILVERBERG: -- where fraud --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don’t care what we said in
dictum. It doesn't seem to me that unconscionability is
the same as duress or the same as fraud --
MR. SILVERBERG: To -- oh, I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that you can -- you can
be a stupid person who voluntarily signs an unconscionable
contract. Now, the courts may protect you because you’re
stupid, but you haven't been coerced. Is there no
distinction between unconscionability and coercion?
MR. SILVERBERG: Not under section 2, Your
Honor. I think the -- the definition that the
Petitioner would have this Court adopt, that narrow view
of making -- again, something Justice Sotomayor
brought up -- would create a rule where certain
unconscionability challenges went to the court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that?
MR. SILVERBERG: -- and other
unconscionability challenges didn't go to the court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is that? I would say
all unconscionability challenges, if you have an agreement
that’s as clear as this one, would go to the arbitrator.
Which ones would have to go to the court?
MR. SILVERBERG: All of them should go to
the court, Your Honor, based on this Court's holding
both in Doctor's Associates and Prima Paint, in that
both fraud in the inducement, like in Prima Paint, and
unconscionability envision a situation where you’ve
got a formed contract that people can choose to opt out
of. I may be subject to a contract that was induced by
fraud, but I may like the benefit of that bargain. So I
may be able to go ahead with that.
And same with an unconscionability challenge.
We’ve got an agreement that was made that -- that the
innocent party can decide to opt out of. And I think
that’s very consistent with this Court's holding and
with what the various State courts have been doing in
reliance on those holdings.
JUSTICE BREYER: But not every contract. I
mean, I’ll take that argument. I’d like to know
about that argument. I’d like to know what really
is the underlying, which I’ve never looked up.
What is the underlying rationale in contract
law of setting aside contracts as unconscionable? Why
do courts do it? What's the theory? I’d like to
know that.
MR. SILVERBERG: My understanding is that
it's so unfair that it couldn't really be said that a
party assented to -- to that. And I think that's what --
JUSTICE BREYER: See, that's what I wonder,
that last part -- is it that the basic theory is we want to
protect a group of people by -- who voluntarily entered
into contracts by giving them the right to opt out, or is
is that we don't think that they really meant to do it?
MR. SILVERBERG: It's the latter, Your
Honor. I think if they really chose to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. On that
question, or any other question, is, I would imagine,
where we have agreement one, and the argument is maybe
agreement one was unconscionable. And then we enter
into agreement two, and the parties in agreement two
agree to -- to arbitrate their unconscionability dispute
in agreement one, and there’s nothing wrong with
agreement two, I would think that's then the question of
unconscionability is for the arbitrator.
MR. SILVERBERG: If I understand your
question --
JUSTICE BREYER: You said "all," and I just
don't think you meant all. But maybe you did. That's
why I asked the question.
MR. SILVERBERG: I -- I think that the safe
thing to do is to keep the door open to people,
especially in situations like this, where there is such
unequal bargaining power, where people are presented
with a nonnegotiable term of their employment --
JUSTICE STEVENS: May I ask this kind of
elementary question?
MR. SILVERBERG: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE STEVENS: Are there cases out there
that hold that an agreement can be partially
unconscionable, that it’s unconscionable for some
clauses but not in its -- in its entirety?
MR. SILVERBERG: Certainly. And I think
that would be matter of State law, again, to determine
when there --
JUSTICE STEVENS: But there are cases
that -- that draw that distinction?
MR. SILVERBERG: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE STEVENS: There are cases drawing
that very elementary distinction?
MR. SILVERBERG: I believe so, Your Honor.
I think in Nevada you would -- if we had maybe just one
unconscionable clause, that the court might sever and
send the rest to the -- and validate the rest of the
arbitration agreement. But then when -- certain -- any
number of clauses, depending on State law, would make
the entire agreement to arbitrate unconscionable.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does it make a
difference in response to Justice Stevens's hypothetical
that there is a provision saying the arbitrator will
decide the conscionability of all clauses? The
arbitrator may decide that clauses 2 and 8 are
unconscionable, but if there’s an agreement and it's
not unconscionable that the arbitrator will decide, then
the arbitrator decides all of them, right?
MR. SILVERBERG: If the agreement -- I think
I understand your question. If the agreement to
arbitrate itself is not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. SILVERBERG: -- there’s no
unconscionability challenge to that, and there’s no
other fraud in the inducement or any other thing that
the court has mentioned it would go to the broader view
of making the grounds for revocation, if those grounds
for revocation are not present, then I believe the
arbitrator would be empowered to make those decisions,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can I ask you just a
follow-up on Justice Breyer's hypothetical to you where
he had the first agreement and then the issue to the
second? You said you’ve got to leave the door open.
The door open on the second agreement or on the first
agreement?
MR. SILVERBERG: I think the door should be
open on all the agreements, because until that door is
open under section 2 -- as long as that door is open
under section 2, then we don't have the concern about
parties making the terms of arbitration so onerous or
burdensome that they would not be able to even access the
arbitral forum. And that's really a huge concern in --
in not just in this case, but in the bigger picture.
Courts must remain open to protect people.
I would venture to say that there are many
people in this room who are subject to arbitration
agreements, and they don't even know, through --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Silverberg --
MR. SILVERBERG: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBERG: -- on that, underlying
your whole case I think is the notion that this is an
adhesion contract; it's a take-it-or-leave-it contract,
very common in consumer, credit card agreements, in
employment contracts, that one party has no say except
to sign or not to sign. Are all those contracts subject
to the unconscionability argument that you’re making or
only some of them? And if only some, which ones?
MR. SILVERBERG: I would suggest, Your
Honor, that they all are subject to that. And then we
look to State law to determine, whether, for example, in
Nevada if you’ve great procedural unconscionability
they have the sliding scale approach based on the D.R.
Horton case, which we have briefed, where you would
require less of a showing of substantive
unconscionability.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not much use signing an
arbitration agreement then, not much use for the employer.
He’s going to end up in court anyway. Every one of them
will be acknowledge as unconscionable. So what’s the
use?
MR. SILVERBERG: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, kiss good-bye to
arbitration.
MR. SILVERBERG: Not at all, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No?
MR. SILVERBERG: That door's been open under
section 3 and 4 since the inception of the Act. We are
advocating the status quo be maintained here, Your Honor,
and there is no reason to suggest that there will be some
rush to court on this. Courts are quite capable to do this
in a summary fashion.
If a party comes before the court with a
baseless unconscionability challenge, I would imagine
not only will the court dispose of it quickly, but if an
attorney makes a routine practice of bringing baseless
motions to the court, he’ll have his own issues to
deal with. So, I don't -- I -- I disagree that there
will be some floodgates or that this will in any way --
to the contrary --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The amici certainly claim
the contrary. The Chamber of Commerce claims that this
is what’s happening and that it has been a snowballing
effect.
MR. SILVERBERG: We disagree with them and
Your Honor, and I would cite that we have some of the
most prestigious arbitrators in this country that have
joined our position and recognized the courts' vital role
in maintaining the fairness of the arbitration process
so the public can trust it and so the weaker parties to
these agreements can be protected, because should that
disappear, there will be nothing to stop stronger
parties from again sending Mr. Jackson, who lives in
Reno, to Minnesota to arbitrate his claim.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, this --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This clause is not of that
kind, and you’ve singled out three things that made it
unconscionable. One, the fee provision, the splitting
fees, that the court rejected. So the only two left is
the one-sided aspect of it and the limited discovery.
It seemed to me that the limited discovery
clause, that that was quite common to say we’re not --
we don't want to get involved in the massive discovery
you can get in a -- in a civil proceeding. Is there
something unusual about limiting discovery to documents?
MR. SILVERBERG: There -- there is something
unusual. They’ve gone well beyond the AAA and limited
discovery to one deposition and one expert, which in an
employment case is very difficult.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Friedman, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT T. FRIEDMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FRIEDMAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I’m hearing terms like "safe thing to do."
And in response to -- I think it was a question from
Justice Scalia, I’m hearing my colleague state that
there is concern that the arbitrator is not going to
apply State law.
This is merely distrust of arbitrators.
This Court has rejected this bias that arbitrators cannot
make these decisions. And, in fact, this Court and many
others have sent very, very complicated issues to the
arbitrator to decide. There is no reason to believe that
an arbitrator, as well as a judge, cannot decide State
law issues of unconscionability, and the arbitrator will
have the discretion and the ability to either strike the
entire arbitration agreement or strike certain clauses
as he or she sees fit.
Furthermore, this type of speculation, this
fear as to what the arbitrator may do, that was rejected
in this Court's decisions in Vimar and PacifiCare, where
the Court stated we are going to enforce this, and the
arbitrator may do something wrong, may do something
right, but at the tail end there will be an ability
under section 10 to address it. There is no difference
there.
Additionally, this -- this analysis of
unconscionability -- I want to reiterate
unconscionability is based on a policy decision that --
that attacks an agreement that unquestionably has
already been made.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. What is the
one-sentence answer, one sentence, to the thing, this is
a very interesting case, lots of stuff in it that we
needn't reach because irrespective of everything else,
they in their reply, the district court, and the court
of appeals all said these whole four pages, the whole
four pages were unconscionable, so none of it’s
enforceable, and all we have to decide is whether that's
an issue for the court. And the answer to that
being not an issue for the court is what, in a sentence or
two?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Justice Breyer, I'm sorry.
I’m going to ask you to --
JUSTICE BREYER: They said, look, there’s a
four-page document. They said this four-page document
is unconscionable, the product of unconscionability, and,
therefore, don't enforce it. That's their claim. That
issue is at least is for the court, because there is no
valid agreement here at all, if that's right.
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, Justice Breyer, the
determination of unconscionability is for the
arbitrator. The -- the limited role of the court goes
only to the making, not to the issue of
unconscionability. So the court --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The problem -- I -- I
keep going back to my initial question to you, is you
want to parse out what making is from unconscionability,
and you want us to say, well, if it's too onerous a fee
for arbitration, that goes to the making, because you’re
depriving the party of -- of an arbitration forum.
If it's discovery, that doesn't go to depriving them
of anything because the arbitrator could give them more
discovery if he or she chose. Am I correct, this is
your argument?
MR. FRIEDMAN: No, Justice Sotomayor, our
argument about the onerous fee -- and it would have to
be evidence put in by the party opposing counsel -- by
the party opposing arbitration, that there was an actual
barrier, an impossibly burdensome barrier. So it does not
come under making; it would be under a -- a Randolph
standard or under a First Options standard.
There’s two areas that we agree are for the
court. One is to determine whether or not there’s an
issue with the making of the agreement. The other one,
if it's challenged, is to determine whether or not there
is indeed access to arbitration.
The First Circuit in Awuah applied this test
very neatly in a very reasonable manner and applied both
First Options and Randolph, harmonized those cases, and
made a determination that unconscionability is for the
arbitrator based on a clear and unmistakable delegation.
But issues as to whether or not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If there’s no access to
arbitration, there’s no way that you can leave that
issue to the arbitrator, is there?
MR. FRIEDMAN: Exactly, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Because you never get to
the arbitrator.
MR. FRIEDMAN: Exactly, Justice Scalia. It
fails the First Options test. There can't be an ability
under First Options for the arbitrator to make a
decision if there’s no access to the arbitrator. So
those are the two tests. In -- in this case, what I
think I’m hearing is my colleague is saying that the
arbitrator can decide nothing; the arbitrator should
decide nothing, notwithstanding this Court's regular
holdings sending very, very complicated matters to the
arbitrator. In this case, the arbitrator can absolutely
decide these issues of unconscionability as well as a
judge can.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Friedman, Mr. Silverberg.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
