IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MONSANTO COMPANY, ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 09-475
v. :
GEERTSON SEED FARMS, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 27, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:09 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioners.
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for Federal
Respondents, supporting Petitioners.
LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MALCOLM L. STEWART, ESQ.
For Federal Respondents,
supporting the Petitioners 14
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
GREGORY G. GARRE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:09 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We’ll hear
argument this morning in Case 09-475, Monsanto
Company v. Geertson Seed Farms, et al.
Mr. Garre.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY G. GARRE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Biotech crops have produced enormous
benefits for the nation's farmers and consumers. The
district court in this case issued a broad-based
injunction against the planting of a highly beneficial,
genetically engineered alfalfa crop. In entering and
sustaining that injunction, the courts below erred in
two fundamental respects.
First, they short-circuited the requisite
inquiry into the likelihood of reparable -- irreparable
harm, because they reasoned that the agency was going to
get into this anyway in the course of preparing its
environmental impact statement. And --
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Garre, the Respondents
argue that we should dismiss the writ here as
improvidently granted, and I wonder if you could explain
why that isn't the preferred course of conduct. They
contend that when this was before the Ninth Circuit,
your firm could have but did not contest the -- the
vacatur of the APHIS deregulation order. It’s argued
that an environmental impact statement is likely to be
issued very soon, or fairly soon. Maybe the Solicitor
General could give us an estimate.
If we agree with your argument that the
Ninth Circuit applied the wrong preliminary injunction
standard and remand for them to apply the right
preliminary injunction standard, the case may be moot by
the time they do that. And the alternative is for us to
plow into the extremely fact-bound question whether
applying what you contend to be the correct preliminary
injunction standard of relief would be warranted on this
record.
In light of all that, why shouldn't we take
their suggestion?
MR. GARRE: The Court shouldn't, Justice
Alito. First as to the vacatur, we appealed the
judgment that contains the vacatur and the injunction.
And our notice of appeal, which is on page 59 and 61 of
the excerpts of record in the Ninth Circuit, makes clear
that we explicitly appealed the vacatur as well.
And let me explain that a little bit more,
but first I want to say as to the environmental impact
statement, the government can address that more, but my
understanding is that we’re probably about a year away
from the environmental impact statement. This case
presents important legal issues concerning the entry of
injunctive relief.
We think the Court properly granted
certiorari and should decide those issues. We think
that, although the record is large, that this Court can
decide, as it did in Winter, that as a matter of law
this record does not support a finding of irreparable
harm.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But Winter didn't involve
something -- as I understand, the -- the decision
vacated the deregulation order. You are not challenging
that. Well, it seems to me if there’s no deregulation
decision in place, then we’re back to the Plant
Protection Act, and there’s no authorization for the
planting of these crops. So as long as you haven't
challenged the vacation of the deregulation decision, I
don't see how there's anything for us to deal with.
MR. GARRE: We did appeal the vacatur as
well as the injunction which is contained as part of the
same judgment. We know that the district --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: However, you haven't in
your brief. Didn't you say you weren't challenging the
vacating order? You keep saying -- I know you appealed
it originally, but the point is that you didn't seek
certiorari on that ground.
MR. GARRE: Well, we -- our argument all
along, Justice Sotomayor has been that the court, the
district court, erred in not adopting the government's
proposed judgment. If you look on page 184 of the
petition appendix, that proposed judgment makes clear
that it’s intended to replace the district court's
judgment, including the vacatur. So all along the whole
argument about --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You agree that those
are two different things, then, right? The vacatur is
one thing and the injunction is another, right?
MR. GARRE: They are part and parcel of the
same judgment. It's true, a vacatur is different than
an injunction. But here --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And under the
vacatur, the normal APA remedy is a remand to the agency.
In fact, there are some courts that say you can't get
anything else. But whether you can or can't, it's clear
that the burden is on you to get something short of
complete remand. The burden is on your friends to
get -- establish the injunction.
The problem with combining the two, it seems
to me, is that you are imposing on them the burden to
meet the injunction standard simply to get a remand to
which they are entitled under the APA.
MR. GARRE: Well, the district court could
have vacated the order in its entirety and send it back
to the agency. It didn't do that. It not only went
ahead and enjoined the planting of RRA, Roundup Ready
alfalfa, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the vacatur does
that. You can't plant once the deregulation order is
vacated.
MR. GARRE: The vacatur was in part. We
know that because the district court's judgment allowed
the continued planting and harvesting of Roundup Ready
alfalfa, the planting before 2007. But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you would say
that the injunction is limited only to a decision the
agency might make to allow partial planting?
MR. GARRE: Well -- and importantly, the district
court's judgment -- and it's on page 108 of the petition
appendix --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. GARRE: -- not only enjoined the planting
of Roundup Ready alfalfa, it enjoined the agency from taking
interim measures. It --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. GARRE: We --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. Why
did it do that? I mean, the way the APA works, this is
sent back to the agency. If the agency wants to
partially deregulate, it can do it. And then you can
challenge it under the normal APA procedures.
MR. GARRE: And that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's very odd to get
an injunction to an agency telling them they can't do
something under the APA.
MR. GARRE: Well, I'm not going to disagree
with you on that. It is important that they enjoined
the agency from implementing the very proposed measures
that we’re now finding -- fighting --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I’m looking at --
MR. GARRE: -- in the context of an
injunction.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I'm looking at page 58a.
Maybe that -- you referred to what as the district
court's --
MR. GARRE: 108a. It's 108a of the petition
appendix.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because I thought that
the only purpose of this injunctive provision was to
spare the people who had already purchased seeds,
allowing those to be planted until March 30, 2007.
MR. GARRE: Planting was allowed until
March 30, 2007, and then that alfalfa could be continued
to be harvested; seeds would be harvested and maintained
separately.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And is it your position that
that gives you the hook, the entry point, for saying,
well, now the district judge didn't just replicate in
all respects the universe without the regulation; it had
some specific injunctive relief, and it didn't go far
enough? That’s --
MR. GARRE: Absolutely. That in combination
with the fact that it actually enjoined the agency from
what it could have done, otherwise done, under --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But whose --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What authority do
you have for the proposition that when a court vacates
an administrative order, it has the authority to tailor
an injunction rather than simply remand the matter to
the agency?
MR. GARRE: Well, I think this Court's
decision in Weinberger involved at least an analogous
situation, where the court found a statutory violation
of the Clean Water Act. It doesn't involve the vacatur
of a decision, but the court then went on to add an
injunction on top of that. So you had the statutory
violation that arguably prohibited the conduct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess --
Weinberger, of course, involved a statute. I mean, the
concern is that the authority to determine how far to go
in deregulating or partial deregulating is for the
agency to make. And once there has been a violation of
the APA, it goes back to the agency. What the district
court did here was assume that responsibility itself.
MR. GARRE: And we at the outset at the
district court stage, if the -- if the district court had
done that, that would have been fine. It could have gone
back. The agency could have adopted the very proposed
measures that we’re now talking about in the context of
an injunction. The district court did not do that. It
entered the injunction not only as to the sale of RRA,
but as to the agency taking --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, then --
MR. GARRE: -- those interim steps.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Garre, I'm looking at
the injunction, and it says that the deregulation decision
is vacated and Roundup Ready alfalfa is once again a
regulated article. We could simply say as far as it goes,
that's all right; anything else is surplusage. We take it
to be the judgment that Roundup Ready alfalfa is once again
a regulated article, period.
MR. GARRE: And we know the district court
didn't mean that literally, because its own judgment
allows the continued planting and harvesting of RRA
planted before --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, but I thought --
MR. GARRE: -- March 2007.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that was just a
dispensation to people who had already bought the seeds.
That was recognizing that they had incurred an expense,
that they were all ready to plant. That -- that was the
only exception. It goes back to the status of a regulated
article with this one exception.
MR. GARRE: Well, if it's a regulated
article, then there's no use of it allowed at all unless
the agency is granting exceptions. So the district
court's grant of that exception was an exercise of
its equitable authority in the context of considering
Respondents' injunction.
Respondents have litigated this all along as
though the injunction provided something in addition to
the vacatur, and this Court's cases establish that the
injunction is an extraordinary and drastic remedy that
does. It allows people to go into court to enforce it.
It provides an opportunity for contempt sanctions.
If I could just -- if I could address the
issue of irreparable harm, there are two key things the
Court -- we hope the Court will understand in
adjudicating the question of irreparable harm.
First is you need to separate out hay
production and seed production. There’s absolutely no
evidence in this record whatsoever of any
cross-pollination from RRA hay fields to another hay
field. So the district court's injunction applies
broad-based to hay production and seed production. But
at a minimum, we think you have to take seed production
out.
The next thing is that, when it comes to the
risk of harm --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Hay production out.
MR. GARRE: When alfalfa is grown for hay, for
forage, as opposed to grown for seeds which can then be
planted.
The next thing to know is what we're talking
about here is the risk that -- and Roundup Ready alfalfa
will appear in a conventional or organic alfalfa field.
We're not talking about transforming a single alfalfa
plant in the country. It's the risk that an existing
alfalfa plant will produce a seed, which will then
produce another alfalfa plant which would be a Roundup
Ready alfalfa plant. So not a single alfalfa plant
in this country is going to be harmed by the addition of
Roundup Ready alfalfa.
The district court found, on page 43 of the
petition appendix, that Roundup Ready alfalfa provides no
harm the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me what's
the legal error? You started by identifying the first
one, which was short-circuiting the irreparable harm.
This seems more like factual correction which you're
getting into. Put it into a legal box for me. What are
your legal claims?
MR. GARRE: Sure. There’s three legal
arguments we have, Justice Sotomayor. The first is the
district court short-circuited the whole analysis by
assuming up front that, since this was going to go to
environmental impact statement, it didn't have to
seriously get into the likelihood of irreparable harm.
And we think that that’s clear error under this Court's
Amoco decision. And, in fact, if you look at --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would you explain,
Mr. Garre, why that's so, because I thought that the
Federal law is before the agency engages in an action
that requires an EIS, it has to do the EIS? So this
unit of the Department of Agriculture violated Federal
law by deregulating prior to the completion of an EIS.
MR. GARRE: Federal law and the regulation
at 40 C.F.R. 1506.1(a) allows action to go forward where
there’s not an adverse environmental impact. The
agency has explained in great detail in declarations
that allowing the very limited use of RRA under the
restricted conditions of the proposed injunctions would
not result in any environmental impact.
If I could reserve the remainder of my time
for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Garre.
Mr. Stewart.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MALCOLM L. STEWART,
ON BEHALF OF THE FEDERAL RESPONDENTS,
SUPPORTING PETITIONERS
MR. STEWART: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I’d like first to address briefly
Justice Alito's question about the length of time that
the agency anticipates the EIS will take. The agency
now anticipates that its best estimate is that the EIS
will be ready approximately a year from now. A draft
EIS has been submitted for public comment. The public
comment period was extended until early March of 2010.
The agency has received on the order of 145,000 public
comments.
And, so, in addition to parsing through
those and seeing which of them need to be responded to,
the agency wants to consult with other Federal agencies.
And, so this process is going to take longer than APHIS
had anticipated at the outset.
Now, we said in our brief in opposition that
the fact that the EIS process was ongoing was a reason
for this Court to deny certiorari. I think regardless
of how good an argument that was at the cert stage, the
Court has granted cert, and we think that the Court
should decide the case. There’s no realistic prospect
that the case will become moot before this Court's
decision is rendered.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you go to the
second part of Justice Alito's question, which was the
issue of standing, both yours and the Petitioners’.
What is it exactly that we’re being asked to review?
Obviously, you’re going ahead with the EIS. You
haven't sought a stay of that.
MR. STEWART: That's correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So what's the
basis of the challenge to the injunction?
MR. STEWART: When the district court issued
its summary judgment ruling, it asked the parties to
propose their own forms of a judgment. And APHIS might
have done what the Chief Justice suggested ought to have
been done; that is, it might have indicated that the
court -- that either it should simply issue a
declaratory judgment or that it should vacate the
deregulation order, and the matter would have been
remanded to the agency to decide what to do next.
And if that had happened, the agency could
then have issued an administrative order that embodied
the same proposed conditions that were embodied in the
injunction. Presumably, the plaintiffs would have
challenged that, and we would have had a new lawsuit.
Now, what APHIS tried to do, in essence, was
to streamline the process by combining into one steps
that could otherwise have been taken separately. And it
proposed an injunction that said the deregulation
decision is vacated and replaced by the following
protective conditions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have the burden
to establish your entitlement to those conditions that
are short of a remand, correct?
MR. STEWART: I don't think it would have
been our burden; that is, if the -- if the order had
simply been -- the deregulation order had simply been
vacated and remanded to the agency, and the agency had
then performed the analysis that’s reflected in the
Hoffman declarations and said we are putting in place a
complete deregulation --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sure, sure.
Agencies can do that.
MR. STEWART: Agencies can do that. And it --
on review of that, it would not have been our burden to
establish that those --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, sure, because
-- but here the question is whether the court can do
that. The court is stepping into the shoes of the
agency. And I would say it's -- I mean, there's
authority that you can't do that at all, but certainly
you’d have the burden to establish that those
reliefs short of remand, that you are entitled to that.
MR. STEWART: I think in the ordinary
course, you’re absolutely correct. And in the usual
case, it's an important principle to us that the court
should not usurp the agency's role.
Here I think, in fairness to the district
court, if the court had issued the injunction we
proposed with the protective measures that were
reflected in the government's proposed judgment, the
court would not have been usurping the agency's role,
because it would have been adopting the very protective
measures that the agency identified as appropriate. So
we think that the district --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you’re
short-circuiting notice and comment or whatever else is
required, the reason we send this to an agency, because
they are expert and all that. The agency is acting
without the benefit of any input on the partial
deregulation.
MR. STEWART: Well, it is certainly acting
with the benefit of whatever information it received in
the form of public comment in its original environmental
assessment for the complete deregulation. And in
addition, the district court, in deciding whether the
agency's proposed conditions would have been appropriate
could have entertained comments from obviously the
Respondents and from anyone else who wanted to
intervene.
But to go back to Justice Sotomayor's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you have -- let's
just -- if this had -- if the order had vacated the
deregulation and sent it back to you, what would you
have -- the agency have had to do to issue temporary
regulations consistent with the ones you proposed to the
district court?
MR. STEWART: Our view is that, first, that
we would not have had to go through public notice and
comment, because, under 5 U.S.C. 553(b)(2), there is an
exception for good cause, and here the relatively
limited timeframe that we were talking about in our view
would have constituted good cause. Obviously, the
plaintiffs might have challenged that.
Now, we would have had to perform some sort
of environmental analysis to comply with our NEPA
obligations in order to feel sufficient confident --
confidence that implementation of our proposed measures
would not cause significant environmental impacts. It
wouldn't have had to be an EIS; that is, NEPA provides,
in appropriate circumstances --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can -- when you -- can
you stop right there, because I thought the law was,
government agency, before you engage on a major
activity, EIS first, and then you can have a
deregulation order?
MR. STEWART: I think that's -- it is
correct to say that, as a matter of the statute and the
regulations, an agency cannot decide to prepare an EIS on
a particular act, decision, and then implement that very
decision during the pendency of the EIS.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, that's what I
thought.
MR. STEWART: But our -- our core point here
is that what we were proposing for the interim, that is
allowing continued planting subject to various
protective measures, was fundamentally different from
the action on which the EIS was being prepared. That
is --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But as far as the court
is concerned, it's conceded that NEPA was violated, an
EIS was required. And then the district court vacates
the deregulation decision. I thought that, under the APA,
at that point, the court is obliged to say, well, the
agency engaged in conduct that was not in accord with
law, and so we send it back.
MR. STEWART: You are correct. And we are
not asserting the right to implement the deregulation
decision; that is, the decision removing all Federal
constraints from the planting and harvesting of RRA.
We’re not asserting the right to do that during the
pendency of the EIS process.
The CEQ regulations speak to this question,
and they don't say while an EIS is ongoing, no activity
related to the action for which the EIS is being
prepared may go forward. They say in the interim the
agency can't do things that will have an adverse
environmental impact or will foreclose reasonable
alternatives.
So, what the agency might have done at the
outset was say: We need to do an EIS before implementing
a complete deregulation decision. The effects of doing
that are at least potentially sufficiently great that an
EIS is being prepared. However, we feel confident that
interim planting during this limited period, subject to
these proposed protective measures, will not have
adverse environmental impact --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you -- do you
agree that when you’re talking about the elements of
the injunction that are short of remand to the agency,
that the Respondents do not have the obligation to meet
the injunction standards with respect to those? In
other words, it's part of the judgment. It's not an
injunction, and you have the burden if you want the
court to do anything other than send it back.
MR. STEWART: I hope I didn't misunderstand
the question. If you’re referring to the types of
activities that would have been prohibited even under
our proposed injunction; that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, I'm talking to
the -- about the types of activities that would be
prohibited if the court just remanded it back, vacated
it, which is everything -- you can't plant.
MR. STEWART: No, I think in order for
the -- the plaintiffs to get an injunction against
those, they would have had to meet --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I guess my point is
they don't need an injunction. The thing that’s
bothering me is you’ve got two different things, the
vacatur and the injunction. And it seems to me by melding
them together, you’re trying to impose the burden on
the plaintiffs to meet the injunction standard to get
the benefit of the vacatur.
MR. STEWART: Well, I think if this had
happened through the alternative events -- course of
events that I discussed previously; that is, if the
matter had been remanded back to the agency and the
agency had issued an administrative order that embodied
these proposed protective conditions, then the
plaintiffs would presumably have either filed a new
lawsuit or challenged this within the confines of this
suit. The burden would have been on them to show both
that those protective measures were --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you short-circuited
that. Isn't this more akin to you seeking a stay of the
vacating order?
MR. STEWART: Well, I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The district court
vacated the deregulation. No one can plant. You and
the Petitioners go into court and say to the court:
Stay that deregulation with respect to this kind of
planting. Aren't you the one seeking the stay? And if
so, isn't it your burden to show that you're entitled to
whatever it is you seek?
MR. STEWART: Well, all that the court had
decided up to the point when we submitted our proposed
judgment was that an EIS was needed before the agency
could implement complete deregulation. And I think in
this respect the case is similar to Winter; that is, in
Winter in the district court -- the district court
initially imposed six restrictive measures on the Navy,
and the Navy elected not to challenge four of them but
challenged the other two. I suppose that the Navy could
have asked for, in a sense, vacatur of its proposed
action and then announced a new action that consisted of
compliance with the four unchallenged restrictive
measures and noncompliance with the other two.
From our perspective, rather than
short-circuiting the process, as I say, we were trying
to streamline it; that is, the court could have sent it
back to us, we could have told it what protective
measures were appropriate, and then some months later we
would have been back in court to review the adequacy of
those, particularly because we thought of the -- any
injunction as being something that would stay in effect
only for the relatively limited period of time while the
EIS was being prepared.
We tried to speed up the process by telling
the court in advance these are the protective measures
we think are appropriate without the need for a remand.
And the court's fundamental error was in equating what
we had proposed with the complete deregulation that was
the subject of the lawsuit. I think that the -- the
agency's declarations explained why the protective
measures that were embodied in the government's proposed
injunction would have been fully sufficient to prevent
irreparable harm to the plaintiffs during the pendency
of the EIS.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that's the legal
error you identify?
MR. STEWART: That's the legal error we
identify. We also think that the district court did,
without quite using these words, announce a presumption
in favor of injunctive relief; that is, the district
court said, wrongly in our view, that it couldn't assess
the adequacy of the proposed protective measures because
that would duplicate the analysis that was going on in
the EIS. We think that was --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you agree -- would
you agree that if the district court had just said the
deregulating decision is vacated and Roundup Ready
alfalfa is once again a regulated article, period, that
would be okay? And you would have no basis to prevent
this from going straight back to the agency?
MR. STEWART: I think the district court
could have done that and, as I say, if -- if the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And all, it seems to me,
that the district court did do in addition to that is to
say that alfalfa seeds may be planted -- alfalfa seeds
that are -- that have already been purchased may be
planted prior to March 30, 2007.
MR. STEWART: If it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It’s the only exception.
MR. STEWART: It didn't just say that. In
its judgment, which I believe is at page 108a of the
petition appendix -- and Mr. Garre referred to this
previously -- it said in addition that the agency is
enjoined from deregulating even in part genetically
engineered alfalfa.
So the district court didn't simply vacate
the -- the deregulation order and send it back to the
agency to decide whether some interim protective
measures would be appropriate. It said the agency can't
do anything while the EIS is being prepared to allow the
planting or harvesting of RRA except to the limited
extent that the district court was authorizing with
respect to already planted alfalfa.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And in your view the
correctness of that ruling has been preserved in the
questions presented to this Court?
MR. STEWART: Yes, I think -- yes, I think
absolutely. Because the fundamental controversy both in
the court of appeals and in this Court has been not
whether an injunction should have been entered at all.
For better or for worse, I think both the Petitioners
and the government have acquiesced in the entry of some
form of injunction. The controversy has been, should
the district court have entered the government's proposed
injunction instead of the one that it actually entered?
And clearly if the proposed injunction had been entered
instead, the Petitioners would have been better off
because there would have been a continued market for
their seed to planters who wanted to grow RRA in
compliance with the proposed protective measures.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's a little
different than answering Justice Kennedy's question,
which is: Did you preserve the issue that the district
court exceeded its jurisdiction in stopping you from
further deregulation? That's a different question than
whether or not it should have granted your further
injunction which is, according to you, a further
deregulation. But it's a different question.
MR. STEWART: I'm not sure to what extent
the Petitioners or -- or the government, frankly, have
focused precisely on that particular language of the
district court's judgment. But it has certainly been
kind of the fundamental basis for our appeal to the
court of appeals and for Petitioners' appeal and
certiorari petition that what they are complaining about
was the fact that a complete injunction was put in
place, instead of an injunction that embodied the
government's proposed protective measures, and we were
focusing on the choice between two injunctions.
We didn't focus specifically on the
alternative course of action in which the matter might
have been sent back to the agency and the agency would
then have embodied those proposed protective measures in
an administrative order. But I think the issue whether
those protective measures would have been sufficient to
prevent irreparable harm to the plaintiffs has been
preserved throughout.
Just to say one more thing about the CEQ
regulations, this Court has held in the past that those
are entitled to deference, and, again, they don't preclude
all action during the pendency of the EIS.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Stewart.
Mr. Robbins.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LAWRENCE S. ROBBINS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. ROBBINS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
In our view, Petitioners lack standing to
bring this case to this Court. By failing to challenge
the lawfulness of the deregulation vacatur either in the
Ninth Circuit or in this Court, Petitioners have an
insurmountable redressability problem. They cannot get
the practical relief they seek even in the event that
this Court vacates or narrows the injunction, and that
is because the vacatur about which they said not one
single sentence in the Ninth Circuit or in their opening
brief or in their questions presented -- that is because
the vacatur, which they never have challenged, had the
unambiguous effect of reregulating RRA.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if the injunction
doesn't do anything, why are you bothering to defend it?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, we're -- we’re
defending it on the alternative ground,
Mr. Chief Justice, that we have not persuaded you on our
threshold question that there -- that there is a lack of
standing. If, for -- I mean, they've made various
arguments as to why they have standing, and I'm going to
address them in a minute. But, you know, there's always
a chance we’re going to lose on that question --
(Laughter.)
MR. ROBBINS: -- and -- and although I don't
think we ought to, we thought it would be prudent to say
something about the merits.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Robbins, can I ask you
about your clients’ standing? What individual plaintiff
here stood to be harmed by what the agency had done? Which
one of them was -- was within, what, 5 miles of any --
any field of the genetically engineered alfalfa?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, the answer is that there
are a great many plaintiffs who put in declarations,
litigated this issue, and prevailed, and there was no
appeal from it. For example, in the courtroom today,
Mr. Pat Trask from western South Dakota, a hay and -- a
conventional hay and seed farmer, who alleged, put in
proof, that he stood -- if the deregulation went forward
without any injunction, he stood to -- a risk of
cross-pollination and contamination.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What? From what? From
what? From --
MR. ROBBINS: From --
JUSTICE SCALIA: From somebody within 5
miles, 10 miles, 20 miles?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, we have to be clear,
Your Honor. What -- what -- what was enjoined was the
future proliferation of this product, where the
president of the company told the district court: If
you let us continue to "introduce," in the words of the
statute, this product, we’re already at 220,000 acres;
we will become a million acres, a fivefold increase. And
that was on the assumption that the EIS would take only
years. It's since been 3 years, and now I hear it's
going to be a fourth year.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you want the Court to
assume that somebody is going to be planting a field of
the genetically engineered alfalfa within, what, 5 miles
of --
MR. ROBBINS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- one of your named
plaintiffs?
MR. ROBBINS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The fact is there isn't a
single named plaintiff who -- who has -- has any claim
that within the utmost limits of -- of risk, he is at
risk currently.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, let me be clear. We
have organizational clients who have -- whose members --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand that. But you
have to bring in a member from that organization --
MR. ROBBINS: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- who is concretely
harmed.
MR. ROBBINS: And we've put in declarations
in the district court, multiple declarations from those
members and from Mr. Geertson, the seed -- conventional
seed farmer from Idaho, and Mr. Trask from South Dakota.
But, Your Honor, let me -- let me, without begging the
question -- I actually think -- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Am I factually correct
that the harm is that from some seed-grown alfalfa, a bee
or the wind is going to take the pollen and put it into
a conventional field?
MR. ROBBINS: That is one of the risks. But
what makes this case --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But is that -- am I
right?
MR. ROBBINS: Yes. One of the risks is
cross-pollination.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How many States grow
alfalfa to seed as opposed to letting it just grow into
hay?
MR. ROBBINS: Most of the seed production is
in the -- is in the Pacific Northwest and the West.
There's a handful of States.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that handful of
States --
MR. ROBBINS: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- is that where the
risk exists?
MR. ROBBINS: No. Oh, no, no. The risk
was demonstrated at different levels and to different
degrees both in the hay-producing States and in the
seed-producing States.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You just said the word
"different levels and different degrees," but this is an
all-size-fit injunction.
MR. ROBBINS: Yes. Because, as I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So how is that
reasonable when the risk is different depending on the
place and type of growth?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, there are different
kinds of risks. And I am happy to turn to the
irreparable harm point, Your Honor, of the proposition
that the risk must be sufficiently likely, which by the
way, does not mean more likely than not, a suggestion
made in the reply brief. No court has ever said so.
"Sufficiently likely" talks in terms of the nature of
the harm.
Here, whether you are growing hay or whether
you are growing alfalfa for seed, there is a
sufficiently likely risk not only of cross-pollination
or all the other ways that contamination happens --
through dropping seeds, through seed mixing, through
custom cutting, through missing ends of fields --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I ask you
something? Is that because your farmers -- I understood
farmers of hay had huge tracts of land. Do they rent
equipment from someone else to do it?
MR. ROBBINS: They often do. There’s
custom cutting where you can't -- you know, you don't
own the equipment. You hire a custom cutter who may be
cutting an RRA field today and your field tomorrow. And
the -- the risk -- and this is all in the record -- the
risk of a seed contaminating another seed or getting
into a hay field is easily sufficiently likely to not
constitute an abuse of discretion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you don't think the
free market would produce companies that advertise: We
only cut natural seed fields?
MR. ROBBINS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't think that
would happen? I am sure it would happen.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, the -- well, the record,
Justice Scalia, before the district court does not tell
us one way or the other, but the --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Robbins, is it -- is
it relevant to that, that in the case of other
genetically engineered crops -- sugar beets, for
example, soybeans -- that the plantings became
overwhelmingly the genetically engineered, rather than
the organic or natural?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I think it's relevant to
one of the categories of harms that we think is
cognizable for purposes of an injunction, and that is
the effect on consumer choice and producer choice to be
in a non-GMO business. And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean, in response to
Justice Scalia's point of how many now, how many at this
moment? But you projected that there would be an
enormous increase, and that was not just pulled out of
thin air. I assume it had something to do with what
happened to other crops.
MR. ROBBINS: Oh, it's -- it's -- not only,
Justice Ginsburg, is it not pulled out of thin air, we’re
taking their word for it. Their president, FGI's
president, said: We anticipate a fivefold increase from
0,000 acres to a million. And that was on the premise
that the EIS was --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just -- I'm sorry to
interrupt. Just from the seeds blowing in the wind?
MR. ROBBINS: No, from a range of
contaminating sources. It's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I am really losing you now.
I thought he was referring to the number of farmers who
would be planting and harvesting genetically engineered
alfalfa. Isn't that -- farmers who wanted to do it. He
was saying: We now have 200,000; we are going to have a
million.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, no; I'm talking about
acreage, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: All right. Acreage, whatever.
He’s talking about acreage of farmers who plant and want to
plant --
MR. ROBBINS: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- genetically engineered seed.
MR. ROBBINS: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: He’s not talking about how
many unwilling farmers are going to have infected
fields.
MR. ROBBINS: No, I -- I understand.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. ROBBINS: But the -- but the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I'm not sure
we understood.
(Laughter.)
MR. ROBBINS: But I took -- I took
Justice Ginsburg's question to be asking: What was
the -- the relevant risk that the district court had to
consider for purposes of irreparable harm? And
certainly one factor which powerfully distinguishes this
case from the Court's decision in Winter is that,
whereas the Navy had been running these exercises for
some 40 years and there was a well-developed track
record as a consequence, here this is a new technology
that was about to spread at least fivefold over 2 years.
But I -- I do want to get back to the -- to
what I think is the insurmountable problem that the --
that the Petitioners have on the issue of standing, because
I heard Mr. Garre say this morning in answer to one of the
Court's questions that the -- that the notice of appeal
recited the vacatur as part of the notice of appeal.
That is true. That is because the notice of appeal,
like most notices of appeal that lawyers file, simply
quoted the judgment.
But when you get to the papers -- the
briefs, the questions presented, the argument, the oral
argument, the questions presented in this Court, the
opening brief, there is not a single word saying that
the vacatur was wrong. And that’s important because,
as I believe the Chief Justice was adverting before, the
vacatur does not -- is not governed by the same
injunctive standards.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that -- there's
a flip side of that that is not so good for you, because
one of the things you want from the injunction is a
prohibition on the agency partially deregulating. Well,
you’re not entitled to that, because the vacatur sends
it -- should send it back to the agency and they can
decide. And if they decide to partially deregulate, you
have the APA challenges available to you.
MR. ROBBINS: I -- I think,
Mr. Chief Justice, there is some considerable force to
the point that the injunction in that respect exceeded
the scope of the vacatur. And it may be -- it may be
that they have standing only to challenge so much of the
injunction as exceeds the scope of the vacatur, but
that's not what they want. What they want is to do all
the planting that the vacatur says they may not.
And so I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your argument is
that the district court judge made a mistake in mixing
up the vacatur and the injunction?
MR. ROBBINS: I would put it slightly
differently.
(Laughter.)
MR. ROBBINS: I would say that the mistake
that was made was in not appreciating, though it was
called to his attention by the lawyers I -- by the party
I represent, that the vacatur did have this effect.
I do think that the injunction was sort of
allowed to be litigated. There were many reasons why
they litigated the injunction. We, for example, wanted
a more demanding injunction --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But isn't one of the
reasons that they litigated the injunction was that by
its terms and because of its issuance the agency on
remand could not have adopted some partial measures to
allow controlled planting?
MR. ROBBINS: Yes. That is a reason why my
clients sought the injunction. They sought -- they
sought other things in the injunction as well, but --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- no, but isn't
that -- isn't that the reason that the manufacturers,
Monsanto, contested the injunction? They said --
because once the injunction is issued, as the
government has told us today, they cannot issue some
partial regulatory scheme with -- with safeguards.
MR. ROBBINS: There is -- that’s doubtless
one reason why they litigated the injunction, but it is
not a reason, Justice Kennedy, that they have standing,
because vacating the current injunction will give them
nothing that they -- that they -- that isn't already
prohibited by the vacatur, except -- and I grant you
this -- it will allow them to go back to the agency,
seek a partial deregulation, which Mr. Stewart told --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that -- but that is
substantial. It takes time, and the district court
injunction that's now in effect prohibits that. And
they have standing to challenge that.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I'm not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Or at least that's their
argument.
MR. ROBBINS: That is their argument, but it
isn't right, and here's why: One of the standing
requirements is imminence, that it must be an actual
harm or an imminent harm. Now, here are the things that
would have to happen for that scenario to come to pass:
It would have to be remanded to the agency. Mr. Stewart
told us this morning there would have to be at least an
environmental -- an EA prepared, that may or may not
come out in favor of a partial deregulation. There
would then be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't mean to
interrupt your answer, but they’ve already done an EA
in support of total deregulation, presumably, and they
found no adverse -- presumably, that would be a fortiori
for partial.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, we don't know. I heard
Mr. Stewart, who speaks for the government, tell us that
it would require additional steps. But this Court's
imminence cases, you know, can't -- do not accommodate
this many if's.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me pretty
doggone imminent if the agency has come before the court
and said: This kind of partial deregulation ought to be
allowed, and we’re in favor of it. I mean, you are not
sending it back to an agency that’s a blank slate. You
know that the agency favors this degree of deregulation.
MR. ROBBINS: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean -- I’d -- you
know, I -- boy, I’d take a remand to the agency any
day.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I can -- I can tell you,
Your Honor, maybe the best authority I could give you on
how imminent this is, how -- whether it really meets this
Court's standings tests, here's what Petitioners said
about this exact scenario when they were in the court of
appeals: They said that the prospect of a future grant
of partial deregulation is, quote, "a hypothetical NEPA
controversy," end quote, that, quote, "rests upon
contingent future events that may not occur as
anticipated or, indeed, may not occur at all."
I take that to be the very definition of
what is not imminent for purposes of this Court's
standing cases.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could I go back to
something you said a while ago, that "likely" does not
mean more likely than not?
MR. ROBBINS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's -- I thought
that would be obvious. If I say your friends are likely
to win, that means they are more likely than you.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I -- I -- you know, I
think the -- the answer is contextual, but in this
context, "likely" for purposes of an injunction,
Mr. Chief Justice, has I think never been understood to
mean more likely than not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do you have -- I --
I was surprised that this apparently hasn't been decided
over the however many years we’ve had this standard.
Is there a case that says "likely" does not mean more
likely than not?
MR. ROBBINS: No. But there are cases -- I
mean, the issue has not been addressed by this Court one
way or the other. I would say City of Los Angeles v.
Lyons and the Amoco case both used the phrase
"sufficiently likely," and the lower courts have
understood that to mean sufficiently likely in light of
the nature of the harm.
Consider, if we were talking about the
probability of the contamination of the water supply of
New York City, would anybody suppose that the -- if the
probability were 10 percent rather than 50.9 percent,
that no one could go into court and get an injunction?
Neither the private litigants -- you know, put them to
one side. The government's own authority to obtain
injunctive relief would be critically hampered if such
an order came about, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: This isn't contamination of
the New York City water supply. It's the creation of
plants of -- of genetically engineered alfalfa which
spring up that otherwise wouldn't exist. It doesn't
even destroy the current plantings of non-genetically
engineered alfalfa. This is not the end of the world.
It really isn't.
The most it does is make it difficult for
those farmers who want to cater to the European market,
which will not accept genetically engineered alfalfa.
It makes it more difficult for them to have a field of
0 percent non-genetically engineered. But that's not
the end of the world, Mr. Robbins.
MR. ROBBINS: I don't think we bore the
burden, an end-of-the-world burden, Justice Scalia.
(Laughter.)
MR. ROBBINS: We bore the burden to show
sufficient evidence of irreparable harm such that, on an
abuse of discretion standard, it was appropriate. But
let me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you were
comparing it to New York City dying --
MR. ROBBINS: No. No, I was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- from poisoned water?
(Laughter.)
MR. ROBBINS: I -- I thought -- I -- it had
been my -- my -- it had been my purpose to simply try to
suggest that it does not make sense to adopt a “more
likely than not” standard for likelihood of success or
likelihood of irreparable harm.
But I do -- if I could come to Your Honor's
question about what the harm really is, there are three
types of harms. There is the contamination of products,
and we’ve talked about that. But there are two things
we’ve not talked about. One of them is the choice to be
in a line of business that farmers and businessmen across
this country have chosen to be in. Some of them are in
this courtroom today. They have chosen organics or
conventional farming that is GMO-free. They have chosen
to sell natural beef. And they have chosen this in a
rapidly growing, large business with dollars -- billions
of dollars at stake.
You mention, for example, Justice Scalia,
the European market. That is just the tip of the
iceberg. The Japanese will not take -- which take, by
the way, 75 percent of our alfalfa exports -- will not --
despite their formal government policy, will not take
GMO products.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Robbins, but if, as
is likely -- I think the government told us that the EIS
is about a year away, but that the EIS is going to say
deregulate --
MR. ROBBINS: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- is going to recommend
a deregulation decision. So we’re talking about the --
whatever the farmers of organic or conventional --
they’re only a year away from, so they will have to
accept that there are other planters who want to do the
genetically engineered crop.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I think history remains
to be written about what will happen in response to that
draft EIS that's a year away. We’ll see how it comes
out. But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I think you yourself
told us how it came out with other crops, that the
genetically engineered crop was very popular and took
over.
MR. ROBBINS: Yes, it's very popular, but
it's also -- you know, past is prologue. We’ve seen what
happened with genetically engineered corn. You can ask
Taco Bell --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And that's a
decision for the government to decide, APHIS, and their
lawyer, Mr. Stewart, who is in the courtroom told us
what the APHIS view is.
MR. ROBBINS: Yes. I understand.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me, could you tell
me, just to clarify one factual matter, the popularity
of corn and the other genetically engineered crops, is
that from contamination or is it just from -- from
consumer choice; i.e., that that's what farmers like
because it's easy to grow?
JUSTICE SCALIA: And what happened with corn?
You -- you -- you said -- gee, I was unaware -- I’ve
been eating corn all this time.
(Laughter.)
MR. ROBBINS: Well, there’s -- there was
the so-called --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What happened with it?
MR. ROBBINS: There was the so-called
StarLink controversy in which there was genetic
contamination of corn. There was genetic contamination
of organic soybeans and organic canola in Canada. There
was .06 percent contamination of -- of -- of rice from
genetically engineered rice that nearly -- that -- that
cost the rice industry, as the rice growers' brief makes
clear -- the amicus brief makes clear.
The fact is the judge had before him
all of this evidence, and he said it is sufficiently
likely to -- to constitute irreparable harm.
Now, Justice Ginsburg, it is correct that
the draft EIS says this is coming. So, in a year,
months, whenever it is, people may have to get ready
for a brave -- for a -- for a different world if not a
brave new world. But it's worth looking at that draft
EIS, because it is very candid about how different the
world will look.
It tells us we know this is going to shut
down the -- the export market. We know that the
Japanese and the Koreans and the Europeans won't buy your
products. We know this will hasten the consolidation of
farming. We know it will hasten the -- it will
hasten the demise of organic farming, a rapidly
developing business in this country --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All arguments you
can make before HP -- APHIS and which presumably were
made before APHIS --
MR. ROBBINS: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- and can be made
before APHIS if this is remanded.
MR. ROBBINS: Indeed --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It doesn't entitle
you to an order saying APHIS can't do anything in the
meantime.
MR. ROBBINS: I -- I agree that there is a
respect in which the injunction goes beyond the vacatur,
and I think, you know, there are arguments why the
district court took that additional measure.
But I -- I think the upshot is that if that
is the only respect that the injunction exceeds the
limit of the vacatur, I don't understand how the
Petitioners can possibly have standing to argue all the
things that they argue, which is: We want to plant
tomorrow. We want to plant the next day. We don't want
to have to go back before the agency and let them do
another EA. We don't want to have more litigation over a
partial deregulation. We want to plant now. That's
their argument before this Court.
And that is precisely what the vacatur tells
them independently they may not do, and they didn't
challenge that. They didn't and they haven't. They
didn't say a word until we brought it up in our
bottom-side brief. Then we heard about it.
And, Justice Kennedy, this is precisely the
situation that was before this Court in Renne v. -- the
California constitutional provision --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
MR. ROBBINS: -- in which Your Honor
wrote the opinion for the Court. Where there are
overlapping provisions, or for -- you know, two pieces
of law that have overlapping effect, and you challenge
one but not the other, you have a fatal redressability
problem. That's where we are today.
And I have not heard -- I mean, I understand
that the vacatur was perhaps only in part because the
judge in his discretion grandfathered certain
pre-March 30 growers -- fine. Maybe it was there for a
partial vacatur. But whatever form of the vacatur it
was, they didn't challenge it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it's kind of
artificial to separate the two out. I mean, it's one
judgment, and they say they’re intertwined. The
injunction is based on the vacatur. And so if they
challenge the injunction, you can't say, well, they’re
not challenging the vacatur.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I -- I'm not sure that
it's fair to say that the injunction is based on the
vacatur. But I do want to -- I do think, though, Mr.
Chief Justice, that every appeal is from a judgment. I
mean, that’s more or less -- excepting unusual
circumstances, that's the only thing you can appeal.
But if I were, for example, appealing a
criminal conviction, a judgment of conviction entered and
sentence, and I raised only evidentiary arguments, and I
fail to raise the sufficiency of the evidence, I -- I
can't get a dismissal in the court of appeals, because I
have -- I’ve failed to raise an issue. And it will not avail
me one whit to tell the court of appeals, well, gosh, I
appealed the judgment, and the sufficiency of the
evidence is embedded in the judgment.
No. The way we appeal things in this
country is we write sentences in our briefs about -- we
write questions presented; we present questions to this
Court. And I will say that, although all manner of
arguments have been smuggled under the tent through the
camel's nose in this case, when I look at the questions
presented in this case, you’ve got to really squint to
find even some of the arguments they have made, much
less this one, which they have not made.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but we have to
decide -- for you to prevail on that, we have to decide
that the injunction does no more than the vacatur.
MR. ROBBINS: No. I think what we -- I
think the question is whether the relief that they are
seeking is separately prohibited by the vacatur and
whether that excess, which may arguably go beyond the
vacatur, is sufficiently imminent to meet this Court's
standing cases.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So -- so the
district judge was wrong. He should have -- if you say
the injunction adds nothing to the vacatur, he should
have ended by saying it's vacated.
MR. ROBBINS: I think that was an available
option. I think the reason he didn't is that, among
other things, the -- the parties were arguing about
whether the -- the injunction should be broader than the
vacatur. And, of course, he had the authority, as the
government has told us in its brief, to decline to
vacate at all.
So it's not as if the remedy phase had no
point. It had a point. It's was all up for grabs. But
in the end he issued a judgment with multiple parts,
only a subset of which Petitioners elected to appeal.
That was their choice. But now having made that choice,
it seems to me surpassingly odd to draw this Court into
a close reading -- and this goes back to one of the
first questions of this morning, from Justice Alito --
the question about digging into this, what the district
court appropriately called the voluminous record of --
of -- of declarations and evidence. That's an --
just a -- I think a passingly -- a passing strange use
of this Court's resources, to dig into those materials,
when in point of fact --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We -- we don't necessarily
have to do that. We just have to decide whether the
lower courts did it.
MR. ROBBINS: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, if we concluded
that they didn't do it, that would -- that would be enough,
wouldn't it? We wouldn't have to do it ourselves.
MR. ROBBINS: Respectfully, Justice Scalia,
I think the only way you can say they didn't do it is
by doing it yourself; because they said they did it. You
look at pages --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They also said stuff which
suggests that they didn't do it.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I -- I won't -- and I am
not here defending every particular line in some of the
opinions, but there is no question that at 69a through
a of the petition appendix, the district court
articulated the standard four-part injunction test. The
court of appeals articulated it as well, said that the
evidence was sufficient. And, indeed, in this record,
there is sufficient evidence to warrant a finding of a
likelihood of irreparable harm, reviewable under an
abuse of discretion standard. Your --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If you're -- if you
are right that the injunction does nothing, they don't
have standing because of that, we should throw the
injunction out.
MR. ROBBINS: Well, I -- I -- I think, given
that standing is a threshold question, I don't see how
the Court could do that. I think the Court could say:
We conclude that the vacatur prohibits exactly the same
things as the Petitioners are demanding from this Court.
They didn't challenge it; they have a redressability
problem, case dismissed --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We don't have to
worry --
MR. ROBBINS: -- or dismissed as improvidently
granted.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The government doesn't
have to worry about standing, does it?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, the government -- well,
the government I think has the same vacatur problem, but
I don't think that's a burden I have to meet, because
under -- I think it's Diamond v. Charles, the -- the
standing has to be by the party that called upon this
Court's jurisdiction.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In deciding irreparable
harm, what weight if any should be given to the
proposition that there was an environmental impact
regulation violation, as opposed to just a regular suit
between, say, two farmers over a nuisance? What weight
do we give to the fact that -- let's assume -- there’s a --
a violation of the rule requiring an environmental
impact statement?
MR. ROBBINS: Well, it -- it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That is not alone a
sufficient harm to justify an injunction, is it?
MR. ROBBINS: No. And no -- no one is
claiming that an EIS violation standing alone gives
rise to an injunction, but it carries some important
weight. And if I could just answer the question
notwithstanding the red light, the answer to the
question is the fact that they violated the EIS
requirement tells us at a minimum that this was a
significant -- a major Federal program that had a
significant impact on the environment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. ROBBINS: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Garre, you have
minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY G. GARRE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. GARRE: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Justice Kennedy, to answer your question,
this Court in Amoco held that you don't give special
weight to that; that you apply the traditional equitable
factors.
Your Honors, we absolutely did challenge the
vacatur below. That's spelled out in note 1 of our
reply brief. The whole fight in this case going forward
since the district court has been over whether or not
the court erred in not adopting the government's
proposed measures. On page 184 of the petition appendix,
it makes clear that the government's opposed measures
were intended to replace the deregulation order. So the
vacatur and the proposed measures are one and the same.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I have a real problem if
the whole appeal is over whether or not the district
court should have accepted the agency's views. The
agency has told us that it has side-stepped going
through all of the regular -- all of the administrative
steps it was required to. It may not have needed to
give notice, but it needed to do some form of an EA and
get comments and do other things. And it didn't do
that.
MR. GARRE: Well, it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So how can we say that
the district court acted improperly, when it's the
government who is asking the district court to forgive
it from doing something it's legally required to do?
MR. GARRE: The district court at least
acted improperly in enjoining the agency from doing that
on remand. And if that's all the Court thinks it did
improperly --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no. My problem is I
don’t see that argument either in your brief or theirs.
MR. GARRE: Well, it's part --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I see only the argument
that it erred by not accepting something that the
government had no power to do outside of the regulatory
scheme.
MR. GARRE: It's -- our view is it's part
and parcel of the vacatur order. The district court
looked at this in the context of the injunction and
posed those traditional factors in examining the scope
of relief.
JUSTICE ALITO: How do you answer
Mr. Robbins’s --
MR. GARRE: I mean, it's important for this
Court to put aside --
JUSTICE ALITO: I'm sorry to interrupt. How
do you answer Mr. Robbins's imminence argument?
MR. GARRE: In terms of going back for the
imminence, we’re operating under this injunction which is
unlawful. It's preventing -- it's causing real harm to
the nation's farmers today. There couldn't be more
imminence in terms of the harm that we suffer because of
this erroneous injunction. With respect, it's -- it's
the farmers that are challenging this --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But wouldn't it be the
same problem for the farmers if we had only the
deregulation decision vacated? They can't do anything
until the agency then gives them permission to do
something.
MR. GARRE: If you go back, the agency
could allow those measures to be implemented and that
would solve --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that's going to take
time.
MR. GARRE: -- our problem.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I mean, it's going to take
time, and you have the EIS on track within a year. So are
you going to do this other operation in 6 months?
MR. GARRE: Not necessarily,
Justice Ginsburg, but, with respect, we’ve been
operating under this erroneous injunction for 3 years.
This Court should say it's erroneous. There are
other cases that are repeating this pattern. It's
important for the Court to correct this error.
And briefly on the question of harm: There
are no instances in this record of any cross-pollination
with hay, only a couple of -- a few isolated with
respect to seed, and their harm really boils down to the
question of their psychological objection to genetically
engineered alfalfa. That harm is not cognizable under
Metropolitan Edison or anything else.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:11 a.m., the case in the
