IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
HARRY F. CONNICK, DISTRICT
ATTORNEY, ET AL.,
Petitioners
v. : No. 09-571
JOHN THOMPSON :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 6, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
STUART K. DUNCAN, ESQ., Appellate Chief, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana; on behalf of Petitioners.
J. GORDON COONEY, JR., ESQ., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
on behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
STUART K. DUNCAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
J. GORDON COONEY, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
STUART K. DUNCAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 09-571, Connick v. Thompson.
Mr. Duncan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STUART K. DUNCAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. DUNCAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case asks when a district attorney's
office may be liable under section 1983 for inadequately
training prosecutors. The Petitioner, Orleans Parish
District Attorney's Office, was found liable for the
terrible injuries caused to Mr. Thompson by a Brady
violation on the theory the office was deliberately
indifferent to Brady training, this despite the fact
that there was proved no pattern of previous misconduct
by office prosecutors.
The district court exempted this case from
the ordinary pattern requirement by making a flawed
analogy to a hypothetical in this Court's City of Canton
opinion. There, the Court suggested that a city may be
liable, absent a pattern, if it fails to inform police
officers of the basic constitutional standard for deadly
force.
Extending that hypothetical to this case was
error. It misunderstood Canton's distinction between
single-incident and pattern liability, nullifying
Canton's stringent standards of fault and causation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Isn't this something in
between? Because in Canton, the hypothetical was one
rookie police officer. Here, it wasn't one rogue
prosecutor. There were four prosecutors who knew of
this blood evidence, and there were multiple
opportunities for them to disclose it, but four of them
apparently thought it was okay under Brady to keep this
quiet.
Now, if we were just talking about -- what
was his name, Deegan? -- it would be a different case.
But we have the three other prosecutors. And so I think
it's questionable to characterize this as a single
incident.
MR. DUNCAN: I understand your question,
Justice Ginsburg. Our argument does not turn on whether
it was one or three or four prosecutors. What our
argument does turn on is that the theory from the Canton
hypothetical, which does not require a pattern, was
clearly at issue in this case. The district court
analogized to Canton in order to allow the jury to find
liability absent a pattern.
There is no question that, whether it was
one or four prosecutors, this is a single incident of a
Brady violation.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, this is a
single incident, and Canton said if you know that a tort
is likely to happen without training, then one incident
is enough.
Every prosecutor knows that there can be
Brady violations if people are not taught what Brady
means, because it's not self-evident in every situation,
correct?
MR. DUNCAN: That's -- that's true, Justice
Sotomayor. Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So if you
know that rookie prosecutors -- and most prosecutors'
offices are filled with young ADAs who have just come
out of law school. If you know that they are going to
meet some situations where the answer is not intuitively
known, like that if you get a lab report, you should
turn it over, don't you have an obligation, isn't that
what the jury said, to train them to turn over lab
reports?
Now, I know you claim you had that policy.
MR. DUNCAN: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We can talk later about
whether or not there was sufficient evidence for the
jury to disbelieve that you had that policy or not.
That's a sufficiency of the evidence question.
But if you know that lab reports have to be
turned over, you've conceded it's a Brady violation not
to do it, and there was sufficient -- and you had no
policy -- I know you are disputing that -- and you had
no policy of turning it over, why aren't you responsible
for a Canton-like violation?
MR. DUNCAN: The question is under the Brady
scenario, which side of the Canton line does it fall on?
Does it fall on the single-incident line or the pattern
line? We say it falls on the pattern line.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Life doesn't always come
in just two categories, and my suggestion to you is this
doesn't fit into a single rookie.
You have -- if you have four prosecutors who
are not turning over this evidence, then it seems like
there's kind of a culture in the office that we don't
turn over -- either we don't understand Brady, because
one suggestion was -- well, having the blood sample will
show you -- you'd have to have the blood sample from
Thompson to have it mean anything.
So there was misunderstanding about that.
But what struck me was that the -- to shoehorn this into
a single incident, it doesn't fit.  So we have a
situation maybe that hasn't -- that we haven't directly
confronted before.
MR. DUNCAN: I think the Court has in
Canton, Your Honor. Let me answer it this way: If we
pay close attention to the function of the
single-incident hypothetical in Canton, I think it
illuminates the kind of notice, the kind of fault, and
the kind of causation that needs to arise out of a
general situation.
So looking carefully, what Canton said is:
A policymaker who fails to give police officers the
basic constitutional standard for deadly force, which
they are not equipped to know in the beginning, and
without which they --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you tell me -- I
think I have a copy.
MR. DUNCAN: I'm sorry, Your Honor. Yes.
This is -- this is -- I'm referring to the -- the basic
Canton standard is at 390, page 390 of the Canton
opinion. And specifically, the footnote is footnote 10,
that discusses the two possibilities, the no-pattern and
the pattern possibilities.
So -- and I'm reading from Canton at
footnote 10. City policymakers know -- "For example,"
the Court said, "city policymakers know to a moral
certainty that their police officers will be required to
arrest fleeing felons. The city has armed its officers
with firearms, in part to allow them to accomplish this
task. Thus, the need to train officers in the
constitutional limitations on the use of deadly force...
can be said to be 'so obvious' that the failure to do
so" is "deliberate indifference."
Now, what we have there, as Justice
O'Connor's concurrence in that case and then later the
Court's opinion in Bryan County explain, you have a
failure to inform city personnel of the basic standard
without which they have no hope of doing their job in a
constitutional manner. So you put your employees in a
situation of impossibility, and when a deadly force
violation occurs, what you have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: These are people who
haven't gone to law school, right?
MR. DUNCAN: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And do not know that you
cannot apply deadly force in most circumstances?
MR. DUNCAN: They've got no background
equipment to know what the constitutional standard is.
And so that satisfies, in a general situation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If you were giving guns to
lawyers, it might have been different.
(Laughter.)
MR. DUNCAN: It could be, Your Honor.
Here, you're giving --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Depending on the law school
they went to or what?
{Laughter.)
MR. DUNCAN: It could be.
However, what you are giving to lawyers here
is the task of analyzing legal judgments. Can lawyers'
judgments go astray, Justice Sotomayor? Absolutely.
Absolutely. But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Now what you're
suggesting is that for certainty you know that a
lawyer's judgment is going to go astray because a
particular area of law is that complicated.
Your people disagreed -- some of your people
disagreed or didn't know whether turning over a lab
report was a -- failure to turn over a lab report when
you didn't know a defendant's blood type was a Brady
violation. That has been conceded in this case, so I
accept as a working proposition that they should have
known that.
What you're suggesting is you get a pass
because, even though you know that there's an area of
law that a young lawyer is not going to be able to
figure out on their own, you fail to train them and
you're okay.
MR. DUNCAN: Well, that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's not the Canton
example.
MR. DUNCAN: That is not -- that's the
Canton example, Your Honor. What we have here --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's what you're
saying.
MR. DUNCAN: No, that's not what we're
saying. We're not saying that the policymaker
inevitably knows my prosecutors are going to make this
mistake, and so I need to train on it and I don't care
about training on it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, then why don't we
just --
JUSTICE ALITO: Can we just -- can we clear
something up?
MR. DUNCAN: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE ALITO: Are you -- are you accepting
the proposition that Brady always requires that lab
reports be turned over?
MR. DUNCAN: No, Your Honor. What we would
concede in this case is --
JUSTICE ALITO: I know you concede that
there was a Brady violation here --
MR. DUNCAN: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- but in answer to some of
the questions, it seems to me you were possibly -- or at
least you did not express an opinion on the suggestion
that it is always a violation of Brady to fail to turn
over a lab report.
MR. DUNCAN: I'm not aware that it would
always be a violation of Brady. However, of course, we
have evidence in this case that the -- uncontradicted
evidence, that the office policy was to turn over all
scientific reports. But --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Duncan, could I give you
a hypothetical -- -
MR. DUNCAN: Sure.
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- just to test how strong
your position is here.
So let's say that there is a new DA comes to
town, and he says, there's going to be one attorney per
case from now on, and it will be a random assignment
system. So sometimes important cases will be tried by
experienced attorneys, but sometimes they'll be tried by
people right out of law school. And there will be no
Brady supervision at all, no Brady training. And there
is a closed file system, that we only turn over what
we're required to turn over and not anything else.
And in addition to that, if I, the DA, find
that you have turned over things that you're not
required to turn over, that will be taken into account
in your yearly review for promotion purposes, for salary
purposes, et cetera. That will be very severely frowned
upon.
So he, the new DA --
MR. DUNCAN: I'm sorry -- repeat the last
part again, the "severely frowned upon" part.
JUSTICE KAGAN: If you turn over anything
that you didn't have to. Okay?
MR. DUNCAN: Exactly. I understand.
JUSTICE KAGAN: If you give any material
that you're not required to do by law.
And so he puts into place this whole system
and -- and says, okay, go to it. And what happens is
that there are Brady violations. And there's a Brady
violation in a capital case and the person sits on death
row, or the person is executed, whichever, and there's a
claim brought.
Is that claim not a good claim?
MR. DUNCAN: If there is a pattern of
demonstrated --
JUSTICE KAGAN: There's not a pattern,
because he just came to town and he just, you know,
instituted all these policies, and this is the first
Brady violation.
MR. DUNCAN: Not for the first Brady
violation, Justice Kagan. But in your hypothetical, you
noted a policy of actually assigning inexperienced
prosecutors randomly to perhaps high-profile cases.
If that were the facts, the jury, as they
could have in this case, could have found that an
official policy actually caused the violation. But they
didn't find it in this case. So the hypo leaves open
that possibility.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But the failure to train or
supervise in any way and the setting up a structural
system that's pretty much guaranteed to produce Brady
violations, that would not be enough?
In other words, even if the jury said yes,
you are liable under that second theory -- not the
policy theory, but the failure to train and supervise
theory -- that -- that would have to be rejected?
MR. DUNCAN: No -- exactly, Your Honor. No
liability there, because it doesn't meet the stringent
fault and causation standards of Canton.
This goes back to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, how is that so? The
-- I've read the instruction that the court gave, and it
seemed to me the instruction the Court gave was
word-for-word taken from Canton. And when I read the
question that you presented in your Petitioner's brief
-- in the petition for cert, I thought what this case
was about was an instance where there was only -- it was
conceded that there was only one such instance.
But then when I read your second reiteration
of the question, which is a little different, and read
the briefs, I thought no, there are four other ones.
And so what you're really asking us to do is to decide
in the case of perfect instructions whether the evidence
supports them. I didn't think I was getting into that,
and, frankly, as raised, the brief I think clearly
supports it, but others could disagree. But why are we
getting into that business in this Court?
MR. DUNCAN: We're not asking you to.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Then what is it
you're asking? Is there something in the instructions
that is wrong? What?
MR. DUNCAN: Yes, the instructions --
JUSTICE BREYER: What?
MR. DUNCAN: -- reflect that the single
incident theory --
JUSTICE BREYER: Sorry. Where -- I'm
reading the instruction. I have it here. What is it?
I'm not saying you're wrong. I'm just saying, what in
the words stated are wrong? And where is the request
that they be stated differently? That I should look at
that, and that they weren't. Okay.
MR. DUNCAN: Yes, Justice Breyer. Let me
help you with that. The -- the -- at the Joint Appendix
page 828, we have the instructions on deliberate
indifference.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. What's
the page number.
MR. DUNCAN: 828.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: 828.
MR. DUNCAN: Joint Appendix 828.
There are the instructions on deliberate
indifference. Let me start here, Justice Breyer. These
instructions are taken from the Second Circuit's Walker
decision, which was the first court that I am aware of
to allow for the possibility of single-incident
liability in a Brady situation.
The second instruction there allows a
choice. It allows a choice for the jury to find that a
single-incident situation -- I'm sorry -- that a
situation involving a Brady decision could arise and be
a basis --
JUSTICE BREYER: What are the words -- I
mean, it looked to me like the words on page 828 are
pretty similar to my copy of what he actually said. So
what are the words on page 828 that you think he should
have said that he didn't say?
MR. DUNCAN: "The situation involved a
difficult choice or one that prosecutors had a history
of mishandling."
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. What he says
here is, "The situation involved a difficult choice or
one that the prosecutors had a history of mishandling,
such that additional training, supervision, or
monitoring was clearly needed."
So it looks to me like, unless I'm reading
the wrong page, which I've sometimes done out of my memo
here. It looks to me like he gave those words.
MR. DUNCAN: That is the -- I'm sorry. Then
I misunderstood your question. Those are the actual
instructions.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm saying what is it that
you asked the judge to do that he didn't do or that you
asked him not to do that he did do? That's what
happens. That's the way you object to an instruction.
MR. DUNCAN: I understand, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So what is that?
MR. DUNCAN: I misunderstood. I was reading
where I thought the single-incident theory was posed in
the jury instructions. What the Petitioners --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought he asked that.
So I was glad to see that. Thank you.
MR. DUNCAN: The Petitioners specifically
asked that an instruction be given that required a
pattern of similar violations --
JUSTICE BREYER: I want you to point out in
the record the words that were said to the district
court saying, Judge, I want you to say this, and then
the judge didn't do it.
MR. DUNCAN: It is instruction number 14.
JUSTICE BREYER: Which is where?
MR. DUNCAN: The proposed instruction. I
regret to say I don't believe that's in the Joint
Appendix, Your Honor. And it is also --
JUSTICE BREYER: Then I think we take it as
saying that you not objecting to what -- to instruction.
MR. DUNCAN: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, your whole brief is
objecting to the instruction, and you didn't include the
objection?
MR. DUNCAN: No, Your Honor. The argument
is not about the specific jury instruction. It's about
the legal theory. What it's about --
JUSTICE BREYER: Wait, wait. If you don't
object to the instruction, then we're back to what I'm
saying, that what you're objecting to is you don't think
the evidence was such that, given that instruction, the
jury could find guilt. And that's what I thought this
case wasn't about to begin with, and there are three
other instances. So I don't see why, given this
instruction, the jury couldn't find guilt.
MR. DUNCAN: What our main complaint is, is
about the failure of the district court to grant a
motion for summary judgment and a judgment as a matter
of law on the basis that a failure-to-train theory under
these circumstances does not permit the single -- the
single-incident --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I understood -- and
maybe I'm confused -- that you were arguing that there
was no set of circumstances in which a prosecutor could
be handled -- could be liable on a theory of failure to
train for one incident.
MR. DUNCAN: Absent a pattern. Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That was the petition as
it came --
MR. DUNCAN: Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it doesn't matter
what the facts are. The facts that Justice Kagan gave
you would never constitute an actionable claim against a
prosecutor; is that your position in this case?
MR. DUNCAN: That's -- under the Canton
hypothetical, yes. It would have to fall on the pattern
side because the general Brady situation is unlike the
single-incident --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what you --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Could I add to my
hypothetical, then?
MR. DUNCAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Suppose that this new
district attorney said -- you know, every day he came
into the office and he said: I think Brady is just
crazy, and I think it's just the worst decision that the
Supreme Court has ever issued; and as long as you don't
get caught, anything you do is okay by me.
MR. DUNCAN: That sounds like a policy to
me, Your Honor. That sounds like a policy, an
actionable policy on the part of the policymaker.
JUSTICE KAGAN: It's not a policy. He's
just, you know, making his views known around the
office.
MR. DUNCAN: Well, this Court has defined
"policy" as a deliberate choice to embark on a course of
action in Pembaur, which this Court accepted. That
sounds like a policy to me. If it's not a policy --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Then the policy is just that
you -- you have to turn over what you have to turn over,
nothing else, and if you turn over anything else you'll
get penalized for doing so. That's the policy.
MR. DUNCAN: Well, then the policy is
constitutional. So what we would look to is, are
prosecutors failing to exercise their judgment properly
pursuant to that policy? And that falls very squarely
within the second part of the Canton choices, which
requires a pattern.
This case is about the alleged failure to
remedy, to guide, to reinforce, the pre-existing legal
judgment that a prosecutor has by virtue of being a
legal professional.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that so? I mean, you
are assume that everyone who goes to law school takes a
course in criminal procedure, and I think there are many
law schools where they don't even have such a course and
others where most -- I don't know anywhere it's
compulsory to take a course in criminal procedure. So
you're assuming that. And, of course, the time is
running. There's something I wanted to ask you about
Brady, which seems to me unlike others and why you would
want special vigilance. And that is, Miranda warnings,
you know what was said; search and seizure, you know
what the police did. But the problem with Brady -- and
this case illustrates it so well -- is you don't know.
If the prosecutors don't do what they're supposed to do,
there's a very high risk, as there was in this case,
that it will never come to light.
So, recognizing the legal obligation of the
prosecutor and the temptation not to come out with Brady
evidence because it doesn't help the State's case,
shouldn't there be extra vigilance when we're talking
about a Brady claim?
MR. DUNCAN: Well, of course, there should
be vigilance, but the question you pose,
Justice Ginsburg, is whether the latency, the
hiddenness, that characterizes Brady violations should
change where we locate the Canton violation. Should it
be enough to put it into the single-incident, so-obvious
category, or still in the pattern category? But Canton
doesn't indicate that the latency of a particular
violation should -- should turn on which category it
goes into. Instead, it's the nature of the employee
duties and the employees themselves and how
that situation gives notice to a policymaker about when
there are obvious training risks. That's what we're
talking about.
So to go back to the hypothetical in Canton,
whether or not a deadly force situation is secret or
not -- of course, it's not. But the office has failed
not just to train, but to inform of the basic
constitutional duty without which those officers have no
chance of fulfilling their duties. And when they do a
deadly force violation under those circumstances, the
causal link will be very strong. It will be strong
enough to meet Canton.
And so there you have -- there you have a
situation where deliberate indifference and causation
are met without the pattern. But what -- you do not
have that in the situation of Brady compliance because,
as -- as everyone agrees Brady involves gray areas. It
is -- it is impossible to determine beforehand exactly
why a Brady violation will occur and what specific
training measures would prevent it from occurring.
And what that means is this falls plainly
within what Canton said about the pattern situation.
And here's what Canton said in the footnote 10 following
onto the hypothetical. "It could also be that the
police, in exercising their discretion, so often violate
constitutional rights that the need for further training
must have been plainly obvious...."
That's the situation we have posed by the
Brady situation in general.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. But, look -- I
-- he read the instructions. They came right out of
Canton. Seems perfect.
Now you're saying, well, whether they did or
not, you cannot have an incident -- you can't have
liability if there's only one incident. And at that
point, I say, gee, I don't know. I mean, maybe it
depends on what the incident is. Maybe the incident
involved somebody saying, hey, Brady? What's Brady? Or
somebody saying, what's a criminal trial? I mean, that
person needs training.
And -- or -- but I don't even have to think
of that here, because there were four incidents here.
And, therefore, I don't have to try to make up weird
hypotheticals. So where we have four instances and we
have correct instructions, what's the problem?
MR. DUNCAN: Your Honor, there weren't four
instances. There was one Brady violation that possibly
could have involved one to four prosecutors. That's
one --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Okay. We have -- we
have -- all this case? I thought that they had several
instances in other cases.
MR. DUNCAN: No. No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: All involved -- in other
words, there has never in this office been an instance
of a Brady violation outside of this case.
MR. DUNCAN: No, Your Honor. That's not
true.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not -- not before this
case. There was some --
JUSTICE BREYER: After, that's what it was.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- later, as far as we
know.
MR. DUNCAN: There were some -- there were
four reported Brady violations before this case, in the
decade leading up, involving this office, that had
nothing to do with the circumstances involved here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Ah. There were four Brady
violations involving this office, okay?
MR. DUNCAN: Correct, out of tens of
thousands of prosecutions.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So now we're
talking about not one; we are talking about four --
MR. DUNCAN: We're -- but we're not --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- over many years, with
tens of thousands of violations, correct?
MR. DUNCAN: What was -- the Fifth Circuit
panel in this case affirmatively said Thompson did not
even try to prove a pattern, and he did not prove a
pattern of violations. The Fifth Circuit panel said
that.
JUSTICE BREYER: This is helpful. Thank
you.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: On your instruction in --
MR. DUNCAN: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- at J.A. 28 second,
would the instruction in your view have been proper, if
the "or" had been replaced by an "and." So: "The
situation involved a difficult choice and one that
prosecutors had a history of mishandling."
MR. DUNCAN: That's closer to what it should
be, Justice Kennedy, yes, because that begins to capture
the pattern requirement. It's not -- it's not the
pattern instruction that was specifically put forth by
the Petitioners in instruction number 15.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Has there been -- has
there been any argument that you have waived your
objection to the instructions?
MR. DUNCAN: Not by Petitioners -- not by
the Respondent in this case. There's no -- there's no
-- question --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did you -- did you object
to it? To this charge?
MR. DUNCAN: The -- the charge?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: With the "or" --
difficult choice "or" one that prosecutors had a history
of mishandling.
MR. DUNCAN: No, the Petitioners did not
object to the -- the specific formulation of that
charge. Immediately after that charge, though, they --
they said, no, but we -- we have to have a pattern
instruction here. In other words --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In other words, the
pattern instruction was -- it was -- was rejected?
MR. DUNCAN: It was rejected. It was
rejected twice, Your Honor, first in the formal jury
instructions and then at the charge colloquy.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that wasn't the
question presented to us. You didn't present to us an
issue of whether the jury instruction --
MR. DUNCAN: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- was wrong or not.
MR. DUNCAN: What we present is the legal
theory on which this case was submitted -- what got to
the jury in the first place never should have got to
that legal theory at all.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You see, what I'm trying
to figure out is whether your position is that under no
circumstance, even the hypothetical that Justice Kagan
set forth, could you be charged with a single-incident
Canton violation. That is your -- your theory?
MR. DUNCAN: With respect to the Brady
situation, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The Brady situation.
MR. DUNCAN: Let me answer it this way:
What -- what the Canton single-incident hypo is talking
about is failing to provide employees with basic tools,
without which they absolutely have no chance of
fulfilling their constitutional obligations. If we --
it's difficult to imagine that situation for
prosecutors.
It is -- it's conceivable that a district
attorney's office set up -- sets up a structure where
prosecutors have no chance of even knowing whether
there's Brady evidence in the file. If you have that
situation, then it's closer to the Canton
single-incident hypothetical, but not involving the
exercise of legal judgment in particular cases. We say
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, how do you
exercise legal judgment if you don't even know what
you're supposed to turn over? That was Justice
Ginsburg's question.
MR. DUNCAN: That's exactly -- that's my
point. That's my point. If you don't -- if you don't
even -- in other words, if you don't even have a police
file, for instance, you can't exercise your legal
judgment if you don't even know what -- what the
subject of your legal -- the object of your legal
judgment is.
But that's not this case. What we're
talking about here is a failure to remedy, reinforce,
refine existing legal judgment that prosecutors have.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. DUNCAN: If there are no further
questions, thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Cooney.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF J. GORDON COONEY, JR.
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. COONEY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Although the Petitioners' brief attempts to
relitigate factual issues that were resolved against
them by the jury, they have raised today only one
question of law, and that is whether this Court should
write into section 1983 a per se rule that the only way,
the only way, a civil rights victim can ever establish
the deliberate indifference of a district attorney is if
he can prove a prior significant history of assistant
prosecutors violating other citizens' constitutional
rights.
JUSTICE SCALIA: For -- for Brady
violations. They limit the principle to Brady
violations.
MR. COONEY: Yes, Your Honor. And I would
submit that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's a significant
limitation, don't you think?
MR. COONEY: But I would submit, Your Honor,
that this Court's -- that their requirement for proving
deliberate indifference is, first, contrary to the
teaching of this Court in Canton and subsequent cases.
It finds no place in the language of section 1983 --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But at the -- but at the
outset it seemed to me -- and correct me if I'm wrong --
that you misstate the theory on which you seek to -- to
have a reversal, and that this is a failure-to-train
case. You didn't mention that.
MR. COONEY: Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: This is a failure-to-train
case; is it not?
MR. COONEY: It is absolutely a deliberate
indifference to the need to train and provide other
protections to the office.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I think that's very
important.
JUSTICE ALITO: Yes, if you could -- could
you just say as succinctly as possible what you would
tell assistant district attorneys if you were the
district attorney for this jurisdiction, and you, with
the benefit of hindsight, having seen this case, what
kind of -- what would you tell them they should do with
respect to Brady?
MR. COONEY: Yes, Your Honor. First of all
I think Canton says you have to look at the specific
circumstances. And so I don't think there's a
one-size-fits-all way or message that has to be
provided.
JUSTICE ALITO: No, but you are training
them, so: Now I want to tell you what you have to do
under Brady.
MR. COONEY: Well, first --
JUSTICE ALITO: What do you tell them?
MR. COONEY: In this office, Your Honor, I
think the first thing one has to confront is Mr.
Connick's testimony and, in fact, the concession that
the Petitioners made on pages 6 and 7 of their merits
brief that the office started with what the brief
described as "Connick's disclosure policies were no
mystery" -- turn over what the law required and nothing
more. I mean, that would be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well,
Justice Alito's question was, what you would tell the
assistant DAs? What's your answer?
MR. COONEY: And Mr. Chief Justice, with --
if -- first of all, I wouldn't start with that rule.
But if I started with that rule it would be incumbent
upon me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why wouldn't you start with
that rule? The rule is perfectly lawful, my goodness.
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I'm not saying it's
an unlawful rule. However, it requires a countervailing
message. And if you're going to adopt --
JUSTICE ALITO: I really would appreciate it
if you'd get to my question. Brady requires that
exculpatory evidence be turned over. Now, do you -- do
you think the assistant prosecutors didn't even know
that?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I don't know that.
It seems from the record in this case they thought that
only something that screamed "exculpatory evidence" on
its face needed to be turned over.
JUSTICE ALITO: Okay. Now, you phrase --
you are the instructor. You phrase the lesson that you
think is required by Brady that has to be given to them.
MR. COONEY: I think at a minimum it has two
pieces, Your Honor. It has basic instruction about how
to go about fulfilling the Brady obligation, and how do
you go about looking through the file to make sure you
know what's there, making sure you have documents that
are in the possession of the police.
Thinking in advance, as this Court talked
about in the Agurs case, about what the evidence is
going to be at trial and looking thoughtfully at that
evidence to determine whether or not the evidence was
favorable to the accused and needs to be produced.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay. That's your
instruction on Brady. Now, you're basing liability on
-- on this incident of failing to comply with Brady. So
you say they should have instructed on Brady.
What else should they have instructed on?
MR. COONEY: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You're the -- you're
the new DA, and you're setting up -- I need to instruct
my people. What -- what do they instruct on? I know
they instruct on Brady under your view. What else?
MR. COONEY: I think the second thing that
the -- that the office really should do is to -- to talk
about the importance of safeguarding the innocent here,
that our job is not just to secure convictions.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I'm --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, we're looking
at -- we're looking at specifics where they're going to
violate the Constitution. I think that's a good thing,
to tell them they have an obligation as well to protect
the innocent.
But we're worried about violations of our
constitutional requirements. We know Brady is one.
What's the next one? What's day 2 in the course?
MR. COONEY: Well, Your Honor, I -- I do
think that there are other constitutional requirements
involved. Most of the hypotheticals, however, that have
been brought before the Court as a parade of horribles
aren't actions by the district attorney.
JUSTICE ALITO: I mean, with respect, I
really don't think, as a young district -- assistant
district attorney, that you have told me anything that's
going to be really helpful to me other than, you know,
follow the law, which you certainly should do, in
dealing with my obligation to turn over physical
evidence, which is what's involved here.
MR. COONEY: Your Honor --
JUSTICE ALITO: Or a lab report regarding
physical evidence.
Now, suppose I have -- I have several cases.
I have this case, where I have got blood -- I have
physical evidence, I have a blood test. I have another
case where all I have was physical evidence, but there
has been no testing of it.
Now, do I have to turn over that physical
evidence?
MR. COONEY: In this case, there has been a
stipulation by the district attorney's office that you
do. And I think if you think about the evidence in this
case --
JUSTICE ALITO: I have to turn over all
physical evidence that's in my possession?
MR. COONEY: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: Okay.
MR. COONEY: But here, the specific --
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, what's the instruction
that you're going to give me to tell me where I'm going
to draw that line?
MR. COONEY: If you have physical evidence
that, if tested, can establish the innocence of the
person who is charged, you have to turn it over.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, how do I know that
before the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, didn't they here?
Didn't they make it available?
JUSTICE ALITO: How do I know that before
the physical evidence is tested?
Suppose I've got all sorts of items that
were found at the -- at the scene, and they might have
DNA on them. They might have epithelial samples on
them -- you know, all this fancy forensic testing that's
done these days. Do I have to turn over all of that?
MR. COONEY: No, Your Honor. In this case,
what we're talking about is a piece of evidence, a
specific piece, several specific pieces of physical
evidence, that it has been stipulated the prosecutors
knew contained the blood of the perpetrator.
It -- the rule and the training that should
have been provided in this instance, particularly since
the DA argues that it was perfectly clear that that
should have been produced --
JUSTICE ALITO: Now, you see what I'm
getting at is that you're dealing with a very specific
situation. So the instruction would be: If you have
physical evidence and you have tested it for blood and
you have a -- you have the result of the blood test, but
you don't know whether -- you don't know the blood type
of the accused, that -- that's Brady evidence, and that
has to be turned over.
And you're saying that the failure to
provide training to every assistant district attorney on
a question of that specificity gives rise to a -- a
potential claim, gives rise to a claim?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, what I'm saying is
I think there are at least three layers to the training
that were missing here. One was the clear message about
the importance of Brady compliance. The second was the
basic ground rules about how you go about your Brady
obligation. And, third, if you have evidence that can
conclusively establish to a scientific certainty the
innocence of the person being charged, you have to turn
it over or get it -- get it tested. You can't just put
it in your hip pocket and say, I know --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Wait a minute. Wait a
minute. What evidence is there that they put this in
their hip pocket?
There was a disclosure that the evidence
existed. Where is the evidence that the defense counsel
didn't have access to asking for it?
MR. COONEY: Yes, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or asking for it to be
tested? Where was that suppressed?
MR. COONEY: The -- the only information --
there was a discovery response that was filed very
shortly before trial, long after Mr. Thompson was
charged with the crime, where in response to one of the
questions, the response was: "Inspection to be
permitted." If you look at the chronology --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And what -- where's the
Brady violation for telling a defense attorney there was
a blood sample there, you can test it?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, there was no
information provided. It was -- the simple response was
that the request was for all scientific evidence, and it
simply -- and physical evidence from the scene of the
crime. The answer was: "Inspection to be permitted."
Then the blood evidence, the very next day,
after the response was provided, was removed from the
crime lab by the prosecutors, never to be found again.
And defense counsel testified without impeachment at
trial that he went to the evidence locker, looked in the
evidence locker, found certain pieces of physical
evidence consistent with the discovery response, but not
the blood evidence, neither the blood report nor the
physical specimens that were involved in this case, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that you are claiming
there was suppression of that evidence?
MR. COONEY: Absolutely, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So if it is --
prosecutors can violate a defendant's constitutional
rights by making improper statements in their closing
arguments.
Do you have to instruct new -- I suspect new
prosecutors coming out of law school don't know what
those rules are. Do you have to give instruction on
what they can say in closing arguments?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I think, first of
all, the issue has to rise to a constitutional level in
order to be talking about this for section 1983
purposes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes. My
understanding is -- I don't -- I'm not an expert in
criminal law. I need training in that. But my
understanding is that comments in a closing argument can
give rise to a constitutional violation.
So you should -- you should train those
people. You know that. You know that that can happen,
just as you know there can be Brady violations. So they
need training in exactly what they can say and can't say
in closing argument.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And Miranda and proper
supervision of affidavits in support of search warrants,
and proper instructions that tell the police not to
exceed the scope of the warrant. So this is -- our
course is expanding.
MR. COONEY: Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The -- the point of
concern here is that we're going to have to go through a
list, case by case, of everything there has to be
training on.
MR. COONEY: I think -- I think there are
some important distinctions here. And, first of all,
when you're talking about search and seizure, when
you're talking about Miranda, you're talking about those
things, the actor that is committing the constitutional
tort there is not the district attorney. It's the
police. What we're talking about here, the
constitutional tort --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When you're talking
about improper comments in closing argument, it is the
prosecuting attorney.
MR. COONEY: But the second important
distinction, Your Honor -- and I do believe training
should be given there. But I think there's a
fundamental distinction between a Brady violation, which
happens in private and may never be revealed and, if
revealed, often happens long after trial and long after
incarceration, and a situation where a prosecutor makes
an improper comment during a closing jury, which is made
in public. Defense counsel has the opportunity right
there to stand up and say, Your Honor, I object, and the
court has the ability to address that issue then and
there.
With a Brady violation, you don't have any
of that. It's made in secret. It's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you don't -- you
don't have to train with respect to closing arguments?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I think they do.
But I think there's -- there's a particular issue.
There's particular force in this context because of the
unique nature of Brady, because it's made in private,
because it is -- by definition, if the information has
been concealed, it has not been revealed prior to the
time the defendant suffers constitutional harm. He's --
he's found guilty, he's sentenced to death, et cetera.
The Brady violation, unlike your situation,
Mr. Chief Justice, doesn't come to light, perhaps ever.
But in Mr. Thompson's case --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So we have --
MR. COONEY: -- more than a decade after he
was convicted.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And it's something like I
was trying to get at before when I said Miranda is out
there, you know what was said, you know what was seized,
talking about -- but Brady is, if the prosecutor doesn't
come out with it, high risk it will never come out.
So we have use of force, plus -- that can
kill people if you're not properly trained. Brady,
because if they don't come up with the information, it
could have what almost happened in this case.
Anything else on this special list?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The concern was that you
don't want to have to give the prosecutors a clinical
law school course before you let them do their job.
MR. COONEY: I agree with that concern, Your
Honor. And -- and I think it's important to remember
that in this case, this was a no-training case. The
evidence in the light most favorable to Mr. Thompson was
there was zero Brady training in the office.
JUSTICE KAGAN: So what would have been
enough? I mean, is an hour a year enough? Is an hour a
month enough?
MR. COONEY: I think that would have been
dependent on what its content was, Your Honor, and the
other circumstances of the office.
If you look at Canton, what Canton does is
it asks the question: Is there an obvious need for
training based on the circumstances of this
particular --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. As I understand it,
you -- you really have a need to train them, when you
know defense counsel is coming over to look at the
physical evidence, don't remove from the locker some of
the physical evidence.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: You want to give a course
in that?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, what -- what
happened is the physical evidence very conveniently was
being sent to the crime lab when it was removed. And so
we don't know what the motivation was as to why that
physical evidence was removed at that time. What we
know is for many, many months --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then, you shouldn't
have -- you shouldn't have mentioned it. I thought you
were -- you were asserting that it was intentionally
removed in order to prevent defense counsel from seeing
--
MR. COONEY: What we assert, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't know that.
MR. COONEY: It was certainly not -- it was
intentionally not placed back in into evidence after it
came back from the crime lab, and there was actual
testimony from the grand jury that was handling this and
looking into this situation for some period of time --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, of course, there's a
MR. COONEY: -- of not just that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There is a causation
problem here. Even assuming training, if Deegan was
going to destroy the evidence or remove it anyway, as he
admitted later to Riehlmann, then the training or lack
of training is just irrelevant.
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I think there
are --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I'm very concerned
about that causation aspect.
MR. COONEY: First of all -- let me address
that directly. First of all, the causation question was
put to the jury; the jury instruction very clearly said
in order for there to be liability here, the fault must
be in the training program, not in the individual
prosecutor. And the defense argued vehemently that
there was a lack of causation. What's interesting here
is --
JUSTICE ALITO: But the judge actually,
though, instructed the jury -- this is back on J.A.
8 -- in order to find that the district attorney's
failure to adequately train, monitor, or supervise
amounted to -- deliberate indifference, et cetera.
So liability could have been predicated not
on the lack of adequate training, but the absence of a
process by which superiors in the district attorney's
office reviewed all of the Brady decisions that were
made by more junior prosecutors; isn't that correct?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, the concept of
monitoring or supervision was actually a concept that
defendants injected into the case. And so, to the
extent that there is any concern that there's an
expansion from training, it's been error that's invited.
And I don't believe it's error, Your Honor, but it's not
something that -- that was put into the case by the
defense or the court.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why wouldn't -- why wouldn't
that be error? That the -- the head of a very large
office is personally liable under Canton for violations
that are -- that are produced by actions taken by
subordinates, unless there is an elaborate process to
review all of the decisions that are made by those
subordinates? Doesn't that go well beyond anything
Canton permits?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, again, the clear
thrust of this case was a failure-to-train case. The
concept of monitoring and supervision was introduced by
the defense, not by the -- by the plaintiffs. But to
get back to Justice Kennedy's case --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you please state
in simple terms to me what exactly they failed to train
these prosecutors to do, that the prosecutors didn't do?
What training -- Justice Alito asked it generally; I'm
asking specifically -- what is the exact training that
was required in this situation that caused the violation
in this case?
MR. COONEY: Number one, there was
absolutely no Brady training at all.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Forget about no Brady
training. What -- I think Justice Alito asked this
question. What specifically would the training have
said or done that would have avoided this Brady
violation?
MR. COONEY: First of all, I think a broad
statement in training about the importance of
safeguarding the rights of the accused --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Now, that seems to
suggest that you're claiming that if there was an
intentional violation by the prosecutors, that that
statement would have avoided the prosecutor from doing
something he or she knew was illegal. Is that what
you're intending?
MR. COONEY: No, it isn't, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay. So tell me.
MR. COONEY: The -- the second aspect of --
of it, though, is what I said to Justice Alito, and that
is that if you have physical evidence which, if tested,
would establish either the guilt or the innocence of the
-- of the defendant, it needs to be produced. Or at
least tested.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That goes to the
sufficiency --
MR. COONEY: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- whether they had a
policy to turn over or -- because it was tested, so
there was no Brady violation from the failure to test
here.
MR. COONEY: The Brady violation was for
failure to produce; you're right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Isn't -- am I right -- am I
right on this? Here -- I read on page 4 of your brief
that it seemed what happened -- and I might not be
right. Correct me if I'm not. What happened is a piece
of paper called the lab report came to the -- one of the
prosecutors' attention 2 days before the trial, and what
it said was the blood that was the perpetrator's was
type B. And the person on trial has blood of type O.
Is that what happened?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, certainly what the
crime lab report said was that the blood that was tested
of the perpetrator was type B.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the -- and the
prosecutor knew that the person on trial had type O?
MR. COONEY: We don't know that, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Ah, that's something --
MR. COONEY: That's the unresolved factual
question.
JUSTICE BREYER: I see.
MR. COONEY: And I think that's where
causation comes in, Your Honor, because I think there
are two possibilities.
JUSTICE BREYER: Did it turn out at the
trial that eventually the prosecutor knew it was type O?
MR. COONEY: It turned out that Mr. Thompson
was in fact type O. But the evidence is --
JUSTICE BREYER: When the did they learn
that?
MR. COONEY: The evidence is unclear as to
whether or not the assistants knew at the time that John
Thompson had type O blood.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could I ask you what
-- most law offices with which I'm familiar, the
training is mentoring. In other words, the young
attorneys learn from the older attorneys, often by
following them along -- around.
Would it have been an adequate training
program for this office simply to say, new prosecutors,
you don't get to be first chair prosecutors until after
a year, and you're going to follow one of the
prosecutors around and learn from them? Is that an
adequate training program?
MR. COONEY: If, in fact, the senior
prosecutors, Your Honor, have a good familiarity with
the constitutional requirements --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. COONEY: -- absolutely.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even -- even if the
violation that becomes the basis for the claim later on
is one that, you know, didn't come up in that year? We
-- they didn't have a Brady issue in that first year.
They went around; they sat in on a lot of trials; but
there wasn't a Brady issue and so they didn't learn
about this type of question. And --
MR. COONEY: I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does that give rise
to a claim of the sort you're bringing here?
MR. COONEY: I think the failure here -- and
I think we have to come back to the deliberate
indifference piece because what would happen there in
that instance, Your Honor, even if the training was not
provided, I think as experience has shown under Canton,
that claim would fail for failure to show the deliberate
indifference of the policymaker.
But here you had substantial evidence about
Mr. Connick's indifference.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Cooney, when you -- when
you gave the specific instruction that you think should
be provided to assistant district attorneys, what you
stated was a questionable understanding of Brady, I
think. You -- did I understand you correctly?
You said that Brady means that if the
prosecutor has physical evidence which, if tested, might
establish the defendant's innocence, that is exculpatory
evidence that must be turned over.
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, that certainly has
been the position taken by the district attorney's
office in this case --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that consistent with
Arizona v. Youngblood?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I believe it -- it
is consistent with Brady that if -- if one has a piece
of evidence that can conclusively establish that the
defendant is innocent, that it can't be the law that the
prosecutor can just put it in his hip pocket, not get it
tested, and not turn it over to the defense, and not
worry about whether they're prosecuting an innocent man.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But, you see, it was
tested. And it was made available to the defense.
Turning over -- using the word "turning over" is
ridiculous, because they're not going to physically give
it to the defense attorney to go off and do what he
wants. They're going to give it to a lab that will
establish a chain of custody, et cetera, et cetera.
So it was made available. He went to look
at it, but the looking at it wouldn't have told the
defense attorney anything. They had to make it
available for testing. He never asked for testing.
They did the lab reports. So now we come down to the
only failure is in the turning over of this report.
Correct?
MR. COONEY: No, Your Honor. First of all,
there is -- there is a stipulation, stipulation L at
J.A. 14: Prior to the armed robbery trial, Mr.
Thompson and his attorneys were not advised of the
existence of the blood evidence, that the evidence had
been tested, that a blood type was determined
definitively --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Now, what did I just
say? The failure to turn over the report, correct?
MR. COONEY: But -- but -- yes, Your Honor.
But what also is present here is the defense never had
the chance to -- never saw the physical blood evidence
itself.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Never knew it existed?
MR. COONEY: Never knew it existed, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's --
MR. COONEY: There is testimony,
clear testimony to that effect. If you look at Mr.
Williams's testimony in this case, there is a section of
the cross-examination where John Thompson's defense
counsel at the original criminal trial said just that.
He didn't know it existed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it isn't -- it isn't
clear from what -- according to what you said earlier,
it isn't clear that it was intentionally withheld from
the defense. It might have just been -- you said it was
sent to the lab when -- when he came to look for it.
MR. COONEY: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So would training have --
have gone into that detail? Don't send something to the
lab when defense counsel is coming over to look for it.
I mean, you know, that -- that's pretty detailed.
MR. COONEY: Yes, Justice Scalia, but here
there's a stipulation that the crime lab report with the
conclusive evidence about the perpetrator's blood
type was never --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay, but -- but that --
MR. COONEY: -- ever provided.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's the lab report.
That -- that's what Justice --
MR. COONEY: And the physical evidence was
never seen, Your Honor, by defense counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: For all we know, by
accident, right? And the training would -- would
probably not have remedied that -- that difficulty.
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, four prosecutors --
it is clear that four prosecutors knew about the
existence of blood evidence for months, and it was never
produced to the defense. And that blood evidence would
have conclusively established John Thompson's innocence.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The defense was told to
come over and look for it -- to look at it. And when he
came over to look at it -- for all we know, by
accident -- it was -- it had been sent to the lab.
MR. COONEY: But -- but Your Honor, the "it"
was not come over and see the blood evidence. It was --
there was a broad request for -- for --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, I understand, but --
yes. Okay.
MR. COONEY: -- physical evidence at the
crime scene, including things that had nothing to do
with the blood. So there's nothing that the defense
lawyer would have known by going to the evidence room to
say: I know there is nothing here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But isn't that --
isn't that best practice? In other words, I thought
that was the good thing, when what the prosecutor does
is say look at everything we've got. And as my brother
has suggested, what is important may not be there for
either deliberate misconduct or by happenstance.
MR. COONEY: But the point here, Your
Honor -- and I think this goes to the causation point,
that -- that it would appear -- it would appear from
looking at Mr. Williams's testimony that there was a
deliberate effort to stay away from blood evidence in
the carjacking case. And Mr. Williams conceded that.
So this idea that this was an innocent error on the part
of the prosecutors does not find support in the record.
The question is --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if it was willful --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that dooms your
case. If it wasn't an innocent error, if it was an
intentional violation of Brady, there is no training
that was going to stop him from doing that.
MR. COONEY: No, Your Honor, I think there
is a difference between a tactical choice to do
something sharp, on the one hand, and a knowing Brady
violation, on the other hand.
And the jury could clearly conclude --
particularly because the 30(b)(6) witness in this office
testified that, in his view, it wasn't Brady material
unless the -- unless the prosecutors knew John
Thompson's blood type -- the jury could clearly conclude
that what happened here was these four prosecutors
didn't understand and never got a clear message about --
about what Brady required, and they -- they did not
produce this evidence.
There is nothing that clearly showed that
they committed knowing Brady violations in this case.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Cooney, I'm still
confused as to sort of how much is enough by way of
training and how you would ask a court or a jury to
decide that.
You suggested to the Chief Justice formal
training wasn't -- isn't necessary if there's some
supervision, if there's some mentoring. But, you know,
this seems to give cities no sense of what they have to
do. No safe harbors. Is that your position?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I think that Canton
articulates a very flexible test. And I don't think
Canton says there is one size that fits all. And I
think the protection that district attorney's offices
get from Canton is from the standard of deliberate
indifference.
And if one looks at the 21 years of
experience under Canton, there have been between 6 and 8
cases against prosecutors' offices under this kind of
theory, in total, where there was some payout from the
prosecutors' offices to the defense. Total. In the 21
years.
So -- and the Court said -- this Court said
in Canton, judge and jury doing their job are adequate
to the test. I think we have been spending a lot of
time focusing on how much training. The fact is, this
is a no-training case, where evidence that the -- that
the defendants now concede should have been produced
wasn't produced, and four people knew about it and
failed to produce it.
In addition, there were multiple additional
pieces of Brady material in the murder case that weren't
produced. And this --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Would this have been
-- would this be a no-training case if the rule was you
have to be in the office for 3 years as a second chair
prosecutor before we let you have a case, and, in fact,
you have to be here 10 years before we let you have a
capital case? That's all it says. Is that sufficient
training?
MR. COONEY: I think, again, you would have
to look at the circumstances of the office. I think
with this -- this presumption against disclosure that
was present in Connick's office, that takes this case
out of the realm of the typical prosecutor's case,
because it is a bare minimum disclosure rule.
I think there needs to be -- if you're going
to have that bare minimum disclosure rule, there needs
to be something to counterbalance it. If you look at
what the assistants testified to in this case, they all
knew what not to produce. What they didn't know was
what to produce.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what do you do with
the Dubelier testimony? Didn't he testify that it was
standard operating procedure to turn over all lab
reports?
MR. COONEY: Your Honor, I think there are
two very quick answers to that. If one looks at J.A.
0 to 551, which was Mr. Glas, the grand jury
prosecutor's, testimony.
What he clearly said was, during the grand
jury, when Mr. Connick decided to terminate the grand
jury, Mr. Connick and his first assistant were actually
arguing with Glas that if the prosecutors didn't know
John Thompson's blood type, they didn't need to turn
over the blood report.
So that's number one. I think there is an
issue of fact that has to be resolved in our favor
solely from J.A. 550 and 551.
And the second is, Your Honor, the -- the
rule, the bare minimum discovery rule. Louisiana law
did not require the production of crime lab reports in
85.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Mr. Duncan, have you 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF STUART K. DUNCAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. DUNCAN: Justice Alito and Justice
Kagan, you asked repeatedly questions designed to elicit
a response from my colleague:  What would you tell a
ADAs with respect to training -- and I believe Justice
Sotomayor as well -- that would have prevented such a
thing? And I didn't hear a clear answer.
The legal issue in this case turns on the
fact that, in the deadly force scenario that Canton
marks out as the paradigm single-incident case, it is
very clear what a police office needs to tell a police
officer. Here's the deadly force standard under
Tennessee v. Garner: Don't shoot people unless there's
a reasonable probability of physical danger to yourself
or to others. You've got to tell them that.
With respect to the Brady scenario, it's not
clear at all. Yes, of course, training is useful. Yes,
of course, training is important. But how do you
connect up a lack of specific training with a particular
violation that occurs?
And having heard the argument, I'm -- I'm no
longer clear as to what the theory of the case of my
colleague's is about what caused the violation.
Whatever caused the violation, I haven't heard about a
specific training measure that would have actually
prevented what happened in this case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How do you train
your new hires? First day, somebody right out of law
school shows up and says, I want to be an assistant
district attorney. How do you train them?
MR. COONEY: I think the first thing you do
is you have a hiring process that emphasizes the
important of -- the importance of Brady, as this office
did. Brady was important. One witness said --
McElroy -- from the moment you walked in the door, you
had to write an essay on Brady. Brady was emphasized as
being very important. And then --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Duncan, that I think you
can't say, because that's just overturning what the jury
found.
MR. DUNCAN: I -- I don't think -- the jury
couldn't have found that that didn't occur, Your Honor.
The jury found that that was inadequate.
JUSTICE KAGAN: The jury found that there
was inadequate training.
MR. DUNCAN: Correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: In fact, the jury found -- I
think, if you look at the record -- the jury could have
found, a reasonable jury could have found, that there
was no training here.
MR. DUNCAN: A reasonable jury could have
found -- well, Your Honor, we don't contest the finding
of inadequate training. What we contest is the
ingredients that lead -- that can lead to a deliberate
indifference finding on the basis of inadequate
training.
And what we say is that this case, that is a
general case about you failed to train on Brady, it
doesn't fit within the single-incident hypothetical.
And what I was trying to get at with -- with response to
your questions and Justice Alito's question was that, if
you can't say with any specificity, well, what training
do you give?
You asked repeatedly, Your Honor, how much
training is enough? So is an hour a year? I thought I
heard my colleague say that an hour a year may make this
not a no-training case, and so what you have there is a
pattern --
JUSTICE BREYER: So we have to overturn the
jury finding?
MR. DUNCAN: No, Your Honor. Absolutely
not.
JUSTICE BREYER: We don't?
MR. DUNCAN: No, you do not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Because they found that the
failure to adequately train amounted to deliberate
indifference to the fact that inaction would obviously
result in a constitutional violation. That's what they
found.
Now, how can we -- assuming that's true and
accepting it and not overturning it -- find that there
was something unlawful? Because you're arguing --
you're all arguing about whether the training program
really was adequate or not. They found it was not.
What do we do?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You can answer.
MR. DUNCAN: Thank you, Your Honor, Mr.
Chief Justice.
The correct resolution is the lower court
should dismiss the failure-to-train claim as a matter of
law because there was no demonstration of a pattern of
violations, and this situation does not fall within the
narrow range of circumstances that Canton foresees for
single-incident liability.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the case in the
