IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MAYO FOUNDATION FOR MEDICAL :
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 09-837
UNITED STATES :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 8, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Petitioners.
MATTHEW D. ROBERTS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MATTHEW D. ROBERTS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 24
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
THEODORE B. OLSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 35
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 09-837, Mayo Foundation for Medical
Education and Research v. The United States.
Mr. Olson.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. OLSON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Congress expressly exempted from Social
Security taxes wages paid to a student who is enrolled
and regularly attending classes. The medical residents
at Petitioners' schools are enrolled and pursuing a
formal accredited curriculum that has a rigorous core
curriculum, as I said; hundreds of classes, conferences,
lectures; laboratory research; written exams; grades;
and intensive, hands-on clinical patient training under
the supervision of faculty members.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Olson, are -- are all
institutions that employ residents schools?
MR. OLSON: I don't know -- I don't know
whether all -- as I understand, the resident program,
which is accredited by the Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education, does involve an
accreditation program which would probably fit -- where
it's taking place, would probably fit the definition of
schools. That is certainly not an issue in this case.
There are -- these -- the institutions that we
represent --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it might -- it might
be relevant, because it would be unseemly, perhaps, to
have residents who are not working at, quote, "schools,"
subject to the FICA tax, and other residents whose
training is approximately the same escape the tax.
MR. OLSON: Well, that was a judgment that
Congress made. Congress made the exemption with respect
to students, and it tied specifically in to someone who
is enrolled and regularly attending classes --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you can't give me the
reality there. Are all resident programs conducted in
schools, or are there resident programs that would not
qualify because they take place in institutions that are
not schools?
MR. OLSON: The only reason I'm hesitating,
Justice Ginsburg, is I don't know the entire universe
out there. Every program, residents' program, that has
been involved in the various cases that have discussed
this have been at schools or universities or colleges.
I'm aware of no program that involves residency and
resident programs accredited by the ACGME that is not
involve in and does not take place in a school or a
university or college. So it could be something out
there that I am not aware of, but I'm not aware of
anything of that nature.
It is undisputed that these individuals in
these residents' programs are enrolled and that they are
regularly attending classes by various definitions of
the word "class." The clinical experience that they are
receiving in hospital rooms, in lecture halls, in all
circumstances that they're involved in, are educational.
They are classes, and it is undisputed -- undisputed --
that the purpose of these programs is to educate doctors
so that they can achieve board certification and
hospital privileges.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Olson, are residents
supervised their entire 40 to 80 hours? Is there an
attending physician standing over their shoulder and
looking at what they're doing?
MR. OLSON: Well, there's two parts to that
question. The answer to the second part is: Of course
not. There is not a supervising attending physician
standing over their shoulder at every moment, but they
are being supervised at all of the time during their
residency program; that is to say that the work that
they do is under the supervision, in that broad sense,
of an attending physician who looks over what they do,
comments on what they do, and so forth.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What I -- how I look at
this case is: How do you draw the line between a
student who is working and a worker who is studying? So
the issue for me is: Is the Treasury Department's
identification of how to draw that line unreasonable?
Do we owe them deference?
MR. OLSON: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Let's use the example
that's been floated around the briefs: the general
counsel of the university who takes classes to increase
his knowledge. Is he a student who is working, or is he
a worker who's studying?
MR. OLSON: There is -- well, the various
courts that have considered this have found the
statutory provision -- that Congress has spoken to the
subject. It has provided an exemption for students, and
it has provided its own limitations. You have to be
enrolled and regularly attending classes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why isn't the general
counsel who's going to, let's assume, either three
classes a week or 6 -- 6 hours of classes, is working
hours as general counsel, and he's regularly enrolled
in classes.
MR. OLSON: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why isn't he part of the
exemption?
MR. OLSON: The -- the Internal Revenue
Service imposes a predominance requirement with respect
to this. The courts that have considered it have said:
This is not a question of law; it is a question of fact.
Is someone really a student or not? Common sense and
common understanding of the word "students" would lead
one to the conclusion of that. I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why wouldn't common
sense lead you to the conclusion that if someone is
working 40 unsupervised hours without an attending
physician at their side, taking care of patients, that
that's really not a student? That's what the Treasury
Department is saying.
MR. OLSON: Well, that is what the Treasury
Department is saying. But, first of all, you have to be
an employee for this provision to apply at all. This
provision --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You don't think
receiving $50,000 or $60,000 a year is enough to make
you an employee of someone?
MR. OLSON: No. No. In fact, the
government will say that the amount of remuneration is
immaterial. The government says that in its
regulations. The IRS says that, and it has said it for
many, many, many years. And right from the beginning,
the amount of the remuneration has no significance at
all.
The fact is, as every court that has
considered the question has concluded, is that these
residents are under supervision. It -- you may be
supervised if someone's not standing over your shoulder.
If they review at the end of the day or at the beginning
of the -- of the course what you've done, what you --
what you -- what situations you've encountered, the
standards that are being applied --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But why doesn't that --
assume it's not the general counsel of the university
but a lawyer working in the general counsel's office.
MR. OLSON: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He's being supervised by
the general counsel, his work's being reviewed, and he's
attending classes at night.
MR. OLSON: Well, in the first place, that
is a different case. This is a refund action based upon
the situation -- the facts are on the ground with
respect to these residents. That is not the case here.
However, that and the other parade of horribles that the
Government mentions in its briefs -- what about the
professor -- I mean, what about the university
president, what about the general counsel? -- all would
be excluded by the predominant requirement --
predominancy requirement, which we're not challenging,
which is not involved in this case, and the Government
hasn't challenged here.
These individuals cannot achieve what they
need to achieve for board certification and hospital
privileges except by having clinical experience. That
is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, what they want to
achieve is a higher long-term pay, but they can go out
and work as doctors.
MR. OLSON: They could -- well, very little.
The -- the record is very, very clear that almost in no
cases, in -- in a very, very narrow circumstance can
they work as doctors. They won't have hospital
privileges. They won't --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I understood that 15
percent of the physicians were not board certified.
MR. OLSON: And -- and many of them may be
in the military or in circumstances -- but the -- but
the record, as examined by the various courts that have
considered it, said, for all intents and purposes in the
modern world, that physicians that are going to be
treating you and me in the vast majority of cases will
be board certified. It's an enormous impediment, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So how about the
architect residents who are working in universities?
Are they medical -- like medical residents as well?
MR. OLSON: Well, they may be. I haven't
studied whether an architect, if they are in a school --
Congress decided what this exemption would cover. It
says: If you are a student enrolled in a school,
university, or college, and you are regularly attending
classes, then you would be covered.
Now, that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Olson, why not read
that provision -- now we are going to the statute -- if
such service is performed by a student, et cetera, as
saying, look, there's a student status, and the service
is distinct from the student's status?
Take the typical work/study program in a
college. That would seem to fit this language to a tee.
There's a student, and the student is working part time,
but you are -- there -- there is no independent
significance to the term "student" as you read the text;
that is, the student and the services are all together.
It's not, "I am a student here and I perform services
there." It's -- the student is -- the education is the
service.
MR. OLSON: Well, the services are performed
for the purpose of receiving an education. As -- as the
Internal Revenue Service construed this provision, up
until the fact that they lost several cases, was that if
your purpose was to achieve or pursue a course of
studies -- that's the old regulation. If your --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But wouldn't -- wouldn't
this fit the work/study student who is studying
philosophy and then he's working in the, say, speech
department?
MR. OLSON: I didn't hear that last word.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- it seems to me
that -- what came into my mind when I read these words
was a work/study program where the student is studying
and that's the status of student. The work is separate
from that. It's not necessarily to advance the person's
education. It's to give the student some money. So
that's what I thought -- I thought that this was -- this
was describing student status, okay; and the student is
also working for some money.
But you seem to say that the service --
that -- that it's -- the student status is not
independent from the service.
MR. OLSON: Well, this -- absolutely, that's
true in this case. The students -- the service that the
students are performing in hospital rooms, looking at
patients, listening to lectures, working in
laboratories, is a part of what they're getting paid
for.
So they have to be an employee to begin
with, in order for this exemption to apply. They
have -- it might be -- it's -- I don't know whether you
have in mind someone being paid for -- by someone
outside the school, but this --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No, I have in mind the
typical work/study program. The -- the student signs up
for work/study and may be assigned to work in the
administration, helping out with clerical things there.
But the student status is one thing; the services are
another.
Now, that, I assume, would be covered, that
the earnings of the student in the work/study program
would not be subject to FICA?
MR. OLSON: Well, the government's got
various categories of examples. The situation that
you've just described sort of falls close to one of
those examples, but this is -- that is not this case.
The government would say, I would think,
that if you are a student, even though your service is
unrelated to your education, you would fall within the
exemption. I think that's one of the examples that the
government gives.
I might have guessed that it would come out
differently. But in this case, the purpose for the
service is education. The goal of the service is
education. It's not to earn a living. And -- and it's
-- and the goal of the universities is not to make
money. It is to provide --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you keep
focusing, Mr. Olson, on -- on this case. And one of the
things that I think is important in the tax code is that
you not have litigation of each different case, so the
different courts are coming out with different rules.
And, at the end of the day, you put one next to the
other, and it looks pretty hard to tell the difference.
So why doesn't it make sense simply to refer
to -- defer to the Service's interpretation?
MR. OLSON: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You go back and --
both of you go back and forth with hypotheticals, each
of which sort of supports, but this basically a very
familiar situation of an apprentice who is both an
employee and both a student, and to try to draw the line
in some categorical way doesn't make sense. The only
way you can draw the line is to have somebody say: This
is going to be the line. And if anybody is going to say
it, it ought to be the IRS.
MR. OLSON: Well, I know we're in the
Supreme Court, but five courts of appeals that
considered this said that the language is clear. It
does not admit to a categorical exclusion of residents
in programs like this. It --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, those five courts
did it before -- most of those opinions were rendered
before the new regulation.
MR. OLSON: That's right. And what the
government having --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Only one of them --
MR. OLSON: The government having lost based
upon the words of the statute and the regulations that
they had promulgated that had to do with the goals, the
purpose, the objective, and the nature of the
activity -- lost every one of those cases and said:
We're going to adopt a regulation that does have the
virtue that the Chief Justice mentioned of -- of being
categorical.
It's the same as saying, if you're
left-handed, you're not going to be covered by this
student exemption, or if you're only doing it during the
daytime --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is it -- is it -- the --
the answer to Justice Ginsburg's question -- I was
uncertain. Suppose a student is working 45 hours a week
in the grounds department cutting lawns, and he does --
cutting the school lawn, and he earns enough money to
help with his way through college. Now, I thought,
under this, that he is not within this statute because
it's 45 hours and not 40?
MR. OLSON: Oh, yes. The -- the United
States --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MR. OLSON: -- would take the position that
it's not 45 hours.
JUSTICE BREYER: That it's not -- okay.
So -- so, what they're doing is -- it started out with
the word "student" and the word "service performed" in
the statute. Then, for many, many years, they have
talked about the employment, how it has to be an
incident to the study. And "incident" is the key word.
And so now what they've done is interpret
their own word "incident" as saying if it bulks too
large in comparison with the -- with the studying, it's
not incident to the study; it's a separate thing. And
that's true whether it happens to be medical school or
it happens to be lawn mowing. They can't -- they don't
want it as so big in comparison to the study that it's
not really part of trying to get the study. It's just
too big. And they use the 40 for that.
MR. OLSON: Yes, they have.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Now, if you're
going to admit the word "incident to," if you're saying
they have the right to put the word "incident to," why
don't they have the right to define "incident to" in
part in terms of 40 hours a week?
MR. OLSON: Well, because it's both
arbitrary and it's irrational. If what the student is
doing, what the individual is doing, what the resident
is doing, is learning the craft that he needs to perform
a doctor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Olson --
MR. OLSON: The government is saying -- and
the government is saying --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- everyone learns.
Aren't you learning today -- sitting here and watching
this -- maybe you're not -- your own argument, but the
arguments before? Aren't we learning in every case that
we're hearing? I -- I --
MR. OLSON: Oh, by the way --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's -- it's, in my
mind, difficult to separate out what makes a person or
stops a person from learning on a job.
MR. OLSON: Well, the fact is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: At any job, actually.
MR. OLSON: -- the Justices of this Court
are exempt from Social Security taxes, so --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You're not
challenging that, are you, Mr. Olson?
(Laughter.)
MR. OLSON: No, you're okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I opted in, Mr. Olson --
MR. OLSON: But -- but the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- for the very reason
the residents might want to.
MR. OLSON: Congress -- Congress decided to
provide an exemption for students. And I want to
address what Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, it didn't as
interpreted. You see, it's not -- it's that -- I
concede everything you say: It's a total learning
experience, and it's a special learning experience. The
problem I was having that I wanted your answer to is
that they have for many, many years said: Just because
it's a pure learning experience and nothing but a pure
learning experience, you still can't get this exemption
unless the work is incident to that experience. And by
"incident" we mean it can't bulk too large --
MR. OLSON: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in respect to the whole.
So the problem for you is not that it's not education.
MR. OLSON: That -- that --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's that the work is the
education.
MR. OLSON: That last step that you made is
just like Humpty Dumpty in Lewis Carroll's "Through the
Looking Glass": A word is what I say it is.
It -- the work that the -- the residents do,
the services they perform are all incident to the
educational process. There's no dispute that the goal
is the education, both from the standpoint of the
university and from the standpoint of the student, that
that is what is accomplished. And what --
Justice Breyer, what they've said is because you are
doing that, the -- the service is incident to the
education until you do it for 40 hours. Then it's no
longer incident.
So someone who may be a student under the --
under the government's interpretation is a student until
they work that 40th hour a week on a regular basis; then
somehow they're no longer a student.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Olson, there has been
a concern expressed that if we accept your position that
residents are students, it will have ramifications for
other areas of the law, notably, the National Labor
Relations Act. Suppose the residents wanted to organize
and collectively bargain. If they're students, they
can't do that.
And let's take the Title VII and the other
antidiscrimination in employment statutes. If they're
not employed, if they're students rather than employees,
then they wouldn't be covered by that legislation.
MR. OLSON: That is the fallacy that the
government is making, that you have to either be a
student or an employee. That argument is not correct,
because in all other respects, these residents are
employees. The exemption provided in 3121(b)(10) does
not come into play unless you are an employee.
So for all those purposes, Title VII, the
Fair Labor Standards Act, and so forth -- those are
other statutes that define the term in a certain way.
What the -- what the code says in 3121(b)(10) -- that
you are an employee, but if you are an employee of a
college or a university and you are a student, which
means you are enrolled in classes and regularly taking a
program for the purpose of education, then you don't pay
FICA taxes. It doesn't have any other implication.
And the Government's position in that
respect, and the argument that's made in the other
briefs, is -- are classic red herrings. They distract
from the real issue.
You don't have to be either an employee or a
student. In fact, you have to be both for this
exemption to apply, and that is what is happening here.
Now, again, this is -- there may be
circumstances where there might be something that's
close to the line and the government might say, well,
you're not really a student. And the government really
tried that in the Second Circuit, in the Sixth Circuit,
and the Eleventh Circuit, and -- and the Seventh
Circuit. And in each one of those cases, the court --
and uniformly, all five circuits, including the Eighth
Circuit -- until the government decided to change the
regulation to say, essentially, residents are out --
that's basically what they said.
JUSTICE BREYER: I looked it up in the
dictionary, and the meaning number 1 b of "incident" is:
an accompanying minor occurrence or -- occurrence or
condition. Minor. In other words, there's the big
thing, and then there's the incident.
Now, if that's the meaning, well, this says
40 is trying to get at whether it's minor or the whole
MR. OLSON: That's the same dichotomy that
doesn't exist. The -- the person is a student. They're
just doing it long and arduously, and they're doing it
for several years so that they can be board certified as
good doctors in their specialty.
The idea that somehow you are a student if
you do it for 39 hours, and if you do it for 41 hours --
the programs are rigorous. They -- they have been
designed by the accreditation programs to be rigorous,
so that the -- a doctor will see lots of patients, do
lots of clinical work, because that, according to all of
the record in all of the cases, is where the education
takes place.
You need the classes. You need the
laboratory. But you need to work with patients doing
the things that we want doctors to be doing with respect
to us when they are certified as a specialist in
neurology or whatever it might be.
So Justice Breyer, the idea that -- this is
a classic definition of not only an arbitrary but a
capricious and irrational regulation. It says that
if -- even if you are a student, you're -- you're doing
the things where you would have to be a student, and
you're doing the types of things that you would make --
make you a student, and you're doing it for the purpose
that would make you for a student, but if you do it a
little bit too much, you're too much of a student, and,
therefore, you're not a student.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, that's because --
MR. OLSON: It doesn't make sense.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- of the second meaning
here. It's very surprising, I found, first reading the
statute in the last case, and now I'm reading the
dictionary.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: And here what it says is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: We don't know whether
that's a step forward or backward.
JUSTICE BREYER: It says: something arising
or resulting from something else of greater or principal
import.
So they're trying to work out, with that
word "incident," is the studying of greater or principal
import? And what they're saying is, when it's 40 hours
a week, this other thing, the studying, is not of
greater import.
MR. OLSON: But that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Rather, it's, let's say, of
equal import.
MR. OLSON: I submit that that makes no
sense at all, because if you're -- if you're studying,
and you're doing it for 39 and a half hours, you're a
student, and if you do it for 40 and a half hours, all
of a sudden you're not doing the same thing? You are
not a student? The incident --
line --
"incident"?
purposes --
JUSTICE BREYER: If you have to draw the
MR. OLSON: I accept the word "incident" --
JUSTICE ALITO: Why do you accept the word
Incident is not in the statute.
MR. OLSON: No, it isn't. I'm saying, for
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why isn't the answer
that the -- that the noneducational aspect of the
service has to be incidental to what they're doing?
MR. OLSON: Well, that might be also. What
we're -- what we're saying -- I don't -- I'm accepting
the word "incident" for the purposes of this case, that
there is no question that the work that's being done,
the services that are being performed, Justice Alito,
are incident to the education. They are a part of the
educational process. They are subservient to the
educational process. In fact, they make the educational
process.
If I may, Chief -- Mr. Chief Justice, may I
reserve the balance of my time?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Olson.
Mr. Roberts.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MATTHEW D. ROBERTS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. ROBERTS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
FICA student exemption covers individuals
who are predominantly students but perform incidental
employment for their schools. It does not cover
Petitioners' medical residents. They are full-time
employees, and the Treasury Department has reasonably
concluded that an employee's paid work does not make him
an exempt student, even if he also learns from his job.
And that's true for three reasons. First,
the text of the student exemption makes clear that it's
not a broad exclusion for apprenticeships and other
learning jobs. Instead, it's a narrow exemption that
applies only to students performing services for a
school, college, or university where they're enrolled
and regularly attending classes.
And, second, when employees are working long
hours and being paid substantial amounts, they and their
employers should be helping to fund the Social Security
system, and they should be earning credit towards
benefits so that they and their families will have
something to fall back on if they become disabled or
die.
JUSTICE ALITO: If the question is whether
someone is predominantly a student or an employee, why
shouldn't we ask: Why are they enrolled in this
program, and why is the institution enrolling them in
the program?
Why are residents enrolled in the program?
Are they enrolled in the program to make money, or are
they enrolled in the program either because it's a
licensing hurdle they have to clear or they want
additional education, and why is the institution hiring
them? Is the institution hiring them to get the value
of their services or is it hiring them for educational
purposes?
MR. ROBERTS: It's probably both, Your
Honor, but it's not workable to determine student status
by looking in a particular case whether the predominant
motive or the motive of the employee or the employer is
education. People who --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, in general, though.
In general, why are residents -- why do medical school
graduates become residents? Do they do -- are they
doing that because they want to earn the 40 to $50,000 a
year that they're paid, or are they doing it for some
other reason?
MR. ROBERTS: I think they're doing it for
both -- for both reasons, Your Honor. But many, many
individuals pursue their jobs for the primary purpose of
learning, like judicial law clerks, like other
apprentices. But they're not excluded -- they're not
covered by this exemption.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because they don't work
at schools.
MR. ROBERTS: Because they don't work at
schools, colleges, and universities, and they, you know,
may not be enrolled and regularly attending classes.
And so the Treasury reasonably concluded that because
this isn't a general exemption for apprenticeships, that
they shouldn't construe it as providing a special
exemption for apprentices who happen to be employed by
schools, colleges, and universities. And --
JUSTICE ALITO: What if they -- on average
they were paid $10,000 a year? Would it be the same?
MR. ROBERTS: Yes. If they would -- if
their work -- I mean, here, basically, they have work,
and the argument is that that work qualifies them as
students. And what the -- what the Treasury Department
has concluded is that it's going to treat work and study
as distinct categories in deciding whether somebody is
predominantly a student, and that it's not going to
count the work as study even if there's some educational
component to it.
And that's reasonable for several reasons,
as I said. First, because the statute just isn't a
general provision that's designed to cover
apprenticeships. And, second, because when people are
primarily workers and they're working for long hours,
they should be covered and participating in the FICA
system.
And, finally, it -- it would be very
difficult to determine on a case-by-case basis what's
their purpose, what the employer's purpose. You know,
is this job more like study? Is this job more like
work? And on that basis -- and to, on that basis,
decide whether that should make them a student.
So considering all of those things, the
Treasury has decided to draw a bright line and say:
Study is study; work is work; and if you're not a
student independently of that, then your work doesn't
make you a student. And the Treasury has also decided
that if you're working full-time, that then you're
predominantly an employee rather than predominantly a
student, and you're not covered by the exemption.
In addition, FICA's historical development
indicates that the student exemption doesn't cover
medical residents, because at the same time that
Congress enacted the student exemption, it also enacted
a separate exemption for medical interns, and it decided
not to include residents in that exemption. And those
actions would have made little sense if the student
exemption had the scope asserted by Petitioners.
And then, in 1965, Congress repealed the
intern exemption in order to give young doctors an
earlier start in building up Social Security coverage.
And that repeal also wouldn't have achieved its purpose
if many and most residents were covered -- were excluded
from FICA under the student exemption.
These -- these residents are people.
They're working between 50 and 80 hours a week. They're
working over a long period of time, and they're
providing critical patient care with minimal
supervision.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if -- what if
the school said: You have to get all this clinical
experience, but we're going to pay you for the first two
hours of the day that you're doing that. Does that
change the analysis at all?
You seem to be focusing on how many hours
they're working. But what if the school says: Well,
look, we recognize some of this is going to school and
some of this is working; so, just like the IRS, we're
going to have an arbitrary rule and we're going to say
you're being paid for the first two hours.
MR. ROBERTS: Well, the rule is that the
paid work doesn't count towards student status, and it
wouldn't -- it doesn't count whether you're doing it for
hours, for 10 hours, or for 40 hours. So, in a
circumstance where they're only being paid -- they're
only working for paid time for a certain amount, that
then that work -- you would have to look there, I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It looks more -- if
you accept their classification, it looks more like the
work is incidental to their status as a student. The
other way around.
MR. ROBERTS: If you accept the
classification in your hypothetical of two hours --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. ROBERTS: -- and the other eight hours?
But those -- that other work wouldn't necessarily
qualify as a course of study, either, Your Honor. I
mean, if what they're doing is providing services but
providing --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It would if they --
and presumably, you would say it does if they don't pay
them anything.
MR. ROBERTS: No, not necessarily, Your
Honor. What -- the Treasury regulations define what a
class is and what a course of study is, and the -- the
individuals have to be engaging in that to qualify as
students and performing -- giving somebody something of
value.
JUSTICE ALITO: But I thought clinical work
could qualify as a course. Is that wrong?
MR. ROBERTS: Clinical work can qualify as a
course under certain circumstances. But the clinical
work that medical students are doing, if you're
referring to that, is of an entirely different order
than the work --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it certainly can if
they're a -- if they can be a student in the last year
of medical school, and they -- they're doing
subintern-level work. That's a clinical program where
they would be categorized as students.
MR. ROBERTS: Yes, it's clinical work, but
it's -- but it's very different than the work that the
residents are doing.
First, there's the distinction that the
residents are getting paid and that the medical students
are paying tuition. But, secondly, from that the
residents are providing valuable patient care. Medical
students are primarily participating in the clinical
activities solely in an educational capacity. And I can
-- if I can describe the different things that they're
doing.
JUSTICE ALITO: We now have a lot of
briefs -- we now have a lot of briefs filed in this
Court by -- in which a lot of the work is done by
students in law school. I assume they're getting credit
for that. Is that -- is that not a course?
MR. ROBERTS: They're not getting paid for
it.
JUSTICE ALITO: But is it a course? Is it
not a course?
MR. ROBERTS: It -- it might be a course,
Your Honor, but they're also engaged in other classes
and other activities that make them regularly enrolled,
and it's part of a degree program. So it's one small --
the clinical course is one small part of that.
JUSTICE ALITO: I understand that. I'm --
I'm questioning why you're resisting the proposition
that clinical work can constitute a course.
MR. ROBERTS: I'm not resisting the
proposition that clinical work can constitute a course.
What I'm saying is that when you're -- when you're being
paid to provide services, that doesn't count as a
course, because the IRS has decided to treat work and
study as distinct categories in -- in applying this
exemption, and that that's a perfectly reasonable
distinction.
Nothing in the statute precludes them from
doing that, and Petitioners concede that -- that it's
reasonable to interpret the statute as limited to
individuals that are predominantly students.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Roberts, do you know
the answer to the question I asked Mr. Olson; that is:
Are all hospitals with resident programs schools?
MR. ROBERTS: No, Your Honor, they're not.
First of all, under the IRS's regulations, the IRS
defines schools, colleges, and universities to include
only institutions whose primary function is the
provision of formal instruction.
And, second of all, if -- on J.A. 27a, in
the record in this case, there's an example of residency
programs that are not students. The -- one of the
hospitals that -- the Hennepin County Hospital that has
University of Minnesota residents also has its own
residents. And just looking on page 27a, if you have
the J.A., there's a question: Do the Hennepin County
residents -- are they enrolled in any academic
institution that you are aware? Not at the present
time.
So, that is an example of one, Your Honor.
And that does point out an anomaly about Petitioners'
interpretation of the exemption. Medical residents who
work for hospitals that are operated by schools,
colleges, and universities would be exempt from FICA
tax, but residents who work for other hospitals wouldn't
be exempt, even though their work is equally
educational. That's just an illustration of the broader
principle that this isn't an apprenticeship exemption,
and that's why, because of that, the Treasury has taken
this approach to the situation where people are learning
on the job.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Roberts, the
Petitioners' brief says twice that there's some
question. Assuming that we hold that the -- the
residents are subject to the FICA tax, there's some
question whether, even if they had to pay the tax,
whether they would be eligible to receive Social
Security benefits or, I take it, credit for four
quarters in full.
MR. ROBERTS: There's no -- there's no
question, Your Honor. It's always been the Social
Security Administration's position that medical
residents are not students exempt from the Social
Security Act. The Social Security Administration stated
that in a Social Security ruling as far as back as 1978,
and they continue to adhere to that position.
In addition, as a practical matter, the way
the Social Security Administration determines whether
people get coverage for a particular period under the
Social Security Act is they look at the W-2's that come
in, and if FICA tax has been paid, then they put them
down as being covered under the Social Security Act. So
as a practical matter, it works that way as well.
As I said before, these workers who are
working between 50 and 80 hours a week over many years
for substantial salaries are precisely the kind of
workers whose employers should be supporting the Social
Security system and who should be earning credit towards
disability and survivor benefits. And we would ask that
the judgment of the court of appeals be affirmed.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Olson, 5 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF THEODORE B. OLSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. OLSON: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
With respect to the question that
Mr. Roberts was addressing with you, Justice Ginsburg,
the record is very unclear. In the Eighth Circuit,
residents may not be eligible for Social Security
benefits. It's quite unclear in the other circuits.
And I invite your attention -- and this is cited in the
briefs -- to 20 C.F.R. 404.1028, which is a Social
Security regulation. It says: "If your main purpose is
pursuing a course of study rather than earning a
livelihood" -- and it's unquestioned that that is what
is happening here -- "we consider you to be a student,
and your work is not considered employment."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Olson, you're not
taking issue with what Mr. Roberts just said? That is,
in practice the -- Social Security looks to see -- they
look at the W-2, see if the FICA tax was paid, and if it
was, then -- then they get credit for Social Security.
MR. OLSON: Well, that may be what they do,
and that may be dependent upon what happens with the
FICA taxes, which is going to be determined -- which has
been determined in four circuits as not being payable
with respect to the residents' programs.
The fact is that the government has taken a
position for many, many years. Talk about deference for
a moment, the National Muffler factors, which we
understand still to be appropriate to evaluate deference
given to an IRS regulation. This is not a
contemporaneous regulation. It is something that came
along just a couple of years ago. It's a
result-oriented regulation. It's basically saying, we
lost all these cases on the facts in the court of
appeals, and now we will pronounce that we will win
these cases, because we know all these residents
programs involve more than --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We have said that
agencies can clarify situations that have been litigated
and positions that they've lost on.
MR. OLSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, why is this any
different?
MR. OLSON: This is very different, because
it -- there's -- not because of any change in
circumstances or facts. It isn't a clarification. It
is a reversal. Because for all those years, the
government said that we had this predominance test. If
your goal is to pursue a course of study, you are a
student.
Now the government is saying, if your goal
is to produce a course of study, but you do it for
41 hours a week, you are not a student. It is a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why are we talking
about National Muffler? I thought the whole point of
Chevron was to get away from that kind of multifactor ad
hoc balancing?
MR. OLSON: Well, I -- this is up to the
Court. The Court has never set aside National Muffler.
The Court cited the National Muffler case in the Cottage
Savings case, which is subsequent to Chevron. It cited
Cottage Savings case in the Boeing case just a couple of
years ago. You may tell me that the factors in National
Muffler are no longer something that you would apply,
but they're all sensible factors with respect to whether
you would give deference to a regulation that pops up
years after the enactment of the statute, after the
government has lost five cases on the facts which are
directly relevant to the facts here, and it's a new
regulation, and there has been no reliance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If Chevron applies,
those considerations are irrelevant, right?
MR. OLSON: You don't need to get to the
part 2, because we submit Chevron would apply and would
stop you at step 1. Government -- the Congress
addressed the factor at issue in this case. It said
what students are: People who are regularly -- are
enrolled and taking classes.
To the extent that you get to the second
phase, those factors seem to be appropriate to consider.
If this is important, and if there is some
anomaly out there, what the government should have done
is turn to Congress, which enacted the regulation that
described student and described what the limitations
were. It had said nothing to do about a categorical
limitation that if you're too much of a student, you're
not a student. It is backwards. If there is some
anomaly, and if the government wants to collect the
funds from these programs that it has really never
collected them from before, then it should turn to
Congress.
There has been no reliance and -- well, the
intern -- the intern anomaly, one of the court of
appeals that -- the court of appeals that considered
that said it relies completely on non sequiturs. It
relies for the interpretation of one statute with the
repeal of another statute 45 years ago and draws
inference from the legislative history with respect to
that which -- the repeal took place 1 year after the
St. Luke's case. The St. Luke's case, the Sixth Circuit
decided that interns were not residents, residents were
not interns.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. OLSON: Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the case in the
