IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ASHBEL T. WALL, II, DIRECTOR, :
RHODE ISLAND DEPARTMENT OF :
CORRECTIONS, : No. 09-868
Petitioner :
v. :
KHALIL KHOLI :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 29, 2010
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
AARON L. WEISMAN, ESQ., Assistant Attorney General,
Providence, Rhode Island; on behalf of
Petitioner.
JUDITH H. MIZNER, ESQ., Federal Public Defender, Boston,
Massachusetts; appointed by this Court, on behalf of
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
AARON L. WEISMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JUDITH H. MIZNER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
AARON L. WEISMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:01 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 09-868, Wall v. Kholi.
Mr. Weisman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF AARON L. WEISMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. WEISMAN: Thank you. Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The issue before the Court today is whether
a State court sentence reduction motion which is a pure
plea for leniency qualifies as, quote, "an application
for post-conviction or other collateral review" within
the meaning of 28 U.S.C. section 2244(d)(2). The State
respectfully argued there are at least three reasons why
such a term as "collateral review" refers only to a
legal challenge, refers to those recognized post-direct
appeal applications in which constitutional,
jurisdictional, and other such fundamental errors may be
raised.
First, as this Court has said, it is
presumed -- Congress is presumed to have known the
language that this Court used in its decisions, and the
term "collateral review" has been used by this Court,
certainly when referring to Federal 2255 applications,
as those type of independent civil inquiries testing the
validity of a conviction and/or sentence --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But, Mr. Weisman, the
phrase is "post-conviction or other" -- "or other
collateral review." And certainly the Rule 25 -- 35
motion is postconviction.
So it's postconviction. It's not direct
review. Why isn't that responsive?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, I think both parties are
in agreement, Your Honor, that the postconviction review
is a part and parcel of the other collateral review.
That's not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: "Or" usually means it's
something in addition.
MR. WEISMAN: Yes, but it's -- with respect,
Your Honor, it is "or other collateral review," and the
"or other" -- and I think both parties are in agreement
as to this -- "or other" embraces that State
postconviction review must also be, quote/unquote,
"collateral review."
Also, I think importantly, it would be
anomalous in a tolling provision, in which we are
talking about the direct appeal already having been
concluded, to embrace things that don't -- that don't --
that come prior to the direct appeal. This is a tolling
-- obviously, 2244(d)(1) speaks about the finality of a
State court judgment of conviction. At that point,
obviously --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you go back to the --
you said -- you said "prior to." I thought the Rule 35
motion is made after the conviction.
MR. WEISMAN: Well, it can be made -- it can
be made prior to when the conviction becomes final. For
example, it can be made within 120 days of the
imposition of sentence. Or it can be made within
0 days after the affirmance of the conviction on
direct appeal of the Rhode Island Supreme Court. So it
can be made prior to when the conviction becomes,
quote/unquote, "final."
JUSTICE KAGAN: But isn't that true
regardless of whether the Rule 35 motion seeks legal
relief or discretionary relief alone? That both can be
made prior to the finality of the judgment?
MR. WEISMAN: That is true, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And -- and if I understand
your argument, your argument is that Rule 35 motions
that seek legal review do fall within the 2244(d)(2)
language. It's just that Rule 35 motions that seek
discretionary relief do not.
MR. WEISMAN: Well, I'm not sure we conceded
that point, Your Honor. I think clearly we're all in
agreement that postconviction vehicles and habeas
vehicles, which obviously all traditionally occur after
the direct appeal has been concluded, obviously qualify
as what this Court -- and everybody, we would suggest --
recognizes as, quote/unquote, "collateral review."
In terms of a Rule 35 motion that says, for
example, the sentence is outside of the -- outside of
the proper boundaries, it's unlawful as a matter of law,
I don't think we've actually conceded before this Court
that that would qualify. But certainly this Court --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Would Rule 35 permit a
challenge for a Federal violation? You've given an
example of an illegal sentence that you think is
discretionary; am I correct?
MR. WEISMAN: Not in --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But does Rule 35(a)
permit a legal challenge of the kind that Justice Kagan
was asking?
MR. WEISMAN: Correct. Our Rule 35 contains
within the same provision a challenge to the legality of
the sentence, to the manner in which it was imposed --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. Let's assume
a pure legal challenge.
MR. WEISMAN: A pure legal challenge,
correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Would Rule 35(a) be
other collateral relief --
MR. WEISMAN: We would --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- as designated by the
statute?
MR. WEISMAN: We would suggest that this
Court doesn't have to answer that question here. There
are good arguments why it would not, again, because in a
tolling provision that speaks about collateral review
and, again, 2255 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So explain again why you
don't think this is collateral?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, certainly when all
you're doing, as the First Circuit recognized, is making
a pure plea for leniency, sentence leniency, you're
not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, no, no. Why is
Rule 35, assuming it's a -- a challenge to an illegal
sentence on a legal ground --
MR. WEISMAN: Well, it could be argued --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why would it not be
collateral review?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, it could be argued that
we're talking about vehicles that challenge the validity
of a judgment that has already survived scrutiny under
direct review. And a Rule 35 vehicle, even one that
raises a legal challenge -- and a tolling provision
simply would not begin to run at that point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't -- I don't
understand your argument at all. It seems to me the
phrase "post-conviction or other collateral review"
means postconviction collateral review or preconviction
collateral review. Isn't that what is added?
"Post-conviction or other"; what's "other" from
"post-conviction"? I guess it would be preconviction,
wouldn't it?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, we would suggest, Your
Honor, that the "collateral review," as explained by
this Court, is referring to the difference between
collateral review and direct review. And the case in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's fine. And is this
direct review?
MR. WEISMAN: This would not -- this is
clearly not -- this is not in the direct review process.
No, it's not.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So it's collateral review?
So --
MR. WEISMAN: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you lose.
MR. WEISMAN: This -- this Court, though,
Your Honor, has said that, speaking about when Congress
enacted 2255, it simplified the procedure for making a
collateral attack on a final judgment entered in a
Federal criminal case, but it did not purport to modify
the distinction, again, between collateral review and
direct review.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would think that if -- if
there's anything to the point you're making, it -- it
hinges not on the "post-conviction or other collateral"
phrase, but rather on the word "review."
I suppose it could be argued that you're not
reviewing the judgment if you're asking for mercy.
Whether a judgment was good or bad, you're -- you're
asking for mercy. And I would -- you know, perhaps it's
not review. Is that your point?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, we go forward and use
that -- even -- we would suggest, Your Honor, even more
strongly that the phrase "collateral review," as that
phrase has been used by this Court consistently,
recognizes that this is a procedure that occurs after
the completion of a direct review process.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's only because
all the cases we've had involved that. We've never had
a case like this before. So in all those other cases,
we've used the natural term "collateral review." That
doesn't mean it couldn't apply to this. It just means
we've never had occasion to inquire whether it applies
to this.
MR. WEISMAN: But, Your Honor, respectfully,
in State v. Addonizio itself, it contrasted the Rule 35
motion, for example. Many jurisdictions, including
obviously the Federal courts, had this very -- almost
exact Rule 35-type proceeding. It has never been
referred to, it has never been understood in thousands
of cases, as collateral review. It always had been
understood as a -- sort of a quasi-civil inquiry, after
the --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Weisman, I think that
that's not right, that the -- as you say, that the
Rule 35 motion that Rhode Island has is based on the
Federal Rule 35 motion that existed prior to 1987, and
that on a couple of occasions this Court talked about
that prior Federal Rule 35 as collateral review. Am I
wrong about that?
MR. WEISMAN: We don't believe so, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN: U.S. v. Robinson,
Bartone v. United States. And I might be wrong about
MR. WEISMAN: We don't believe it ever
referred to a sentence -- a plea for sentence leniency,
Your Honor, no, not -- not as a plea, a pure plea for
leniency under Rule 35.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the current Federal
rule --
MR. WEISMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- provides for -- it's
Rule 35 also, but it doesn't have the pure leniency?
That's Rhode Island's?
MR. WEISMAN: That's correct -- correct,
Your Honor. We're just speaking about the pre-1987
guidelines rule, which is the same.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let's assume that we adopt
your formulation generally, that it has to be for legal
error, collateral review has to be for legal error, and
we could even add what the Ninth Circuit has found, it
has to be by a court in order to avoid clemency, parole
review boards, and so forth.
I don't see why you don't lose anyway,
because the allegation here, the complaint, the
argument, may be that there was an abuse of discretion,
and if there's an abuse of discretion, that is a legal
ground to set aside the -- the sentence.
MR. WEISMAN: I think, Your Honor, we have
to differentiate between a legal ground and the vehicle.
Again, the vehicle, the reduction, the plea for leniency
vehicle, is not a legal vehicle. It's simply, I think,
as the Kholi panel recognized --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's a motion made
in a court, reviewable by the appellate courts of the
State.
MR. WEISMAN: Well, it -- but -- but --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's a little odd to say
that that's not legal. If -- an abuse of discretion
standard is something we're quite familiar with in the
law. We've never thought of that as being somehow
extra-legal.
MR. WEISMAN: Well, to the extent it's abuse
of discretion, it's really shorthand for the appellate
court takes a look; if the sentence is within the proper
bounds and if there was, quote, "some justification" for
the imposition of the sentence, then it's affirmed. And
just like on the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And if there's no
justification, what do they do?
MR. WEISMAN: If there's no justification --
I mean, I can say it hasn't happened so far in our
State, and I think -- you know, I don't know what
happens in other States, but, essentially, that's all
the inquiry is. They take a look at the sentence; if
it's in the legal bounds, the filing of the motion
itself, as to pre-'87 guidelines, presumes the validity
of the conviction and sentence, and it simply says:
Give me a second chance; take a second look; look at the
offender, look at the characteristics, look at what --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are those different
than the characteristics that the sentencing judge looks
at in the first instance?
MR. WEISMAN: They could be the same. They
could be other. There is a wide --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In other words, how
these -- you've obviously seen a lot of these, and I
haven't seen any, but I mean, do the Rule 35 motions
typically say -- do they typically concede the legal
validity of the sentence and then simply say -- what?
mean, I assume the sentencing is -- is completely open
and you can put in anything at all, like the -- the
deprived childhood, the unique situation, the age,
whatever.
MR. WEISMAN: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In what sense is
Rule 35 different from the arguments that are made at
sentencing?
MR. WEISMAN: It's not much different at
all, Your Honor. It is essentially the same. It is --
it is simply --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that's bad for
you, isn't it, I mean for the very point that Justice
Kennedy was raising? If it's the same sort of arguments
that you get to raise as a legal matter prior to the
imposition of sentencing, why should they not be
considered legal matters when they're raised under Rule
MR. WEISMAN: Because we don't believe they
are legal matters, Your Honor. What they're asking for
is sentence leniency based on pure factual matters like,
as you indicated, Your Honor, Chief Justice, the history
of the individual, the various --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are those issues
that can be -- that are typically raised on direct --
direct review?
MR. WEISMAN: No, they're not, Your Honor.
We have a procedure whereby generally sentence reduction
and sentencing issues must be raised pursuant to
Rule 35.
If I could --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do you quarrel with a
statement in Mollicone, a Rhode Island 2000 decision
that says we will interfere with the trial court's
discretion, vis-à-vis sentencing, only in rare instances
where the trial justice has imposed a sentence that is
without justification and is grossly disparate from the
other sentences generally imposed for similar offenses?
MR. WEISMAN: No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is that the review
standard?
MR. WEISMAN: Correct, correct. What the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That is the standard of
review, correct?
MR. WEISMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So please explain to me
why that is not what Justice Kennedy described as a
review for abuse of discretion and why a review for
abuse of discretion is not a legal challenge?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, what we suggest is the
abuse of discretion that that is talking about is if
there's no justification. They look -- again, they look
at the sentence, and if there's no justification for it,
then it will be an abuse of discretion. If there's some
justification -- and, again, it hasn't happened. If
there's some -- if the sentence is within the legal
limits and there's some justification for it, it will be
affirmed. That's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. Am I
misunderstanding you?
MR. WEISMAN: That's the shorthand.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you saying that the
Rhode Island appellate courts never change a sentence
under Rule 35?
MR. WEISMAN: We have not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or are you saying that
they do find some lack of justification in some
sentences?
MR. WEISMAN: No. What we're -- what we're
saying, Your Honor, is if there's some justification for
it and if it's within the legal sentencing bounds, the
denial of the Rule 35 motion is affirmed. And that
happens all the time.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then -- then think
you're saying that it only gets reversed for abuse of
discretion, right?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's a legal ground,
it seems to me. And I don't know how you could say that
that's a plea for leniency. It's a plea that -- that
the sentencing court abused its discretion and should
have given a lesser sentence. How is that leniency?
It's abuse of discretion.
MR. WEISMAN: Because the inquiry is simply
-- I understand the words "abuse of discretion" are
used, but the "no justification and manifestly excessive
standard" simply, as the cases explicate, looks at the
sentence; if it's legal and if there's some
justification for it, the appeal is denied.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't want to have to
figure this out case by case, or even jurisdiction by
jurisdiction, as to whether it's an abuse of discretion
review or a leniency review or this or that. And
that -- that makes me inclined to say we should treat
your Rule 35 as coming within the tolling provision, so
we don't have to grapple with -- I mean, I'm not having
very much success understanding the distinction that
you're telling me. I don't want to have to do this for
States.
MR. WEISMAN: I understand. But certainly,
Your Honor, just -- just using the formulation that
everything that's filed in a State court post a judgment
of conviction qualifies would certainly be an odd way
for that Congress to have expressed that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you read the -- the
relevant provision of the Rule 35? I mean, there are
two categories, the ones about legal challenges, at
least as I read the rule, and --
MR. WEISMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Read the relevant part of
Rule 35.
MR. WEISMAN: Yes, certainly, Your Honor:
"The court may correct an illegal sentence at any time."
Period. "The court may correct a sentence imposed in an
illegal manner, and it may reduce any sentence when a
motion is filed within 120 days after sentence is
imposed or within 120 days after receipt by the court of
a mandate."
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So you're talking about
reducing --
MR. WEISMAN: We're talking -- this case
involves only a motion to reduce sentence. And
certainly the policy considerations for what Congress
would have intended --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Weisman, I'm sorry.
Before you talk about policy, so this motion to reduce
sentence is very short. It just says that the man
"prays that the sentence imposed with respect to the
above matter be reduced in accordance with the
provisions of Rule 35." Would it make a difference to
you if it said he prays that the sentence imposed -- he
prays that the illegal sentence imposed with respect to
the above matter be reduced in accordance with
provisions of Rule 35?
MR. WEISMAN: It might be.
JUSTICE KAGAN: If he had put in that word,
"illegal," would that have made the difference?
MR. WEISMAN: It might, Your Honor. And
under our system, it might -- that might have been
characterized, not as a sentence reduction provision or
sentence reduction vehicle, but as a legal motion to
correct an illegal sentence, or challenging the
sentence.
JUSTICE KAGAN: So -- but that does suggest
the difficulty that Justice Scalia raises, is that we're
going to have to look at the particular rule of the
State, we're going to have to look at the particular
motion, we're going to look at any -- we're going to
have to look at any State law regarding how motions are
construed.
MR. WEISMAN: Sure.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And this is going to be a
very difficult determination.
MR. WEISMAN: Sure. If I could just address
that, Your Honor. The problem is -- it's simply because
a statute of limitations is an affirmative defense,
these are matters that already are going to have been
concluded in the State court. Before anyone files for
54, the State's court's going to have findings.
They're going to -- it's either going to be a motion for
sentence leniency or it's going to be a motion to
correct an illegal sentence.
These matters -- and they have to be pled by
the State as well. So when an applicant goes to Federal
court, district court, and files a 2254, if we want to
raise the affirmative defense of the time bar, which
will save the Federal court a lot of time, obviously,
because there is no case at all -- and if we can
contrast it with exhaustion, for example, which, as this
Court obviously is familiar with, presents very
complicated questions of whether, you know, State
procedures were exhausted and claims were exhausted,
this is very straightforward. If somebody raises a
motion which challenges the legality of the sentence, it
will be characterized in State court in the run of the
mine -- in the run of the mine cases, as an
illegal sentence.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So a petitioner in the
future in Rhode Island should file a petition that says:
I'm filing a motion pursuant to 35(a) for an illegal
sentence -- make something up --
MR. WEISMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- or for leniency. And
then are district courts supposed to figure out whether
the legal challenge was frivolous or not or had a basis
in law or fact --
MR. WEISMAN: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- and then decide
whether they would toll or not toll based on that now
side trial on what's an illegal sentence and what's just
a plea for leniency? That's what you are proposing?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, what we suggest actually
is very straightforward, Your Honor. If somebody
captions their document, you know, "Motion for sentence"
-- "for sentence reduction and motion to correct an
illegal sentence," that's not this case, obviously,
because then the court --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what if they say
"correct the illegal sentence because it was an abuse of
discretion"?
MR. WEISMAN: If it's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So is the magic words
"illegal sentence" or is the magic words "abuse of" --
what are the magic words?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, it may not so much be
magic words, but it's what the -- as this Court has
said, it's what the substance of the motion seeks, and
that will already have been determined in State court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Either -- either your
victory will give you absolutely nothing, or you have
truly stupid defendant lawyers in Rhode Island. I mean,
why would anybody not caption the 35 motion that way?
MR. WEISMAN: Because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What's to lose? You say it
doesn't matter if your claim of an illegal sentence is
frivolous or not. What's to lose?
MR. WEISMAN: Because, Your Honor, they
actually want to reduce their sentence. It's not -- we
don't suggest it's not a matter of playing games. They
-- you know, they feel they were sentenced for 30 years
and maybe they want 20 years, and if they want to
challenge the legality of the sentence, they recognize
the established collateral attack vehicles.
JUSTICE ALITO: There is another argument
that you could make, other than the one you've been
pressing, which is that collateral review means
something other than a step in the criminal case. But
you've chosen not to make that; is that correct?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, we've spoken about the
words "collateral review" as embracing a case that's
already -- upon looking -- a proceeding that occurs
after the finality of the judgment, which obviously
includes this Court's denial of cert or the time --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you've said that this
could be done before finality. I thought -- I --
MR. WEISMAN: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sure you said that
earlier, that this motion can be made before the
judgment is final. Didn't you say that?
MR. WEISMAN: It can. It certainly can,
Your Honor. And we would suggest --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that's not what you
just said.
MR. WEISMAN: No --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What you just said is after
the finality. Which is it?
MR. WEISMAN: We would suggest, Your Honor,
that that furthers our argument. A Rule 35 motion is
not collateral review because it is not a motion -- you
could say even in a legal sense, motion. It's not a
motion that occurs after the judgment becomes final.
And we're looking at a tolling provision, and the
congressional intent of the tolling provision was
finality and exhaustion of State remedies.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. I'm not sure
I understand that. There's nothing in this rule that
bars a litigant from filing after the conviction is
final. They have 120 days.
MR. WEISMAN: They have 120 days. It can be
filed after the sentence is imposed, 120 days of that
date, or 120 days after the conviction becomes final.
And we would suggest that the term "collateral review"
embraces, as Justice Alito indicated, sort of that
concept that, obviously in a tolling provision, it
begins to run when the conviction becomes final.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Justice Scalia's
suggestion --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Except that it says --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- that perhaps the --
the leniency review is -- is not review of the
conviction or sentence. But you didn't -- you didn't do
anything with that. You didn't argue that the kind of
review that's involved with leniency is really not
review of the sentence for legal error.
MR. WEISMAN: It's clearly not, Your Honor,
correct. I think, as everybody here recognizes, the
Kholi panel and the Respondents in this case as well
characterized this Rule 35 proceeding as sort of apart,
distinct, away from the underlying case. And that's
undoubtedly true in the sense that it's not -- it's not
part of the direct review process. It's -- it's clearly
not. But that doesn't mean it's collateral review.
It's not either/or. It could be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So what -- is it
something in between? It's not direct and it's not
collateral?
MR. WEISMAN: It's -- it's neither fish nor
fowl, Your Honor. I mean, simply because it's not part
of a direct review process doesn't mean that it's,
quote, our argument would be, "collateral review,"
because, again, "collateral review" has this sort of
meaning in the law, using this Court's decisions, using
this Court's cases, referring to a post-judgment vehicle
in which fundamental jurisdictional and other types of
errors can be raised.
JUSTICE ALITO: What about a motion --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I guess we need a new
adjective then, because I'd always thought that there
are two kinds of review, direct and collateral. You say
there's a -- a tertium quid. What do you want us to
call that?
MR. WEISMAN: Well, I don't know that it
needs to be called anything, Your Honor. I think the
only question with respect --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think that maybe it
doesn't need to be called anything because it doesn't
exist. I -- I can't --
MR. WEISMAN: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- imagine anything that
isn't either direct or collateral.
MR. WEISMAN: -- it is certainly -- it is
certainly an interesting vehicle because, it can be
filed prior to the finality of the judgment and it can
be filed -- and it can be filed after the judgment
becomes final.
And, again, going -- going back to the
policies, the 2244(d)(2), very clearly, two big
policies, again, are finality, which obviously it
promotes -- these cases would not be in Federal court if
they were time-barred -- and exhaustion of State
remedies. To have a motion that seeks leniency only,
there's no purpose that could be accomplished by
bringing that motion into Federal court, and therefore
it doesn't serve that purpose.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Weisman, that's
true also of State habeas claims that are based only on
State law. But six circuits have said that 2244(d)(2)
applies to those claims. Are you contesting that?
MR. WEISMAN: We're not. But the -- but the
important element there, Your Honor, is that those
vehicles can be raised to bring -- those are the
vehicles, the collateral vehicles, through which the
States have channelled constitutional, jurisdictional,
and other fundamental claims.
The Rule 35 sentence reduction vehicle
doesn't -- can't do it, can't do that service. So,
sure, you could have -- you could have a habeas, and the
only issue, the only claim raised in habeas could be,
you know, it's in violation of -- of my State rights,
which couldn't be heard in 2254, but --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Where the exhaustion policy
does not come into effect.
MR. WEISMAN: Exactly. But Congress may
have well said we're not going to be in the business of
looking at the individual claims. Look, this is a
collateral review vehicle. This vehicle is a recognized
vehicle for bringing, for channeling in these claims.
So that's going to toll.
But this other vehicle, this Rule 35
sentence reduction vehicle -- it can never be used for a
claim that could go to Federal court. It's pointless.
I mean, it wouldn't serve the purpose, and of course it
would undermine the State's interest in getting the
State prisoners into Federal court within 1 year.
I'll reserve my time if that's okay, Your
Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. WEISMAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Ms. Mizner.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JUDITH H. MIZNER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. MIZNER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The First Circuit here correctly held that
Khalil Kholi's motion for a reduction of sentence under
Rhode Island Rule 35 was an application for State
postconviction or other collateral review with respect
to the pertinent judgment or claim. As such, it tolled
AEDPA's 1-year limitation period, and Mr. Kholi's
petition was timely filed.
We look to the common usage and ordinary
understanding of the words of the tolling provision in
the context of the statute. Collateral review is a
proceeding occurring after final judgment that could
affect that judgment.
JUSTICE ALITO: Am I correct that you think
"post-conviction or other collateral review" means
anything that occurs after the conclusion of direct
review?
MS. MIZNER: Yes, for purposes of the
tolling provision.
JUSTICE ALITO: Then what does the phrase
"or other collateral review" add? Why -- why wouldn't
Congress just say "post-conviction review"?
MS. MIZNER: In Duncan, this Court talked
about the possibility of civil commitment or contempt in
custody that could be part of the Rule 2254 proceeding
and that that would not be postconviction. So that
postconviction is a form of collateral review but is not
the only form.
In Duncan, the Court also discussed the fact
that many States may call what other States call
"post-conviction review" something else, and that that
would also then be collateral. The collateral is just
a -- an umbrella that encompasses postconviction and
other forms of review after a judgment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why don't you just
call your motion a motion to correct an illegal
sentence? Then we wouldn't have any dispute here, I
gather.
MS. MIZNER: Under the State's theory, there
would not be. I did not file this motion.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You're not one of
the stupid lawyers that we were worried about before.
(Laughter.)
MS. MIZNER: I may be in other respects,
Your Honor, but not this one.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sure of that.
But you do think that if you had -- if you or whoever
files these motions had simply said that, there would be
no problem, right?
MS. MIZNER: From the State's perspective.
I don't think that there's a problem with omitting the
word "illegal," because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it's because
you want something other than legal review, right? You
want to throw yourself on the mercy of the court.
You've got plenty of avenues to correct the illegality
of the sentence, but this is something different, right?
This is to -- not correct -- you admit it's illegal, but
you say but it should still be reduced for a lot of
reasons.
MS. MIZNER: Yes. It is a request for the
court to -- to review, to take a second look, to
reexamine the sentence to determine whether or not it
was unduly severe at the time that it was imposed. You
are asking the court to -- to take a second look, either
based on factors that were submitted at sentencing or
additional information that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You can raise all of
those -- all of those claims under the normal State
collateral postconviction, State habeas, all those other
things, right?
MS. MIZNER: You can raise those issues
under the postconviction review. You can also raise
them -- in Rhode Island, there is a provision of the
postconviction review statute that speaks of the -- any
facts that would require a new proceeding in the
interests of justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I guess I'm
having trouble. You can -- the various grounds on which
the sentence should have been lower than it was,
including the fact that setting the sentence at that
level was an abuse of discretion, you obviously can
raise those at sentencing and you can raise those on
direct review, right?
MS. MIZNER: In Rhode Island, you cannot
challenge your sentence on direct review.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Can you challenge it
on -- in State habeas?
MS. MIZNER: You challenge it by way of the
Rule 35 motion.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's the only
vehicle you have --
MS. MIZNER: It's the normal --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's the only
vehicle you have for challenging the sentence.
MS. MIZNER: That's the normal vehicle that
is used for challenging the sentence. I believe that
you could also encompass it in a motion for
postconviction relief, which is the kind of umbrella
Rhode Island procedure for raising -- for a legal
challenge.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So after a conviction in
the State, if there's an appeal with a number -- on
direct review, with a number of issues, improperly
admitted evidence and so forth, you -- the lawyer can't
add: And, in addition, he was sentenced under the wrong
provision; he was given 5 years too many because the
judge cited the wrong provision. You can't say that on
direct review?
MS. MIZNER: Under my understanding of the
Rhode Island Supreme Court decisions, the answer to that
is no.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You can challenge only
the conviction, not the sentence, on direct review?
MS. MIZNER: I believe that that is the
holding of the Rhode Island Supreme Court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do --
CHIEF JUSTICE: In what --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you agree that Rule 35
is not something that the prisoner must exhaust before
seeking Federal habeas?
MS. MIZNER: Exhaustion for Federal habeas
is limited to exhaustion of the claims that are going to
be presented in the Federal habeas petition. And since
a -- the denial of a request for a sentence reduction on
the grounds of abuse of discretion is not going to be a
claim that is cognizable in Federal habeas corpus
jurisdiction, then you would not need to exhaust it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But this is the whole
purpose of allowing tolling of the 1-year Federal
statute, the purpose to give the petitioner an
opportunity to exhaust what he must exhaust?
MS. MIZNER: Exhaustion is one of the
purposes of the tolling provision, but this Court has
recognized that AEDPA's purpose was to further the
principles of comity and finality and federalism, and
had a clear purpose of encouraging litigants to pursue
claims in State court prior to seeking Federal review.
So, tying the tolling provision to State
applications shows congressional concern for comity,
which at its core is a -- is a respect for the State
processes that are used in reviewing the claims of State
prisoners.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I -- I may have
asked this already, but it seems unusual to me so I want
to make sure of the answer. Your -- you have a client
who is convicted of a particular offense that results in
a sentence of, what, zero to 5 years, okay? And the
judge, in imposing the sentence, engages in racial
discrimination. It turns out that he sentences
African-Americans to 5 years and Caucasian defendants to
years. That, you're telling me, is a claim that you
cannot raise on direct review or on -- in State habeas?
MS. MIZNER: It would be raised in the State
Rule 35, a motion to correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you say it
"would be raised." Are you saying it can only be raised
under Rule 35?
MS. MIZNER: It could be raised under the
State postconviction review proceedings as well.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's what I would
have thought. So Rule 35 is not the only vehicle for
challenging a sentence?
MS. MIZNER: No.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- your adversary said
the contrary, and I was -- you're flip-flopping. Can
this be brought on a direct appeal or not?
MS. MIZNER: No, not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: A non-legal sentence?
MS. MIZNER: Not on direct appeal.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what did you mean
when you answered the Chief Justice that it could be
brought in collateral proceedings?
MS. MIZNER: Well, rule 35 is a collateral
proceeding --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's --
MS. MIZNER: The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Just so your adversary,
when he gets up on rebuttal, can confirm or not this
point, any challenge to an illegal sentence has to be
brought first in a Rule 35(a) motion, regardless of what
the grounds of the illegality are?
MS. MIZNER: Yes, or perhaps in a motion for
postconviction relief under section 10-9.1.
JUSTICE ALITO: Can I return to the question
Justice Ginsburg asked a couple of minutes ago? We have
-- let's say we have a case in which a defendant
convicted in State court has some exhausted Federal
claims that this defendant wants to raise in a Federal
habeas; also files a motion seeking a reduction of
sentence based purely on a request for leniency, a
sentence within the range prescribed by the statute.
What purpose is served by tolling the time to file the
Federal habeas during the pendency of this request for
leniency in the State court? Now, you say comity, but
in concrete practical terms, what purpose is served?
MS. MIZNER: A prisoner who receives
adequate relief in the State court, through whatever
vehicle, may choose not to pursue a Federal habeas
corpus claim.
JUSTICE ALITO: In your experience, does
that happen a lot? You have somebody who is sentenced
to a 5-year sentence and that's within the range, also
has legal challenges that would result in no conviction,
no time whatsoever and no criminal conviction -- that
person decides to give up on the legal challenge because
the 5-year sentence might be reduced to 3 or 2 or 1?
MS. MIZNER: I would say that would be
unlikely, but there are many Federal habeas cases that
are -- raise questions of, for example, ineffective
assistance of counsel at sentencing. A State resolution
that reduces the sentence would obviate the need for a
Federal habeas petition in that context.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can you explain --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If you look at 2255 --
that's the Federal postconviction review, and it also
has a 1-year statute of limitations. That limitation
would not be tolled for a Federal Rule 35 motion. So
why should it be tolled for State?
MS. MIZNER: 2255, Justice Ginsburg, has no
tolling provision at all, and the reason for that may
perhaps be the respect for comity that Congress
recognized when you are addressing a 2254 petition filed
by a State prisoner.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I think, Ms. Mizner, the
amicus brief in this case asserted that, in Rhode Island
or in other States with a rule like this, many judges
sit on these Rule 35 motions. They just let them stay
pending for a considerable period of time, in order to
retain some ability to modify the sentence if and when
they feel like doing so. Is that your understanding of
what happens to these motions, that they just sit, that
they are not denied?
MS. MIZNER: I don't practice in Rhode
Island, but in this case the Rule 35 did not sit. It
was resolved by the trial court within 3 months. The
issue, the potential for abuse from sitting on motions
is not limited to a Rhode Island Rule 35. It's not a
peculiar concern.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I guess the
question -- and I'm sorry if I cut you off -- is not
that this is a question of abuse, that it may be a good
thing. The idea is you've got a motion for reduction of
sentence because of mercy, and the judge might say:
Well, I'm inclined to exercise mercy if you come out of
the rehab program in a good way, if it turns out after
the first several months that you're a model prisoner.
In other words, it's not a question of abuse, it's a
good thing; and if we start saying that the time for
Federal habeas is tolled, judges might be inclined not
to exercise such charity based on the prisoner's conduct
after conviction.
MS. MIZNER: Well, the Rule 35 also provides
that the decision must be made within a reasonable time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: 120 days, right?
MS. MIZNER: No, 120 days is the time
frame --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: For filing?
MS. MIZNER: -- within which the motion must
be filed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MS. MIZNER: The rule also provides that it
must be decided, resolved, within a reasonable time. So
there is a -- a limitation in that respect.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do we have any indication
in the case law what a reasonable time consists of?
MS. MIZNER: I have not found any Rhode
Island cases discussing that particular question.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can you go back for a
second? Imagine a defendant is convicted of robbery and
he's sentenced to 10 years. He thinks there is an error
in my conviction of a legal nature, and he thinks there
is another error in my -- in my sentence of a legal
nature. Now, I take it in Rhode Island he files an
appeal to consider the first.
MS. MIZNER: Yes, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: And as to the second, he
files a Rule 35 motion.
MS. MIZNER: That's my understanding of
Rhode Island --
JUSTICE BREYER: And when does he file the
Rule 35 motion? Because it says at any time.
MS. MIZNER: No. A Rule 35 motion must be
filed within 120 days.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, it doesn't say that.
It says a court may correct an illegal sentence "at any
time." I'm talking --
MS. MIZNER: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: It has nothing to do with
mercy. I want to know how it works. He says there's a
legal error in my sentence. When -- how does he get
that corrected?
MS. MIZNER: A defendant would have an
interest in getting it corrected as soon as possible.
JUSTICE BREYER: I have -- I'm not -- don't
take what I have as my view. I just want the fact. I'm
asking you a fact. When -- how and when does the person
correct the legal error in his sentence?
MS. MIZNER: He could correct it by filing
the motion at any time, and --
JUSTICE BREYER: Where?
MS. MIZNER: In the trial court.
JUSTICE BREYER: And if the trial court says
no, what does he do?
MS. MIZNER: He appeals that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. Okay. So now we
have two appeals. One is from the judgment of
conviction; another is from the judgment imposing the
sentence. Now, the Federal statute says a 1-year period
of limitation shall apply from the date on which the
judgment became final. Correct?
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. When is the date on
which the judgment of the sentence became final?
MS. MIZNER: If both appeals are pending at
the same time, the practice would be to consolidate
them, so you would have a ruling from the Rhode Island
Supreme Court --
JUSTICE BREYER: And if they are not
appealing -- they are not -- they are not at the same
time, then what?
MS. MIZNER: Then the judgment would become
final when the Rhode Island Supreme Court affirmed the
conviction and either this Court --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not the sentence?
MS. MIZNER: You may have two time frames --
JUSTICE BREYER: In April, they affirm the
conviction. In June, they affirm the sentence. Do
those 2 months -- does the date on which the judgment
became final by conclusion of direct review, does that
run from April or from June?
MS. MIZNER: I would say June.
JUSTICE BREYER: June. Okay. Now, suppose
he doesn't -- suppose that there were no appeal from
the -- I see. Our problem is that there is no appeal
from the judgment -- from the sentence where he asks for
correction as a matter of mercy and not law.
MS. MIZNER: There may be an appeal --
JUSTICE BREYER: There may be?
MS. MIZNER: -- from such -- from the denial
of a Rule 35.
JUSTICE BREYER: What I'm trying to figure
out is why, if you're willing to call, for purposes of
one -- the 1-year statute begins to run from the time
the direct appeal becomes final. Why is it a direct
appeal of a sentence where you appeal the matter of law
and it isn't a direct appeal of a sentence where you ask
for mercy? It's the same rule. It's the same
procedure.
MS. MIZNER: It -- the Rule 35 --
JUSTICE BREYER: This would help you just as
much, I imagine. I'm just trying to get it straight in
my mind.
MS. MIZNER: Rhode Island's manner of
addressing the Rule 35 seems to be somewhat unusual in
terms of --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know. You see, my basic
question is: Why -- look, two appeals; one judgment,
one sentence. Okay? January, June. You're prepared to
say the 1-year statute does not begin to -- to run until
June. Fine. The Rule 35 motion, when you took an
appeal, became final for purposes of the Federal habeas
statute in June.
So why doesn't the Rule 35 motion become
final under (1)(a) of the habeas statute, whenever
that's decided finally? Why is it collateral at all?
Why isn't it direct, just as your first one was direct?
MS. MIZNER: If the Rule 35 motion is filed
after the Rhode Island Supreme Court affirms the
judgment with --
JUSTICE BREYER: Wait a minute. Judgment of
what? Judgment of conviction --
MS. MIZNER: The judgment of conviction.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- or judgment of sentence?
MS. MIZNER: Judgment of conviction. The
Rule --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's not the same reason
that it doesn't become final when you haven't appealed
your sentence yet, or when they haven't -- they didn't
consolidate.
I am quite confused, as you see, as to how
this all works in Rhode Island. I -- Rhode Island -- I
used to be on the First Circuit. I know it has some
special ways of doing things that are sometimes
different, and this is different.
MS. MIZNER: It is, Justice Breyer. And I
have not seen any Rhode Island cases addressing a
Rule 35 motion that was not filed after the judgment of
conviction had been affirmed in the context of looking
for a discretionary reduction of sentence.
JUSTICE BREYER: There must be in Rhode
Island some complaints about the sentence.
MS. MIZNER: In terms of a motion for
reduction for leniency --
JUSTICE BREYER: Both.
MS. MIZNER: I have not seen any --
prejudgment -- pre-Rhode Island Supreme Court
resolutions.
JUSTICE ALITO: What would happen if the
statutory maximum for an offense in Rhode Island is 5
years and the sentencing judge imposes a sentence of 10
years, and the defense attorney at that time says, well,
you can't do that, that's more than a statutory maximum;
and the judge goes ahead with it, and then an appeal is
taken?
You're saying that the appellate court in
Rhode Island would not entertain that argument? They
would say you have to go back and make a Rule 35 motion
in the trial court? Maybe that's the procedure.
MS. MIZNER: That is --
JUSTICE ALITO: It seems odd. Is that it?
MS. MIZNER: That is what the Rhode Island
Supreme Court has said.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is there a citation for
that, that you have? Is it your --
MS. MIZNER: I do not have that with me.
JUSTICE ALITO: Could I return you to
something more basic? Do you think the term "collateral
review" is a legal term of art, or is it a term that we
can -- we should interpret simply by looking up the word
"collateral" in a dictionary?
MS. MIZNER: Well, this Court has discussed
the -- has used the term "collateral review" in a -- a
number of different contexts, in civil cases, in habeas
cases, in the -- in the manner of distinguishing between
direct review and something that is outside direct
review.
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't -- if I look up
"collateral attack" in Black's Law Dictionary, won't I
find a definition there? And won't it tell me that this
is something other than the proceeding? This is an
attack on a judgment outside of the proceeding that led
to the entry of that judgment. Isn't that what the term
generally means?
MS. MIZNER: "Collateral" generally means
supplementary, as defined in Black's, and "collateral
attack" in Black's is defined as an attack on a judgment
in a proceeding other than direct appeal.
JUSTICE ALITO: Right.
MS. MIZNER: But the Rule 35 motion in Rhode
Island is not part of a direct appeal. It is a
separate, specific --
JUSTICE ALITO: But it's part of the case.
MS. MIZNER: It is part of the case,
Justice Alito, but a -- a motion for a new trial based
on newly discovered evidence, which is viewed as
collateral, is also part of the original proceeding.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what about just a
regular motion for a new trial, not based on newly -- on
newly discovered evidence? Is that collateral, or is --
is that part of the -- the criminal proceeding?
MS. MIZNER: The motions for new trial -- a
motion for a new trial that has to be filed within 10 or
days of the conviction would be part of the direct
appeal and therefore would be -- would not be
collateral. But a motion for a new trial that is filed
after the judgment is affirmed by a court of appeals and
the time for cert has passed would be collateral.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what's wrong with the
argument that nothing that occurs in the criminal case
itself is collateral? What Congress had in mind when it
spoke about collateral review was something like habeas.
Let me give you an alternative
interpretation of this, and maybe it's completely wrong,
but you'll tell me why it's wrong.
"Post-conviction" is a term of art. Many
States, including Rhode Island, have postconviction
review statutes. So Congress wanted to have that time,
the time when those proceedings were tolled -- were
pending tolled. But not every State uses that phrase.
Not every State uses that term. They have other names
for the proceeding, and that's what's meant by "other
collateral review." "Collateral review" is a term of
art. It's not something that you understand by looking
up the word "collateral" in a dictionary.
What's wrong with that?
MS. MIZNER: There is no indication that
Congress was limiting the use of the term "collateral
review" to a postconviction legal challenge. Congress
could have said that if it had wished.
JUSTICE ALITO: I'm not saying it has to do
with whether it's legal or something else. It has to do
with whether it's in the criminal case or not in the
criminal case.
MS. MIZNER: Traditionally, motions that are
filed -- motions for a new trial are -- may be filed
after the judgment has been affirmed and have been
viewed by the courts as collateral, as collateral
review. So there is -- the tradition doesn't limit the
use of the term "collateral review" to a proceeding that
is completely separate and apart.
Indeed, a 2255, while it may be separately
filed, is then consolidated with the original
proceeding, and there's an entry in the docket -- you
shall not file any more pleadings in that separate case.
It all goes back to the original case. The 2255, which
is collateral, is heard by the trial court.
So there is a -- there is no reason to
assume that Congress was limiting collateral review to
something outside of the original proceeding.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Do you --
JUSTICE ALITO: 2255 is -- is in the
original case, but it's a habeas substitute. It was
adopted by Congress as a substitute for habeas; isn't
that right?
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Do you think that a petition
for clemency that's presented to the governor would toll
the limitations period?
MS. MIZNER: No, I do not, Justice Kagan.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Why -- why is that
different?
MS. MIZNER: Because 2244(d)(2) is tolling
an application for review with respect to the pertinent
judgment or claim. And a -- an application for clemency
doesn't produce any change in the judgment that is
rendered by the court. It's not a request that is
related to the legal reasoning behind a judgment; it
doesn't challenge the basis for the judgment. And it's
an executive branch function, in some cases with advice
and consent of a legislative body. And there's no
judicial review. So it is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that may be right,
but I don't think that's the reason. I -- I thought we
had held that the word "filed" in the petition means
filed in a court, not filed with the governor. It's --
it's the word "filed" in -- in the tolling provision
that -- that does the work.
MS. MIZNER: I would agree.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You think it doesn't
matter that -- I mean, a Rule 35 motion is a motion made
in the original criminal proceeding, not to the side of
it. So isn't a collateral attack a sort of -- another
proceeding to the side of the main proceeding, but the
Rule 35 motion is filed in the criminal proceeding
itself?
MS. MIZNER: Yes, it is, Justice Ginsburg,
as is a Rule 33 motion for a new trial based on newly
discovered evidence, which courts have held to be
collateral. It's a question of -- of when these motions
are filed that makes them collateral. They are not part
of the direct review process.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So if this was -- if this
motion had been filed before judgment, which can happen,
before the judgment is final, then there would be no
tolling?
MS. MIZNER: Tolling would not come into --
into play until after the judgment has become final. If
this has been addressed and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the question --
MS. MIZNER: -- resolved prior to, it would
have no impact on tolling.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So the answer is yes. This
motion which can be filed either before or after
judgment -- the time is tolled if it's made after the
judgment but not if it's made before.
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There seems to be some
confusion. Judgment is rendered before this motion is
made. There's a conviction and there's a sentence,
right?
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there's a judgment
rendered. That's different from whether the judgment is
final in a Federal sense. It's final as far as the
State is concerned, because the judgment was rendered,
correct?
MS. MIZNER: Well, the judgment would become
final as far as the State is concerned, if on appeal, if
there is an appeal and the Rhode Island Supreme Court
has affirmed.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But if there's no
appeal, it was final the day it was rendered.
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As far as the State is
concerned. If there is an appeal, then it may undo
that, correct?
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there is a judgment,
and this is always post-judgment.
MS. MIZNER: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well -- well, that's not --
that's not what the State says, anyway. The State says,
and I think the way 35 reads, it doesn't have to be
filed after judgment.
MS. MIZNER: It has to be filed within
1 days after the entry -- after the sentence.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's right. It can't be
filed any later than that. But it doesn't say that it
can't be filed before judgment.
MS. MIZNER: It would have to be filed after
the sentence is imposed.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's right.
MS. MIZNER: And the sentence --
JUSTICE SCALIA: When does -- when does it
become final? When does the -- even at the trial court
level, when does it become final?
MS. MIZNER: I would say that the -- it
becomes final when it is imposed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Weisman, you have 6 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF AARON L. WEISMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. WEISMAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I'll begin -- if I could just clarify
regarding the scope of Rule 35. The reporter's notes to
Rule 35 do make it very clear that an illegal sentence
is one which has been imposed after a valid conviction
but is not authorized under law. It includes, e.g., a
sentence in excess of that provided by statute,
imposition of an unauthorized form of punishment, a
judgment that does not conform to the oral sentence.
And our supreme court has gone on to explain this
provision by saying: We have never -- we have never
countenanced a challenge to the constitutionality of a
penal statute in the context of a Rule 35 motion, nor
have we declared that a sentence imposed pursuant to an
unconstitutional statute is illegal as contemplated by
Rule 35.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry, I -- you were
speaking so fast, I didn't follow you.
MR. WEISMAN: I'm sorry, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Perhaps we can go back
to the simple question, which is, can a defendant who
has been sentenced bring a challenge to a sentence in a
direct appeal or not? Or do they have to go by Rule
(a)?
MR. WEISMAN: Although there is dicta and
some language where our supreme court says essentially
file challenges to your sentences pursuant to Rule 35,
it is clear that only certain types of challenges can be
brought in a Rule 35 motion. In the run of the mill
cases, they have to be brought if there is an appellate
record in direct appeal, or most commonly they're
brought pursuant to the State's postconviction relief.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So now we
get to the point where some can go under 35(a) but some
can't.
MR. WEISMAN: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So they should go on
direct appeal, correct?
MR. WEISMAN: The only ones that are correct
under 35(a) are, again, where the sentence is not
authorized by law or has imposed an unauthorized form of
punishment or a judgment that --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's called "it's
illegal."
MR. WEISMAN: Correct. Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: So now it's illegal.
MR. WEISMAN: Correct, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the odd thing is that
-- that kind of appeal takes place either days or
possibly weeks after the defendant may already have
appealed his conviction to the higher court.
MR. WEISMAN: Well -- correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that right?
MR. WEISMAN: That is correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: That normally happens?
MR. WEISMAN: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what I'm curious about
is what happens if the court affirms that sentence,
let's say 2 months after it already affirmed the
conviction?
MR. WEISMAN: Right. And our --
JUSTICE BREYER: Which is the judgment
pursuant to which -- which is the judgment that became
final by conclusion of direct review?
MR. WEISMAN: And our position would be
that's not part of the direct review appellate process.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why?
MR. WEISMAN: That the --
JUSTICE BREYER: The person is not being
held in custody pursuant to a judgment of the State
court, or at least a relevant judgment, until the
sentence has been appealed. Then there's the conclusion
of direct review in respect to the judgment in respect
to which he is being held in custody. I'm just reading
the statute --
MR. WEISMAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- the Federal statute.
MR. WEISMAN: But, Your Honor, that could
occur at any time. That can occur 5 or 10 years or
years later.
JUSTICE BREYER: Exactly.
MR. WEISMAN: And we're not --
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's why I don't --
that's why I am confused. I look at the language of the
Federal statute and it seems to me that this individual
is not being held in custody pursuant to a judgment
until that sentence is final.
MR. WEISMAN: But we would suggest --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the sentence is final
in the lower court, but they say when the sentence is
final at the conclusion of direct review in respect to
that sentence, which hasn't even taken place yet.
MR. WEISMAN: Yes, but our point would be,
Your Honor, that it doesn't move the start of the 1-year
limitations period. The start of the 1-year limitations
period, as this Court said in Jiminez v. Quarterman,
begins when it begins. It begins when that judgment
becomes final, which is 90 days after our supreme court
affirms the judgment of conviction. It's final.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Then you're going to
say --
MR. WEISMAN: It doesn't --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- all appeals in Rhode
Island from sentences -- all appeals on their lawfulness
or their mercy take place under Rule 35, and all of them
are collateral.
MR. WEISMAN: No. What we -- respectfully,
what we're going to say is collateral review refers to
those, as this Court said in Duncan v. Walker, habeas
postconviction relief vehicles that -- that occur after
the conviction has become final.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm totally confused.
If this is part of the criminal proceeding, which is
your position, that it's not collateral, but it's part
of the proceedings, when does this proceeding become
final?
MR. WEISMAN: It becomes final --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That -- that truly --
because -- you're -- you're --
MR. WEISMAN: Well, under Jiminez v. Walker,
it becomes final when -- 90 days from when the supreme
court affirms the conviction.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But if the Rhode Island
court has told litigants that they can't challenge some
portions of an illegal sentence except by way of Rule
, how can we call the decision on the affirmance of
the conviction a final determination of the legality of
the sentence? That's contradictory.
MR. WEISMAN: Because Congress has decided
to pick the day on which the appeal becomes -- the
conviction becomes final, which always occurs 90 days
after the State's high court --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but that's not --
that's not what the -- what it says. It talks about a
judgment. And a judgment in -- in other terms is
usually the conviction and the sentence. Rhode Island
for its own reasons has separated the two, but --
MR. WEISMAN: Yes, but Congress has set four
dates on which the conviction becomes final.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the case in the
