IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DANA ROBERTS, :
Petitioner : No. 10-1399
v. :
SEA-LAND SERVICES, INC., ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, January 11, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:23 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOSHUA T. GILLELAN, II, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
Petitioner.
JOSEPH R. PALMORE, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
for Federal Respondent.
PETER D. KEISLER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
private Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JOSHUA T. GILLELAN, II, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JOSEPH R. PALMORE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Federal Respondent 28
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PETER D. KEISLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the private Respondent 49
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOSHUA T. GILLELAN, II, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 59
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:23 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next this morning in Case 10-1399, Roberts v. Sea-Land
Services.
Mr. Gillelan.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOSHUA T. GILLELAN, II,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. GILLELAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Dana Roberts was injured and shortly
thereafter became disabled in the course of his work for
Sea-Land in fiscal year 2002, but he was not awarded
compensation until fiscal year 2007.
The question presented here is whether the
maximum weekly rate established by section 6 of the
Longshore Act that was in effect at the time his
disability began or that which was in effect at the time
he was awarded compensation governs his case. He is
entitled to whichever maximum is the applicable one.
Section 6(c) of the Act provides explicitly
that the applicable maximum is that in effect at the
time that the claimant is "newly awarded compensation."
The term "award" or "awarded" in the Longshore Act has a
consistent meaning throughout, contrary to the views of
the court of appeals below; and that meaning is a
compensation order filed pursuant to section 19(e) of
the Act, which is described in section 19(e) as "the
order making the award."
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What happens in the
case --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that the two parties are
at extremes and that there is indeed something in the
middle. I mean, you say it has to be the determination
of entitlement to compensation by the agency. The other
side says no, it's just entitlement, whether it's been
decreed or not. Why -- why wouldn't it be an award,
however, if it was the employer that voluntarily paid
the amount due, which is what he's supposed to do
anyway, right? Why wouldn't that be an award of
compensation?
MR. GILLELAN: Well, because the statute --
in some sense of the word "award" it is.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, a sense that -- that
the text would bear, as opposed to the -- to the sense
that the other side argues here.
MR. GILLELAN: I think that the text will
not bear that reading, in particular because the
payments that you are describing that could be
considered an award are described throughout the Act as
payments "without an award." Now, how the claimant can
have been newly awarded benefits at the time the
employer makes a payment "without an award" I think
defies the meaning of that word.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where -- well, I wish you
would submit the sections of the Act that use it that
way, that say "compensation without an award."
MR. GILLELAN: Section 14(a) through (e)
refers to compensation payments without an award.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. GILLELAN: Those are the provisions.
Section 14(a) and (b) directs those payments without an
award.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the -- and the
critical time, then -- I think, isn't it true that most
compensation payments are the -- are as a result of
voluntary action by the employer and not a proceeding?
MR. GILLELAN: That is true, yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So -- and then in those
cases, when the employer says, okay, I will voluntarily
make this compensation available, then measuring --
the -- the pay would be measured by the time the
employer makes -- makes the compensation available,
right?
MR. GILLELAN: I think not, because the --
the statutory provision says it's the award that's
determinative.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But there's no award.
MR. GILLELAN: But there can be an award. I
think that's the critical --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we have -- what is --
I mean, there can be.  But here's a person who has been
injured and gets compensation without having to bring
any legal proceeding for it. What is the weekly -- the
measure then? It can't be an award, the date of the
award, because there is no award. So, what is it?
MR. GILLELAN: The employer that wants to
lock in this year's maximum rate and not have his
liability progress above that simply needs to have an
award entered.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, he doesn't. No, he
doesn't. He can just begin payment. This (c), which is
the section we're talking about here, doesn't just
provide for newly awarded compensation. It also says
"survivors currently receiving compensation for
permanent total disability or death benefits."
"Currently receiving." Now, does that mean
it has to have been decreed by the agency? I don't
think so.
MR. GILLELAN: That provision, which -- that
clause --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That clause.
MR. GILLELAN: -- that separate clause --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. GILLELAN: -- which is not in this case,
because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand. But it --
but it applies to the question, it seems to me, that
Justice Ginsburg asked, doesn't it?
MR. GILLELAN: No, I think not.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No?
MR. GILLELAN: The function of that clause
is that in permanent total and death cases, because
there's an annual escalator provision, whatever your
rate is this year is going to go up -- if it's a
permanent total or death case -- is going to go up each
October 1st by the increase in the national average
rate.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But only if you've been
receiving compensation.
MR. GILLELAN: If you -- if --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay? If neither the
employment -- if neither the employer gives you the
compensation voluntarily nor as you -- as you contend,
there has been an award by the agency, you're out; (c)
doesn't apply. Right?
MR. GILLELAN: I wouldn't say (c) doesn't
apply, no. I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How else would it apply?
You are either receiving compensation, which I would
understand to mean receiving it from the employer or by
reason of an award, or else you've been newly awarded
compensation, which I guess means it hasn't yet been
paid, but -- but you have the award in your pocket.
MR. GILLELAN: Well, the -- the function of
that separate clause is for cases in which an award has
been entered of death benefits or permanent total
disability benefits, and everything up to that point is
governed by the maximum that's in effect at the time of
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't say that,
counsel. It says "survivors currently receiving
compensation." It doesn't say "by virtue of an award."
It says "receiving compensation." So, if the employer
is paying it voluntarily, you're in there. And then it
goes on and it contrasts with receiving compensation
those newly awarded compensation. You're not yet
receiving it, but you've been awarded it.
MR. GILLELAN: Well, Mr. Roberts did not
fall within the currently receiving compensation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand that.
MR. GILLELAN: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But I'm just trying to make
sense out of the provision. And it doesn't seem to me
to make any sense unless you read it just the way I
suggested.
MR. GILLELAN: Okay. I hope I can provide
that sense. The function of that separate clause is
that a claimant who has been awarded compensation at a
given rate, at the -- which is the maximum at the time
of the award, will continue to receive compensation
in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't say that. It
says nothing about an award. The last part talks about
an award. It says "currently receiving compensation for
permanent total disability or death benefits." And if
you're receiving it from your employer, I don't know why
that isn't covered by that. Why isn't it covered?
MR. GILLELAN: I can certainly see that
those terms would appear to apply --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. GILLELAN: -- to that situation in which
the employer is paying compensation for death or for
permanent total disability. That wouldn't provide us
for a maximum -- any applicable maximum.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think it affects
your case. It's just a matter of understanding what
this provision is talking about.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes. And the -- what I'm
trying to say about the function of this clause is that
a claimant who has been awarded compensation for
permanent total disability -- let's assume the employer
hasn't paid anything until the ALJ issues an award, and
at the time that award is issued the maximum is $1,000 a
week, and the employer was making -- the employee was
making more than 1500. So, that maximum is the rate.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But if the employer has
been paying voluntarily, you don't penalize the employee
for not having an award, right? I mean he's in the same
position; the employer has conceded the liability.
MR. GILLELAN: He certainly is not in the
same position, no.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, would
Justice Scalia's reading in your judgment -- accept his
proposition that those currently receiving voluntary
payments from the employer fall under subsection (c).
Would his reading require the employer every year to
recalculate the benefits to the maximum that's
established that year?
MR. GILLELAN: Yes, it would. Yes, it
would.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And that's why his
reading --
MR. GILLELAN: And that is precisely the
function of that clause.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The function of (b) is
to set a maximum that will control all payments present
and future.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes, yes, definitely.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so, if you read it
the way he does, that maximum would change each year.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes. And for permanent total
disability and death cases --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand why
that's so only for employment -- for employer payments
and not the case for awards. If that's so for the
employer's payment, why isn't it so for awards that have
been decreed? Why don't they change every year?
MR. GILLELAN: They do. If the award is for
permanent total disability or for death, they do.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So, then my reading
makes perfect sense.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes, your reading does make
perfect sense. And the function of that second -- that
-- the clause for those currently receiving compensation
for permanent total or death is that even when the
maximum continues to go up after the date of an award,
that new maximum is the applicable one for the
continuing period of disability or survivorship.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When -- one of the
arguments on the other side that I thought made some
sense was the idea that you should focus on a particular
point in time when you're figuring out what the amount
of the award is going to be; that it doesn't make --
that it's at least odd to say, well, we're going to
calculate how much you're entitled to at this point, but
in terms of the applicable maximum, we're going to wait
however long it takes and calculate that as of this
point. Doesn't it make more sense to figure out the
applicable numbers at the same point in time?
MR. GILLELAN: Marginally more sense,
perhaps so. But that is an argument that should be
addressed to Congress. Congress could easily have made
section 6(c) turn on the time of injury. Instead, they
provided very explicitly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, if we think --
if we think the statute -- in other words, your
argument, your response, is that the statute is
unambiguous and it can't be read --
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- in a more
sensical way.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes, and that each use of the
term "award," contrary to the Ninth Circuit's view, is
consistent with that. That is, whenever Congress refers
in this statute to an award or compensation being
awarded, it is talking about the order making the award
as it's described in section 19(e).
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't really have to
establish that, do you? All you have to establish is
that it is -- there is no way in which "newly awarded
compensation" means entitlement to compensation. That's
all you have to establish.
MR. GILLELAN: That is exactly correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't have to show that
it's used consistently throughout, only that it's never
used to mean entitlement to compensation.
MR. GILLELAN: That is -- that is exactly
correct, and I --
JUSTICE ALITO: Are you conceding in answer
to these questions that your reading doesn't really make
any sense; that's just what Congress -- that's what
Congress did?
MR. GILLELAN: No, I hope I'm not conceding
that.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what sense does it
make? What -- why should the ceiling depend on whether
an employee is getting compensation voluntarily from the
employer or as a result of a formal award? If you have
two identical -- identically situated employees and one
is getting the compensation without an award and one is
getting it with an award, as you understand the term
"award," why -- what sense does it make to treat them
differently?
MR. GILLELAN: I would say they certainly
are not identically situated. The claimant who has an
award --
JUSTICE ALITO: They're identically situated
in every respect except one. One has a formal award;
one does not. What sense does it make to treat them
differently then?
MR. GILLELAN: There are serious
consequences of the fact that one has an award and the
other is being paid only without an award.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, if I understood
your response to my prior line of questioning, you deny
that they are treated differently. The one who is
receiving compensation is treated the same, under the
same provision. There are two parts to it: survivors
currently receiving compensation and survivors newly
awarded compensation.
Those two classes are treated exactly the
same. The only one that is treated differently is
somebody who is neither being paid by the employer nor
has yet received an award.
MR. GILLELAN: No. No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No?
MR. GILLELAN: No, no. The clause that
depends on whether you're currently receiving only
applies to permanent total disability and death cases.
In all other cases, the clause that says "newly awarded"
is the only applicable provision.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I see. Partial disability,
in other words.
MR. GILLELAN: Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. GILLELAN: And temporary total.
Temporary total has -- the rates do not go up each year.
JUSTICE BREYER: Would you then go back -- I
did have the same question Justice Alito asked, and I'd
like to hear the answer. The answer -- that there --
I'll add one footnote, perhaps, which -- make it a more
complete answer, and that is that it makes very little
sense to me when a worker becomes disabled on January 1,
1990, for example. He is now disabled. And so, we
calculate what his wage was. His wage was $200 a week.
And now we say: But that shouldn't exceed twice the
average weekly wage, and we're not going to apply it to
him.
You're going to apply it to him at some
random date. His wage that he's getting paid is figured
out as of January 1, 1990.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: But the maximum that it
could be is figured out as of January 1, 1998, when he
finishes a proceeding.
Now, I just -- for both reasons, why would
you distinguish and why would you get that result? For
those two reasons, it doesn't seem to make much sense to
me, your reading of it, while theirs does make sense.
Now, you explain why that is.
MR. GILLELAN: Okay. Okay. I think the
point is to encourage the employer to get an award
entered promptly because that way they will lock in that
early maximum rate or minimum rate. The minimum rate
provision applies exactly the same way under section
6(c).
JUSTICE KAGAN: But I thought Congress
wanted the system to operate so that people just did it
voluntarily without an award.
MR. GILLELAN: Well, they want that to
happen as often as possible, but the employer has the
right in any case to file a notice with the Department
of Labor saying we do not believe the claimant is
entitled to compensation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, it really doesn't
make a whole lot of sense. I mean, it seems to me you
have to acknowledge it would be a much better statute
had it been written differently. And really your
argument here is it's not up to us to revise the
inadequacies of a statute. I mean, your argument is you
just can't read the language that way. And it provides
a stupid result. There are such things as stupid
statutes, and this is one of them, right?
MR. GILLELAN: I don't think it's stupid,
but yes, my basic argument is it isn't.
JUSTICE BREYER: But you think -- you think
it is not stupid because you think it is a good idea to
give a lot of work to the Department of Labor and that
all the employers who are going to do this voluntarily
and there will never be a problem with it -- all should
be encouraged to go and get a certificate from the
Department of Labor. All right. I'll take that as --
something.
And now, why is it I can't read the statute
the way that it seems to make somewhat more sense? I
don't see any words here that stop me from reading it.
MR. GILLELAN: "Newly awarded compensation"
are the critical words.
JUSTICE BREYER: Where now there exactly?
It says -- you mean in (c)?
MR. GILLELAN: In -- yes, 6(c).
JUSTICE BREYER: You just told me that just
has to do with permanent or total disability, and this
is far --
MR. GILLELAN: No. Excuse me. The other
clause of that provision, the one that says "currently
receiving compensation" -- that one only applies to
survivors and permanently totally disabled workers.
JUSTICE BREYER: But why -- why don't they
both? I mean, as I read it naturally, it says that --
we now have a special thing, you know, which these
people are the dead ones and the widows are getting it
and the permanently disabled people, and the -- this
individual, and the Secretary, the Secretary or his
delegate is going to calculate this thing all the time.
And they've got a special thing here for -- for
permanent people, permanently disabled, and they're
saying as to those people, we're giving them a break.
They can't look for more work. They can't look for --
they're dead, for example, and they can't find other
sources of income. And so, we say that, that if the
average wage goes up and their wage was higher to begin
with, we will raise it a bit.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that applies not only
to the people who are just getting this for the first
time in the relevant period; it also applies to all
those who have been getting it. It applies to both
groups. Well, that makes sense to me.
MR. GILLELAN: For permanent total
disability --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Right.
MR. GILLELAN: -- and death.
JUSTICE BREYER: Right.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, the whole thing applies
just to the permanently disabled and the death things.
What says it applies to anybody else?
MR. GILLELAN: No, the -- the clause --
JUSTICE BREYER: The whole thing. The
whole -- the whole -- all of (c). That's -- in my thing
here, that's seven lines. All of (c) applies to
permanently disabled and those who died.
MR. GILLELAN: Well, that's certainly -- no
one has put forward that construction, and that would
mean that there is no maximum applicable to other
categories of disability, like Mr. Roberts's disability.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, yes. Oh.
MR. GILLELAN: The new --
JUSTICE BREYER: I feel slightly like an
Abbott and Costello movie, but I'm getting this --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, what happens to
your argument if we disagree with you that employers
have a way to seek a compensation order? As I read the
regulations, the only way they can do that is if the
employee files a claim, and the employee's filing of the
claim then sets the process in motion. I can't imagine
that an -- any employee, knowing that a future award
could help them, would bother filing a claim to help the
employer lock in his rate.
MR. GILLELAN: I think -- actually, my
experience, my universal experience with this statute,
is that that is not a realistic view of what claimants'
behavior is.
The critical difference is an -- the entry
of an award does not merely confirm that the employer is
making payments; it requires it to continue making those
payments until --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's not my question.
Most of your argument is premised on the -- I thought,
that the employer could lock in his rate --
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- by seeking an award.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If I disagree with you
that the Act doesn't provide for that and neither do the
regulations, that only employees can seek awards, what
happens to your argument?
MR. GILLELAN: Oh, I think -- well -- I have
trouble accepting that hypothetical situation because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, as I've studied
it, I think that's the case. So, assume that fact to be
true, that employers have no regulatory or statutory
right to seek an award. They can either stop paying and
have the employee make a claim or not.
How -- what does this do to your argument,
if that's accurate?
MR. GILLELAN: Nothing. It simply requires
the employer to induce the claimant to file a claim if
it wants that award.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: By stopping payment.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes. Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, that destroys the
whole voluntary payment aspects of this.
MR. GILLELAN: Well, they wouldn't --
indeed, they wouldn't have to stop payment. They simply
need to tell the claimant: If you don't file a claim,
we're going to stop payments. No --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Isn't it an odd statute?
JUSTICE BREYER: I see. Is your argument
this now -- I'm sorry to be so slow. But that, look,
there is a statute here; it that says compensation
cannot exceed more than 200 percent of the annual weekly
-- or the weekly wage. Then in (3), it says how to
calculate that particular number. And then you go over
to (c), and (c) says that calculated number applies to
those newly awarded compensation.
And you're saying "newly awarded
compensation" means somebody got it through an award,
not somebody got it automatically. And since somebody
got it -- had to get it through an award or it wouldn't
apply when you just get it because they pay for it, it
just doesn't apply. You have to go get the award. And
the word you're turning on is "newly awarded."
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's the argument?
MR. GILLELAN: Yes, it is.
JUSTICE BREYER: Like Abbott and Costello, I
don't know what I'm talking about. But I do -- I do --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: I was -- I was --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Gillelan --
JUSTICE BREYER: Now I fully understand your
argument.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, could I --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Could I follow --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could I ask you about
another inconsistency in this section? We've gone over
one, which I think is there. Isn't there a group left
out of this thing, even under -- even under the
Government's interpretation of it? What happens to
people who are receiving compensation for temporary
total disability or for partial disability? They
don't -- they don't come under either one of those two
categories, even under the Government's interpretation,
right?
MR. GILLELAN: No. I think under the
Government's interpretation, as under ours, they fall
under those --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, they haven't gotten an
award yet. They have not gotten an award yet, and they
are only partially disabled or have temporary permanent
disability. They're -- they're not covered by (c), are
they?
MR. GILLELAN: Well, they are covered by it,
but before we know which year's maximum applies, an
award --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, that's right, but
they --
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It doesn't take effect --
MR. GILLELAN: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- during that year.
MR. GILLELAN: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, does that make any
sense?
MR. GILLELAN: Yes --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, it doesn't. But you
say the statute doesn't make sense.
MR. GILLELAN: I think it does because it
encourages the employer to have an award entered so that
it will have the benefit of the current maximum rate and
not next year's or the year's after or the year's after
that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's not a
serious --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Gillelan, if a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead. You've
been -- you've been waiting the longest.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KAGAN: I think the way the argument
has gone so far is that we've all been saying this can't
make sense, and you've been saying, as you have every
right to say, yes, but this is what the statute says
based on the "newly awarded" language.
But that does assume that "newly awarded"
can't mean an entitlement. And then you run up against
some other statutory provisions where an award does seem
to mean, not a formal compensation order, but instead an
entitlement to funds. So, 908(d)(1), it seems as though
the word "award" means entitlement; 910(h)(1), it seems
as though the word "award" means an entitlement; and
3(b), which says "award in a compensation order,"
suggests that awards can be made in a formal order or
awards can be made differently because of an entitlement
that is automatically paid.
So, I guess there are three places that it
seems to me your reading of the word -- your limited
reading of the phrase "newly awarded," you know, runs
into problems in those three ways, and I'm left then
thinking we should do what makes sense.
MR. GILLELAN: I may have missed what the
third of those was. I have the --
JUSTICE KAGAN: 933(b), 908(d)(1), and
910(h)(1).
MR. GILLELAN: Ah, okay. Yes, 9 -- the
section 8(d)(1) that they're referring to refers to an
award to an -- the unpaid portion of an award to an
employee who dies before that award has been paid out.
Their reading of "award" in that provision is
contradicted by the subsequent paragraph of the same
subsection, which says "an award may be made after the
death of the injured employee." It's 908(d)(3).
Now, that is impossible on their reading of
"award" -- on the reading they give "award" in section
8(d)(1). No, what it means in 8(d)(1), as throughout
the Act, is an award. And if none has been entered
while the claimant is still alive, it's entered after
his death. And the survivors under that provision take
the rest of it that had not been paid before the death.
Now, we have essentially the same analysis
of those other provisions. Yes, in those other
provisions as well, it does mean a compensation order.
If you cut it loose from that statutory foundation, we
get three or four different possible meanings that the
Respondents try to put on it, and we are cut loose from
anything.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you're -- you're
making your case harder than it has to be, it seems to
me, by saying that it always means an award of
compensation by the agency.
I -- I think in -- in 8(d), I don't think it
means that, but it certainly means an amount due and not
an entitlement. It means an amount, a specific amount
due, and that explains its meaning elsewhere, but that's
quite different from saying that it means entitlement.
MR. GILLELAN: No doubt it is, yes. And --
and perhaps there may be some variation in the meaning
in the other provisions. That's possible. But in
section 6(d), we think it has to mean the entry of an
award. That's the only definite event it could refer
to.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I think that's true,
but only because of the earlier portion of 6(c) which --
which covers all other payments that are not by virtue
of an award.
MR. GILLELAN: Right. Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Receiving compensation.
MR. GILLELAN: Yes.
I would reserve what time I have left.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. GILLELAN: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Palmore.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOSEPH R. PALMORE
ON BEHALF OF THE FEDERAL RESPONDENT
MR. PALMORE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Petitioner's interpretation of section 906,
which hinges entirely on the date of an administrative
compensation order, renders that provision impossible to
apply in the many cases expressly contemplated by the
Act in which there is no such order. That
interpretation also creates arbitrary distinctions
between beneficiaries' benefit levels based on
administrative happenstance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Your --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, if you're --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, if you're
walking down the street, you're on a business
enterprise, they haven't shoveled the snow, you slip and
fall and you're hurt, you go home and say: Good news,
I've been awarded damages.
MR. PALMORE: The statute provides for the
award of damages, and I think this is -- this -- the key
to this, understanding how this scheme works, is
understanding section 914 and section 913. These are at
page 17a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we're not talking --
MR. PALMORE: -- of the appendix.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- about how the scheme
works. Grant you that it makes a lot more sense your
way, but you -- will you grant that it's not up to us to
rewrite the statute?
MR. PALMORE: It's absolutely not up to
you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. PALMORE: -- to rewrite the statute,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, what we're talking
about is whether "awarded" in that provision can bear
the meaning that you want to give it. Let's assume that
Congress passes a -- a new statute providing for tax
credits for -- for each child, okay? My wife gives
birth to a child just before Christmas, and I say, oh,
goody; I've been awarded $2,000. I wouldn't say that.
That's not a normal use of the language.
MR. PALMORE: I think it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I am entitled to it under
this statute. But when the event of having a child
occurs, I don't say I've been awarded $2,000. You might
say it analogously. I mean, you know, oh, hey, I've
been awarded $2,000. But that's analogous. And
statutes are not written by analogy; they're written to
say what they say.
And I don't know anybody that would use the
term "awarded" the way you want it used. The Chief
Justice's example is another one: Oh, good, I've been
awarded damages.
You haven't been awarded damages. You're
entitled to them.
MR. PALMORE: I think Justice Kagan
highlighted three provisions where the statute does in
fact use the word "award" to indicate a statutory
entitlement.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's go through those.
MR. PALMORE: I'd be glad to, Justice
Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you -- you show me
how -- I agree with you that they don't mean the entry
of an award by the agency, but I don't agree with you
that the only -- only reading you can give them is
entitlement.
MR. PALMORE: Well, just -- to start with
section 933, which is at page 24a of the Government
appendix. This is one of the sections highlighted by
Justice Kagan.
JUSTICE SCALIA: 933 --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- of the gray
brief.
MR. PALMORE: Of the gray brief. 933(b)
says: "Acceptance of compensation under an award in a
compensation order filed by the deputy commissioner"
will have certain consequences. That expressly
contemplates -- this is page 24a, Justice Scalia.
Sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm sorry. Give me a
minute. Give me a minute.
isn't it?
MR. PALMORE: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The language is important,
MR. PALMORE: Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. What page?
MR. PALMORE: Page 24a of the appendix to
the gray brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. Got it.
MR. PALMORE: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the language is?
MR. PALMORE: So, the first sentence says:
"Acceptance of compensation under an award in a
compensation order" --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. PALMORE: -- "filed by the deputy
commissioner" shall have certain legal consequences --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. PALMORE: -- that aren't important here.
That sentence, even read by itself, suggests there can
be an award that's not in a compensation order.
Moreover --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, yes. Yes.
MR. PALMORE: -- the last sentence says:
"For purposes of this subsection" -- not the purposes of
the entire Act -- "for purposes of this subsection, the
term 'award' with respect to a compensation order means
a formal order issued by the deputy commissioner, an
administrative law judge" --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's -- that's true. And
what that means is that it can be considered an award if
you've gotten it from the employer voluntarily. That is
still an award of compensation.
That's all that that last sentence proves.
MR. PALMORE: I think it contemplates -- it
certainly precludes, I think, Petitioner --
Petitioner's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, yes. Yes. I agree
he's wrong.
(Laughter.)
MR. PALMORE: Well, the actual -- the
"actual receipt" interpretation that Your Honor is
advancing is not one that's been advanced in this case.
It would have extraordinarily -- extraordinary practical
difficulties, and application would be really
inconsistent.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no, no. I think he's
persuaded me that in -- in the section we're talking
about, subsection (c), the only meaning left for "award"
is an award by the agency, because --
MR. PALMORE: Well, I'd like to try -- I'd
like to try to convince you otherwise.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But -- but you have to show
me one other provision at least where the only meaning
you can give "award" is entitlement to money.
MR. PALMORE: Well, I think section
910(h)(1), another provision cited by Justice Kagan, is
another example.
JUSTICE SCALIA: (h)(1)?
MR. PALMORE: (h)(1).
JUSTICE SCALIA: "Upward adjustments to" --
MR. PALMORE: At 15a.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- "compensation to
which" --
MR. PALMORE: Right. This is a very
complicated provision, but what's important to note here
is that Congress made -- this was Congress's attempt to
provide additional benefits to beneficiaries whose
disabilities commenced before 1972.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. PALMORE: They make a critical --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What page are you on?
MR. PALMORE: I'm sorry. Page 15a of the
appendix to the gray brief.
The specifics aren't as important as the use
of the phrase, and it's one, two, three, four, five
lines from the bottom, "or his survivor was awarded
compensation as the result of death." So, it makes a
key determinant for figuring out how these adjustments
are going to be made whether someone was awarded
compensation prior to October 27th, 1972. There's no
indication here, and it would make no sense to suggest,
that Congress meant to distinguish between people who
had a formal compensation order and those who didn't.
I think -- but if I could go back to
section --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: His answer to that was
that the provision also permits an entry after someone
-- of an order after someone dies.
MR. PALMORE: That's his answer on some of
the other provisions --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, it's -- the
incongruity is taken care of by the Act directly.
MR. PALMORE: Right. But here that -- here
there'd be no reason for someone to go in and get a
compensation order, because these were long-past
disabilities, and Congress was simply creating a rule
for how to true up these past beneficiaries and provide
them additional benefits.
But I think if you --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what does "awarded
compensation at less than the maximum rate" mean? I'm
not sure what that refers to.
MR. PALMORE: There was an old maximum.
Prior to 1972, there was a $70 maximum.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. PALMORE: Okay. So, if someone was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Aren't you entitled to get
the maximum? No?
MR. PALMORE: Yes. But some people --
two-thirds of their average weekly wage resulted in a
figure below the maximum, right? So, for those people,
what section 910(h)(1) did was said if you were awarded
compensation at less than the prior maximum, you're
going to get an inflation adjustment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I got you.
MR. PALMORE: For everyone else who was
already at the maximum, they got a new, statutorily
created time of injury, which is itself significant,
that Congress went -- used that route.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. PALMORE: But there's no indication --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're right. It doesn't
make sense. It --
MR. PALMORE: Well, it doesn't make sense
under Petitioner's reading. I think it does make sense
under our reading.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, yes.
MR. PALMORE: Okay?
And if you go to page -- page 17a, I think
these are the key provisions for understanding how
section 906 works in the statutory scheme. Section 914,
at the bottom of the page, 17a to the Government's
brief, provides that employers must pay compensation
without a compensation order promptly, as soon as they
have notice of an injury.
(b), which is on the next page, 18a, says
that the first payment has to come in 14 days, within
14 days of notice of the injury, unless the employer
controverts liability.
So, if I'm an employer, I have an employee
who's injured, I've got to get out my checkbook on day
14 and start writing checks. I need to know what number
to fill in. I need to know --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you're doing
that -- you're doing that without an award.
MR. PALMORE: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, how can you say
what the employer pays should be considered an award?
MR. PALMORE: Because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's without an
award.
MR. PALMORE: Because if you don't consider
that, then the -- the statutory maximum provision is
impossible to apply because then it's unclear -- and I
haven't heard Petitioner answer what the statutory
maximum is. If that employee who gets his first check
after 14 days has not been newly awarded compensation
and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, then we're back --
we're back to (b) overrides (a). You -- you're saying
that (a) would be interpreted in favor of the Petitioner
but for (b)?
MR. PALMORE: No, I'm saying that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because I agree with the
Chief Justice. Without an award, it seems to me it
tends to help the Petitioner.
MR. PALMORE: That use of "award" clearly
means compensation order, and I'm not here to suggest
that the -- that the statute never uses the word "award"
to mean compensation order. Often it does, and in this
case, that provision does. But the larger point is that
that employer has to start payments in 14 days, and he
has to know what statutory maximum applies. Under
Petitioner's view of the statute, there is no answer to
that question, because that employee has not been newly
awarded compensation. So, section 906(c) --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And in what percentage of
the cases are we in that world?
MR. PALMORE: It's a -- in a substantial
majority of cases no claim is ever filed, Justice Kagan.
Page 38 of the red brief points to legislative history
before Congress in 1972 which demonstrated that, and
that remains the case. This is a workers'
compensation scheme that encourages employers to pay
without administrative compulsion. It's supposed to be
simple to apply. The employer is supposed to know how
much to write that check for at the time he writes that
first check, after 14 days.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But your reading doesn't
encourage employers to pay, because they can stop just
by saying they contest, right?
MR. PALMORE: Absolutely. They have a
statutory right to controvert.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So -- so, your reading I
think leads to protraction. And they get that date of
injury rule no matter how long they string it out under
your reading. If you read -- what is the magic
phrase -- newly --
MR. PALMORE: Newly awarded compensation.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You can say, well, that
means in the case of the employer who pays promptly,
pays immediately and continues to pay voluntarily, that
the compensation is acquired when the employer starts
paying voluntarily. But if the employer is not paying,
then the compensation is newly awarded when there's an
award.
So, I don't see why -- what kind of problems
this statute would have if we say newly awarded could
mean awarded by the statute, which would be newly
awarded when you're injured; but it can also mean
compensation ordered by an award. So, you have the
employer who pays promptly can lock in that early date,
but if he doesn't pay promptly, the -- then the ceiling
is going to go up till the time the award is entered.
What's wrong with that reading?
MR. PALMORE: That's again a reading that
hasn't been advanced in this case, but I understand Your
Honor's question and Your Honor's point. I think that
reading of it would be very difficult to apply because
there may be many cases where an employer will write one
or two checks and then stop. There made be cases in
which an employer will write a check for the wrong
amount; there will later be a dispute about what the
proper benefit level would be.
So, I think you'd develop a whole body of
case law and controversy about what it meant for the
employer to have paid, in that sense.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But those aren't
going to be the typical cases, I think. You said there
may be cases, and I suppose there may be. I assume what
happens -- employers just don't write checks. They say
this is how we calculate what we owe you. And it is
based on the maximum of this year, not any future ones,
and if the employee says no, no, no; I have a right to
get the -- then the employer will say, well, okay, I
either agree with that or not, but you don't get a
check.
MR. PALMORE: Well, the -- the employer will
need to protect itself by writing that check unless it's
going to controvert liability. Justice Ginsburg pointed
to one of Petitioner's arguments that this provides an
incentive for employers not to controvert liability when
they don't have a good-faith basis for doing so, but
section 928 of the Act provides for attorney's fees in
that situation. So, there's already a remedy for that
kind of situation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I -- I understand
the amounts at issue here. What is a usual amount
that's at stake in this sort of case? We're talking
about the concerns -- I guess on both -- about
gamesmanship, but how much difference are we talking
about?
MR. PALMORE: Well, the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't know; maybe
you don't have statistics, on an average.
MR. PALMORE: Well, I can -- we can use this
case as an -- as an illustration. So, in this case, the
Petitioner's disability began in 2002. So, our view is
that that's when he was initially awarded compensation.
And so, the 2002 maximum of $966 applies.
Petitioner's view is that because he
received a formal compensation order in 2007, the 2007
maximum applies, this 1,114.
So, it can make a considerable difference.
I think, though, that Petitioner recognizes --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The consequence -- I
mean, there's the time value of money, too. The
consequence of the employee saying I'm going to wait 5
years because I think the maximum is going to be a lot
higher is that he doesn't get anything in the meantime,
right?
MR. PALMORE: Well, that's -- that's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's reasonable for
an employer to say, okay, if you want to wait, I'll
wait.
MR. PALMORE: That's right. The larger
point though is that in many cases in which compensation
is paid without compulsion of a compensation order, an
employee never files a claim. Section 913 expressly
contemplates that by saying that an employee has 1 year
in which to file a claim from an injury unless he has
been receiving payments, in which case the time runs
from the last payment received.
JUSTICE BREYER: What happens -- just for my
technical knowledge here. The -- the employee suffers
partial disability on February 1. He then doesn't
notify the employer until, let's say, February 10, and
then the employer waits for a week or so, and then
begins to pay.
Now, is the employer supposed to calculate
the -- the weekly wage that he's paying on in the week
February 1 to February 10 or -- 3 days, he puts it
aside. But -- in the first week or does he do it on the
first week he got notice? How is that -- how does that
work?
MR. PALMORE: Well, he needs to provide --
he needs to make a payment within 14 days --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's right.
MR. PALMORE: -- of notice.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I'm saying he has to
write the check now.
MR. PALMORE: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the wage could have
changed in those few weeks.
MR. PALMORE: It's from the --
JUSTICE BREYER: The first week he didn't
get the notice. Then the second week he did get the
notice. Which week does he calculate the payment on?
MR. PALMORE: From when the disability
commenced.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, what you're
not --
MR. PALMORE: And --
JUSTICE BREYER: Then we can't -- we cannot
read this thing "award" to mean award by the employer.
We can't mean it to read "award" by the -- by the
government, in your view. We have to mean it to mean
the time that he became entitled to some money.
MR. PALMORE: That is our submission --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. PALMORE: -- Justice Breyer. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the tough thing is
saying, well, that that's an award. That's what this
case turns on.
MR. PALMORE: Well, as we -- as I was
discussing earlier, we think that the statute does
sometimes use "award" that way.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what you pointed to in
the statute is you pointed to some situations which say
we have situation 3 and 4, and they're not present here;
but in situation 3 or 4, award does mean this.
MR. PALMORE: I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. That's --
MR. PALMORE: Right. I think if I can show
you -- if I can show you -- there are some cases --
JUSTICE BREYER: You don't have another
example of a -- of a situation where "award" did mean --
and so, you're saying there are some others where
"award" doesn't mean, okay. But --
MR. PALMORE: Well, I think there are --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- is there anything --
what's the most analogous thing you can find anywhere
where award has referred to the time a person became
entitled to a thing, prior to the time anyone was --
became obliged to give him some money?
MR. PALMORE: Well, I think --
JUSTICE BREYER: Even if that time first was
the period for -- way for calculating the money?
MR. PALMORE: I think 910(h)(1) is that
example --
JUSTICE BREYER: 910(h)(1).
MR. PALMORE: And I hesitate to go back into
the weeds of that --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, don't do it again.
MR. PALMORE: -- provision.
(Laughter.)
MR. PALMORE: But the first sentence says --
it talks about those who were entitled to total
permanent disability or death, which commenced -- so, it
talks about commencement of entitlement and then --
JUSTICE BREYER: It says was awarded
compensation.
MR. PALMORE: -- and then later uses
"awarded compensation." If I could go back quickly to
the claim issue.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Your brief -- your brief
seem to use the "newly awarded compensation," your
meaning of it, at the time of injury, the time of
disability, the time of entitlement to compensation.
And it seems to use those terms interchangeably. What
term are you settling on and why?
MR. PALMORE: Okay. I think we address this
in footnote 9 of our brief. It's the commencement of
entitlement to disability benefits, which is almost
always going to be when disability itself commences.
Petitioner has pointed out that there is an
idiosyncratic set of cases in which, if a disability
lasts more than 3 days but fewer than 14, you're not
compensated for those first 3 days. So, in that unusual
circumstance, it would be day 4, but the employer who
writes that check at day 14 is going to know. That's --
that's the key.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, you can do it. You
can say it's the time that the statute awards him the
compensation. That's the English language.
MR. PALMORE: That's -- that's correct,
Justice -- Justice Breyer. And I think that --
JUSTICE BREYER: But it's the statute that's
doing the awarding.
MR. PALMORE: To make his -- I think
Petitioner has developed kind of a procedural
work-around to the -- the problem created by his
interpretation the statute, which is that he needs a
compensation order in every case to make the scheme make
sense. To get compensation order, he needs a claim in
every case. And as the colloquy before reflected, the
way he can get a claim in every case, because in many
cases claims are not filed today, is that the employer
must threaten the disabled employee to cut off benefits
if that employee doesn't file a claim, threaten to
controvert liability when that employer has no
good-faith basis for doing so. All to get the employee
to file a claim that the claim -- employee doesn't think
is necessary, to get a compensation order which serves
no other purpose than to trigger this maximum rate
provision.
That's contrary to the way this statute is
supposed to work. The statute is supposed to encourage
amicable agreement between employers and employees to
avoid administrative process and the gearing up of the
administrative machinery wherever possible.
And Petitioner's proffered solution to the
problem of the absence of a compensation order in every
case is contrary to that of the entire thrust of the
Longshore Act as a workers' compensation scheme.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And your answer to the --
to the problem of an employer protracting -- so he
doesn't have to pay sooner; he can wait till later -- is
there would be no penalty as long as the employer says
I'm -- I'm contesting, but you say the attorney's fees,
that's -- is that --
MR. PALMORE: Attorney's fees and interest,
both of which are generally applicable remedies that
apply to cases that don't implicate the statutory
maximum or the statutory minimum. This -- Petitioner's
solution using his reading of the statute to deal with
employer delay is over-inclusive and under-inclusive.
It's over-inclusive because it's going to
deal with cases in which there hasn't been delay by any
responsibility by the employer, but there's been
administrative delay, there's been a dispute.
But it's also under-inclusive in that it
only deals with those small number of cases that deal
with the statutory maximum or minimum.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Palmore.
We'll let Mr. Keisler speak for a bit.
Mr. Keisler.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER D. KEISLER
ON BEHALF OF THE PRIVATE RESPONDENT
MR. KEISLER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I'd like to begin, if I may, by addressing
Justice Scalia's and the Chief Justice's questions on
whether the term "award" can bear the meaning that we
ascribe to it and then explain why, since it can bear
that meaning, this is the only sensible interpretation
of the Act.
First, it is not uncommon, Your Honor, to
use the term "award" to describe a benefit conferred by
a statute. The dictionary definition is a benefit
conferred. Your Honor, Justice Scalia used a
formulation -- what if a statute awards a tax credit?
Well, the Court's decision in New Energy Company v.
Limbach began: An Ohio statute awards a tax credit to a
certain producers of ethanol.
I think even Your Honor was the author of
that decision. It is --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, well, I -- I agree
with that. You can speak of the statute as awarding
something. But when you use the phrase "newly awarded,"
you're not referring to the enactment of the statute;
you're referring to the time at which the person
qualifies under the statute. And I don't know any usage
of that sort, that a person -- well, you know, when my
wife has a baby, I've been awarded money.
You haven't been awarded money.
MR. KEISLER: I think the party becomes
newly awarded at the time the party becomes disabled,
and, therefore, there is an amount due under the
statute. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, that's what you say.
But I don't know -- I don't know any common usage that
employs the term --
MR. KEISLER: But it is a usage within the
Longshore Act elsewhere, as Mr. Palmore --
JUSTICE BREYER: What about the -- the
business was newly awarded the tax credit at the time
they made the deduction?
MR. KEISLER: At the time they became
qualified for what the statute required them to do to
get the tax credit, yes. And that is how it is used in
0(h)(1), as Justice Kagan said. It's how it's used in
908. And section 933 specifically provides Petitioner's
definition of "award," a formal compensation order, but
says it is only for purposes of this subsection.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it's not the way
it's used in 914.
MR. KEISLER: That's correct. And that's
why this is a case like Robinson v. Shell Oil, in which
the word "employer" was used throughout Title VII in
different ways. And what the Court said is you then
have to look at the context of the individual provision
in which the word appears that you're construing to
determine how the word is being used in that particular
provision.
And here the most fundamental reason why it
is an untenable construction of this Act to rely on the
date of a compensation order to determine the applicable
maximum rate is that then the Act would be silent as to
the maximum rate in the vast majority of instances in
which compensation is paid, because, as Mr. Palmore
said, in the vast majority of instances no claim is
filed. And, as Justice Sotomayor pointed out, when no
claim is filed, no compensation order will ever be
issued.
And that's not an accident. That is a
function of a very central feature of the Act's design
that Petitioner's interpretation is entirely at odds
with. The Act is designed to enable compensation to be
calculated precisely and as early as possible so that
the money can get into the employee's hands very quickly
and with a minimum of instances in which the
administrative machinery has to be invoked. That's why
the norm is no compensation order.
And so, Petitioner's interpretation is
counter to that in at least two respects: It relies on
the existence of a compensation order, which in most
instances won't and shouldn't issue, and it would
maximize, rather than minimize, the number of instances
in which someone has to go and get an order to force
compensation orders out of the system to make
Petitioner's interpretation work, even though everything
is happening exactly as the Act says it should. The
employer is voluntarily paying exactly the amount that
the employee says is due, and there's no need to get the
agency involved.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But how much of a
practical problem is this? I understand the -- the
amounts are here, but it's 5 years, and apparently the
employee was happy to wait 5 years to get an award.
Normally, if you're an employee and you're disabled, and
the employer says, well, here's what we're going to give
you, and it's based on the maximum of the latest we
have, you're not going to say: I'm going to wait; these
wages are going to go up nationally, and I'm going to
wait a year; maybe I'll wait 4 years because I think
there's a trend on national average wages, and I'm going
to cash in on that; I'm going to be without money for
the next 4 years and I'm disabled, but -- I mean, that
doesn't sound to me to be a plausible situation.
MR. KEISLER: But if Your Honor thinks about
the situation in which the employee is voluntarily
receiving from the employer everything that the employee
agrees is due, then the question is, in that
circumstance where the employer is doing everything
right, what can the employer do to force out of the
system a compensation order that will lock in the
maximum rate? And Petitioner's solution to that problem
evidences the problem with his position.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, no, I mean --
I don't know what the employers do, but usually in a
situation like this, the employers have good lawyers and
they write at the end of the check, you know: This is
in full satisfaction of any claims under the -- the
whatever.
MR. KEISLER: But there is no compensation
order until that employee files a claim. And under
Petitioner's interpretation, there would therefore be no
knowable maximum rate. And Petitioner's solution to
that problem, on page 16 of his reply brief, is to say
that the employer should threaten a bad-faith cutoff of
funds. The employer should say I will cut you off
unless you file a claim.
That's bad for everyone. It's bad for the
employee who has access to payments delayed. It's bad
for the employer who apparently is being told it must
controvert liability in bad faith, because the employer
doesn't in fact disagree that the employee is entitled
to liability, or face a 10 percent penalty for cutting
off the employee without a basis for controverting
liability. And it's bad for the agency who suddenly has
all these claims filed. All in a situation in which
everything is working exactly as the Act intends.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Give me your example again
of "award" used as "entitlement."
statute.
Limbach.
MR. KEISLER: 910(h)(1).
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no, no. Not from the
MR. KEISLER: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you gave --
MR. KEISLER: Oh, New Energy Company v.
It was a Commerce Clause case from, I think,
1989 in which Your Honor began the opinion by saying, to
describe the setup, an Ohio statute awards tax benefits
to... and then described the category of energy
producers who could take advantage of the tax benefit.
And I think those energy producers --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That wasn't -- you gave
another example.
MR. KEISLER: Robinson v. Shell oil?
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, not a case.
MR. KEISLER: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Just an example you made up
out of your fertile imagination which --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- which seemed to me
pretty good. But I forgot it. I'll get --
MR. KEISLER: An example --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'll get it from the
transcript.
MR. KEISLER: I think it's the employee who
was receiving voluntary payments, and everything is
proceeding the way the Act intended. But the employer,
in order to know what its maximum rate will be, in order
not to be surprised 5 years hence by a maximum rate that
only then can be known, has to force a compensation
order out of the system. And the only way Petitioner
says the employer can do that is by threatening a
bad-faith cutoff of funds.
Whether it happens frequently or
infrequently, Mr. Chief Justice, I think an
interpretation that relies on a mechanism that is so
obviously counter to the way the statute is supposed to
function is, by virtue of that, an extremely unlikely
and unnatural interpretation of the statute.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: About what percentage of
the compensation cases involve the statutory maximum?
Because if you -- if your pay is less than the statutory
maximum, this issue doesn't come up.
MR. KEISLER: In 1972, Congress was told
that it would be about 10 percent. My understanding is
since then, it's grown so that I'm told that about 20
percent of cases today require application of the
maximum rate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does the maximum
always go up?
MR. KEISLER: Ever since 1972, each year's
maximum as calculated by the Secretary of Labor has been
higher than the preceding year.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Theoretically, it
can go down.
MR. KEISLER: Theoretically, it can. It
never has.
If the Court has no further questions.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Keisler, if I could just
go back to this language. If -- if according to Justice
Scalia's old opinion, the statute awards compensation at
the time of disability, essentially what you would be
saying is that an employee who becomes disabled in a
certain year is awarded compensation at that time. Is
that right?
MR. KEISLER: That's right, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but I -- I didn't say
in that opinion that the -- the employer in -- in that
-- or whoever it was that was entitled under the statute
-- was "newly awarded" it. I agree the statute awards
it, but when you say somebody is "newly awarded," you're
talking about an event at that time. And that's --
MR. KEISLER: I think the function --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a different usage.
MR. KEISLER: I think the function of
"newly" in this statute is something different,
Justice Scalia. And that relates to the questions that
Your Honor and Justice Breyer were asking about the
relationship between the "currently receiving" clause
and the final clause. I think the "currently receiving"
clause, which relates to those with permanent total
disability and death, is an adjunct to another provision
of the Act, section 19(f), which provides for a COLA, a
cost-of-living increase, every year for that narrow
subset of the most disabled of employees. They and they
alone get that annual bump-up.
And so, that "currently receiving" clause is
written for that category to make sure that their
bump-up isn't capped by a static maximum rate. The
other part of the clause, "newly awarded compensation,"
is about everybody else.
Now, I think the use of the word "newly"
there is just to distinguish it from the "currently
receiving" clause, which is escalating year by year.
And those newly awarded compensation, meaning at one
point, fixed in time -- only when you are "newly"
awarded compensation are you then going to have your
maximum rate fixed.
And then -- and both Petitioner and we
agree -- whatever it's fixed at, whatever year, that
stays the same for the duration of your collection of
compensation.
If the Court has no further questions, I
thank the Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Gillelan, if I got that right, you have
2 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOSHUA T. GILLELAN, II,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, let's assume an
employer pays, continues to pay over a period of time,
and the employee needs more money and goes in and says
you owe me more money; I'm going to make a claim. The
board says no, he doesn't owe you more money; he was
paying the right amount. And so, you're not entitled to
the 1200 you're asking for; you're only entitled to the
1,000 he was paying.
Under your view, if that happened 5 or 10
years after the payments started, would the employer be
liable for the higher average 10 years later?
MR. GILLELAN: Only, of course, if the
employee's own wages at the time of the injury qualified
for that, but yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Assuming it does, that
the answer is "yes"?
MR. GILLELAN: Yes. Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, what stops an
employee from simply doing what I said? What stops an
employee from kicking up his own maximum by -- whenever
he chooses to do it, years and years later?
MR. GILLELAN: Well, I think in that
situation, the claimant hasn't triggered that award. In
fact, the claimant has triggered the maximum that's in
effect at the time of that award that only makes -- it's
an award only of what the employer has been paying.
It's not a denial, as it's characterized in the
Government's brief. But it is an award only of what of
the employer has been paying.
If the claimant did not bring it forward
with that and the employer let it go for still further
years, then even a subsequent year's maximum would be
the actual --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If we find any ambiguity
in the statute, in the statutory language, would it then
make more sense to adopt your meaning or the
Government's, given all of the factors that the
Government argues counsels in its favor?
MR. GILLELAN: I think each of those
arguments is fallacious. They misdescribe the statute
in their reasons why this is not a sensible provision.
But even if there is an ambiguity --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Assume that --
MR. GILLELAN: Before we lose, that -- the
other possible meanings of "newly awarded" have got to
include what they say the test is.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:23 p.m., the case in the
