IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DIANNE KNOX, ET AL., :
Petitioners :
v. : No. 10-1121
SERVICE EMPLOYEES INTERNATIONAL :
UNION, LOCAL 1000. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, January 10, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:19 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
WILLIAM J. YOUNG, ESQ., Springfield, Virginia; for
Petitioners.
JEREMIAH COLLINS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
WILLIAM J. YOUNG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JEREMIAH COLLINS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 25
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
WILLIAM J. YOUNG, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:19 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 10-1121, Knox v. The Service
Employees International Union.
Mr. Young.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM J. YOUNG
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. YOUNG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Before addressing SEIU's motion to dismiss
for mootness, it is important to remember the underlying
facts of this case. For 10 months in 2005 and 2006,
more than 36,000 nonmembers, or nearly 40 percent of
those employees represented by SEIU employed by the
State of California, were compelled to contribute to
SEIU's $12 million Political Fight-Back Fund without
being provided the opportunity to challenge the amount
of the fee and to object to its exaction, required by
the First Amendment.
Adding insult to that injury, the Ninth
Circuit said that nonmembers could never say no to
contributing to SEIU's political expenditures for ballot
propositions, at least Proposition 76. They have no
right to refuse to bankroll that element of SEIU's
political speech. This defies this Court's decisions,
distorting the political process on a massive scale.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Young, could I ask you
to speak to the mootness question first?
MR. YOUNG: I was just addressing that.
JUSTICE KAGAN: As -- as I understand your
brief, you're essentially saying that it's impossible to
moot a claim for nominal damages. Is -- is that a
correct reading of your position?
MR. YOUNG: I'm not sure I would go that
far, Justice Kagan. I think in this case, the
wishy-washiness, as it were, of the language used by
SEIU when it distributed this pasted-on dollar to the
class -- or dollars, more accurately -- was inadequate
because it failed to represent the importance of the
judgment that the nonmember class had won.
JUSTICE KAGAN: So, that's a different
point, right, which is that the notice was inadequate?
MR. YOUNG: That would be correct.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And -- and when you say
"inadequate," I read you to be saying sort of not
apologetic enough. And -- in other words, not saying,
look, you had a claim against us, we think you're right;
it was a valid claim; here is your judgment in
satisfaction of that claim. That it didn't forthrightly
say that. But do you think if it had forthrightly said
that, we would be living in a different Article III
universe?
MR. YOUNG: Not in this case, Justice Kagan.
Turning to the adequacy of the notice, of
the financial disclosure, that did not comply with the
district court's judgment, either. If -- if the only
question were the distribution of nominal damages, then
perhaps we would be living in that different Article III
universe. But this case is about the judgment of the
district court that the SEIU was attempting to comply
with. They failed to do so in virtually all of its
elements.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And how is that? How did
they fail to comply, other than, you know, the question
of whether they were forthright enough about the fact
that they were satisfying a claim?
MR. YOUNG: The -- the district court had
ordered -- described the type of notice that it
anticipated. The district court specifically determined
that SEIU's subsequent 2006 financial disclosure was
inadequate to cure the problem that was caused by the
seizure of fees starting in September 2005. And that's
on 73a of the -- the Petition Appendix B.
The union in this case merely sent the same
financial disclosure in the notice that it sent, to try
to moot the case, that it had sent in June of 2006.
Well, the district court had already said this is
inadequate. That seems to me to -- to end the inquiry.
Obviously, the district court did not
contemplate that the notice that was sent in June 2006
satisfied the obligations of its judgment; else it
hardly could have ordered a -- a useless act in ordering
a new type of notice go out.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And the reason
that's important in terms of the content of the notice,
the inadequacy, is what?
MR. YOUNG: The reason that is important,
Justice -- Mr. Chief Justice, excuse me -- is that the
SEIU is asserting that the case has become moot because
it has now complied with the district court's judgment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your --
MR. YOUNG: It has --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your
argument was that the -- a different type of notice
would have resulted in more members electing to opt out,
to demand the refund of their assessments?
MR. YOUNG: And that's certainly one of the
possible consequences. Obviously, I -- we would --
that's speculative to some extent. But since the
purpose of the notice is to provide the information
necessary to -- to object, one of the purposes, then we
certainly anticipate that there would be more objectors
were there to be an -- an adequate notice that complies
with the district court's judgment.
JUSTICE ALITO: If the special assessment
requires a different kind of notice and possibly a
different kind of opt-in or opt-out regime, would the
case be moot?
MR. YOUNG: If the notice -- I'm sorry. I
didn't understand.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, we're not dealing here
with the kind of notice -- with the typical Hudson
notice given at the beginning of the year, when the
annual dues are collected. We're dealing with a special
assessment. Now, if a different kind of notice is
constitutionally required in that context, would this
case be moot?
MR. YOUNG: No, it would not. Obviously, we
have -- we -- we still have the nominal damages question
and the adequacy of the payment --
JUSTICE ALITO: My question is whether
the -- the different requirements, which presumably were
not met here in the context of the special assessment,
if there are different requirements in that context,
would that be enough to preserve this case as a live
controversy?
MR. YOUNG: So long as the union failed to
provide them, and at least in this case, the district
court's judgment, we believe, provides a -- an adequate
respect for Hudson's underlying requirements,
Justice Alito.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. -- Mr. Young --
MR. YOUNG: Yes, Justice --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- as I understand, the
union recognizes that a consequence of mootness would be
that the Ninth Circuit judgment is vacated. Now, if the
union would also recognize that that means the district
court judgment stays in place, so if the Ninth Circuit
judgment is worked out and you're left with the district
court judgment as the law of the case, then I think it
is moot, isn't it?
MR. YOUNG: No, Justice Ginsburg, and this
is why: The union would remain free to return to its
old ways, the -- the very type of reason that this Court
declined to find mootness in W.T. Grant. The union has
made much -- much of a showing -- or much of a show,
more accurately, of the fact that it has changed its
internal policy. It won't do this for 180 days. But
that can hardly be sufficient for this Court to find
mootness in this case. The union made this wonderful
and meaningful policy change on 6 days' notice.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it wasn't -- this --
this case is about a completed episode. It's about a
special assessment that is long over.
MR. YOUNG: That is true, Justice Ginsburg.
But it is also about the declaratory relief that was
ordered by -- that was entered by the district court.
It is about the -- which was virtually injunctive relief
in this case.
It is also about the effect of that judgment
for future activities and -- and how that will affect
the way SEIU operates.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Does it have --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, are you saying that
this is capable of repetition, yet evading review? I'm
not quite sure.
MR. YOUNG: It would certainly be so in this
case, Justice Kennedy. The union set a very short
time -- well, a relatively short time period, given the
length of time a case comes up from the courts as a rule
in this Court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does the injunction have
future -- future terms? Is it a permanent injunction or
is it just an injunction that relates to the notice
that's required in this case?
MR. YOUNG: Just -- just to be clear, there
is -- I'm talking about something that's tantamount to
an injunction, Justice Kennedy. It's -- it wasn't
actually phrased as an injunction. It was an
affirmative -- an act -- ordering an affirmative act.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But isn't that important,
Mr. Young, because usually where we've talked about
capable of repetition or where we've talked about the
same thing could happen again, it's where an injunction
has been before us rather than a suit for damages as to
a past act?
MR. YOUNG: Yes, Justice Kagan, I think that
has been generally the case. I -- in my research, I
could find very few cases where it wasn't clear to me
that this Court was addressing injunctive relief.
Hudson itself, it seems to me, did not specifically
discuss the entry of injunctive relief in the lower
court, and Hudson itself addressed a mootness issue.
I mean, if we -- if we talk about these
cases in their -- in their strictest sense, the union's
notices are all annual. So, by the theory that it
becomes moot when those notices expire, or potentially
moot when those notices expire, this Court would never
address these issues because it would -- I can't imagine
one of these cases ever getting up to this Court in as
little as a year.
But the -- this Court in Hudson, in -- I
believe it was footnote 12, said that this Court reviews
the policy, the procedure, the acts as they were
defended in the district court. And the union's policy
and procedure and acts here were defended in the
district court. And, therefore, cases like this should
not become moot, because it is capable of repetition and
would be evading review simply by the mere limits of how
long these policies and procedures are in effect.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you make that argument
in your opposition?
MR. YOUNG: It's -- it seems to me,
Justice Kennedy, it is implicit in our argument,
although clearly our main point in that argument is that
this is a -- a paradigm case of voluntary cessation of
allegedly unlawful activity. Until cert was granted in
this case, until the Petitioners' merits brief was
filed, SEIU was vigorously defending its practice. It
remains free to impose that practice.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's another --
something quite different than the capable of returning
to old ways, because here we do have a discrete episode
that's over. And there was no question that, even
though that -- what was it, in 2005 -- that the period
in 2005-2006, when the special assessment was in effect,
that was long over, but you were -- you were continuing
to litigate it. And nobody suggested that it would
become moot simply because the period was over.
MR. YOUNG: That's -- that's true, Justice
Ginsburg. Pardon me.
This argument -- this argument was not
raised until we were before this Court, the union's
argument that the case had somehow become moot, and
until it issued a notice --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, they said that it
had become moot because they gave you all the relief you
requested; so, there was nothing left to the case.
MR. YOUNG: Well, "all the relief," Justice
Ginsburg, implies that they had complied with the
district court's judgment. As to the notice, we believe
that they have not, and we believe that's clear because
of the very fact that the district court rejected the
06 financial disclosure as adequate. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe it's a good
point for you to move to the merits.
MR. YOUNG: Yes, thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I ask you a
question about the merits?
MR. YOUNG: Yes, certainly, Justice
Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you attacking the
normal system of basing assessments moving forward,
based on past accounting and chargeability and
non-chargeability? Or are you just attacking the
special assessment?
MR. YOUNG: I -- I appreciate the question,
Justice Sotomayor. No, we are not attacking the normal
Hudson procedures. On --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So,
articulate for me what's -- borrowing a phrase from one
of my colleagues yesterday, how do we write this
opinion? When is a second Hudson notice required?
Let's presume for the sake of argument that the union
had cost overruns. Labor salaries went up; printing
costs went up, not for lobbying; but generally there was
a 10 percent increase in their expenses across the board
because various contracts that they were involved in
required it. Would you require a second notice in that
circumstance?
MR. YOUNG: Yes, Justice Sotomayor. We
would -- we believe -- pardon me -- that a new Hudson
notice is required whenever there is a material
alteration in the obligations that are imposed upon
nonmembers. The values that this --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Articulate that again.
A material change --
MR. YOUNG: A material increase or --
increase in general terms, in the obligation imposed
upon the nonmembers. In this case, I don't think
anybody would dispute the 25 percent --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A material new assessment?
MR. YOUNG: A material new assessment.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. YOUNG: Yes, Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's -- we're talking
about money here, right?
MR. YOUNG: Yes, we are.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. YOUNG: Yes. Certainly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Without -- but
without regard to the reason for the assessment?
MR. YOUNG: I think as a matter of principle
I would have to say yes, Mr. Chief Justice. The
nonmember --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I'm not sure
that -- this may just simply be repeating Justice
Sotomayor's question, but if they say we have to raise
the assessment 10 percent because, as she said, you
know, we estimated the printing costs for the union
newsletter, whatever, was going to be this and it turns
out they raised it, it's going to be that; so, we know
we're going to have to get additional money, for things
that are indisputably chargeable, why do you need
special procedures in that case?
MR. YOUNG: Well, it wouldn't be so much a
special procedure as a new opportunity to object and
challenge the amount of the fee, Mr. Chief Justice.
Certainly, one of the elements -- and we
recognize, of course, that the primary reason
individuals object is political expenditures, but this
Court said very clearly in Abood that people can object
for any reason, for no reason, for a good reason, for a
bad reason; nobody can inquire as to why someone
objects.
And certainly when a material alteration --
there has been a material increase in the obligation
imposed upon nonmembers, they may choose to make an
economic decision that heretofore they chose not to
make. They may choose to minimize -- particularly the
non-objectors. They may choose that they want to
minimize the financial obligation that they are paying
to the union at that time. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's peculiar because in
the circumstance where the extra assessment is all going
to go to chargeable activities, in fact that means
economically speaking the following year the objector
will be better off, not worse off, because there is a
higher percentage of the total fee that's being paid to
chargeable activities.
So, this special assessment that Justice
Sotomayor and the Chief Justice were talking about is
one that will benefit the objector, if he keeps quiet
and says nothing. So, it's a little hard to imagine the
frame of mind that would say I need the notice because
now I might object, whereas I wouldn't have before.
MR. YOUNG: Well, Justice Breyer, the reason
for the notice is these people may not trust the union.
They -- they may choose to challenge the amount of the
fee.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, I see that point. Can
I ask you -- oh, are you -- you want to pursue that
further, or are we --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Let me give you
this example.
MR. YOUNG: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: And now I -- but I think I
see what your answer is. Imagine it's year two. In
year one, expenditures broke down so that it was
70 percent chargeable, 30 percent not chargeable. Got
that?
MR. YOUNG: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: And normally, under Hudson,
that means in year two the deal is the objectors pay
70 percent, right?
MR. YOUNG: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: In the middle of year two,
surprisingly, something comes up. Something comes up.
A surprise to the union, and they want to have a special
assessment. And you're saying they just can't without
going through this procedure all over again?
MR. YOUNG: That would be correct,
Justice Breyer. The -- I'm now talking about --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And take the money that
they collected?
MR. YOUNG: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can they take the money
that they collected under the first notice, and, instead
of doing the special assessment, in the middle of it,
this campaign gets announced by the governor, and can
they then divert the chargeable amount that they had
predicted and spend it on the non-chargeable amount? Or
are you -- or does that require a second Hudson notice?
Without a special assessment.
MR. YOUNG: I understand, Justice Sotomayor.
And no, under that case, I don't believe it would.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, this is a
peculiar rule that you have asked us to adopt. The rule
is that where there is a special assessment and it will
make all the objectors better off, they have to have a
special notice that they can object. But where the rule
is that we're going to take money we already collected
from them and spend it for a totally political purpose,
we don't give them a special notice and they don't have
to object.
Now, that seems totally backwards, but I
understand why you get there, and my suspicion is --
which you can confirm, is that's the only administrable
system you can think of.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you concede that it's
going to make them better off? I would -- I would
assume that that's your principal objection. They don't
know whether this new assessment is indeed going to be
divided the way the original one was or not. They might
want to challenge --
MR. YOUNG: That's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- whether -- whether it's
all going to be used for -- for assessable activities or
not. And they have no -- you're telling me they have
no --
JUSTICE BREYER: Right. But in my
hypothetical --
JUSTICE SCALIA: At the very least, they
have to make a -- an interest-free loan to the -- to the
union until such time as they can challenge it.
MR. YOUNG: Well, that's exactly correct,
Justice Scalia. And I understand --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but the hypothetical,
if I could continue with it, is -- is perhaps
unrealistic, but they have 20 bishops and 14 most honest
people in the United States, and they've all absolutely
guaranteed, and everybody agrees, that this goes to
chargeable activity. And where I was going with my
question, which you see where I was -- you're with me on
this, right?
MR. YOUNG: Yes, I am, Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER: And combine the two. What
I'm trying to point out and get your response is that
you've been forced into this position to create a
workable system. Now, why is that workable system one
whit better than the workable system we already have,
which is all this washes out in a fair manner the
following year, that there is an inevitable year's lag?
It doesn't work perfectly, but it's as good as any
other, and all we have to say is it's better than yours.
Now, why is yours better than that?
MR. YOUNG: Well, I recall the bishops from
the last time I was here, Justice Breyer. I think they
made an appearance then.
JUSTICE BREYER: They're useful to me.
(Laughter.)
MR. YOUNG: They are, I'm sure.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I assume we wouldn't need a
Hudson notice at all, if -- if bishops affirmed all of
these things, right?
(Laughter.)
MR. YOUNG: You anticipate my next point,
Justice Scalia. These -- these aren't bishops, and with
due respect to our litigation opponents in this case,
these are people that nonmembers don't trust. These are
people with whom nonmembers do not wish to affiliate.
And these are people that the nonmembers do not wish to
support, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The problem is in -- in
this system, and going back to Justice Breyer's
practicality, they will get a chance to object. It just
won't be at the moment of the special assessment; it
will be the following year. So, when the union gives
its new notice, it's going to set forth its chargeable
and non-chargeable amounts as audited, and it will say,
as it did -- as it's done in the briefs before us, on
Proposition 76, we're going to take 50 percent as
chargeable. And the union members can come in and give
a Lehnert objection, those who want to.  Those who
don't, know it's happened, and they agree to it.
Isn't that correct? They do get a chance to
object; the question is the timing.
MR. YOUNG: Then the problem is, Justice
Sotomayor, understanding the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is there an answer to
that? They will get a chance to object then?
MR. YOUNG: Well, they'll get a chance to
object after they've already paid the interest-free
loan.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but that's true of
the first example I gave you. If something happens in
the middle of the year and the union needs to divert
already-assessed funds to challenge a election, they can
do it. And you said that's okay.
MR. YOUNG: And the nonmembers would have
the chance to challenge that, but it would be within the
normal system of ordinary union dues.
We -- we, and I believe this Court in
Hudson, presume that any reasonable -- reasonably
competent union management would -- would have
relatively stable expenditures over the years.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Isn't -- isn't the premise
of Hudson that you give the notice before, before -- you
receive the notice before you have to cough up the
money?
MR. YOUNG: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And what's now proposed is,
well, for -- if there's an additional assessment, you
cough up the money first, and then later you straighten
it out. And I -- do you get -- do you get the interest?
MR. YOUNG: That seems to me to be the
problem, Justice Scalia. The people who got the June --
June 2005 notice were left in the dark -- indeed, the
union may have been in the dark -- as to this special
assessment. But once the union agreed to -- decided to
impose the special assessment, the union was required by
Hudson's principles to shed some light. You know,
perhaps it is less predictive, less accurate, to say we
intend to spend the money this way. But when you have
an assessment which is purely intended for politics, and
that's what the union said, to create a Political
Fight-Back Fund, that's not, you know --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you get -- does your
Hudson notice tell you about what's going to happen next
year? I thought your Hudson notice told you this was
the breakdown for the last year, and as far as we can
tell, that's what it will be next year, but -- but
things could change. What does the Hudson notice tell
you?
MR. YOUNG: The Hudson notice provides you
with an opportunity to object and some assurance,
because of the audit requirement --
JUSTICE BREYER: But am I right in my
description of it?
MR. YOUNG: I think -- I think that would be
a fair description, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do they -- do they
carry over from one year to the next, or do you have to
refile your objection to the union expenditures every
year?
MR. YOUNG: Most unions, Mr. Chief Justice,
require an annual objection. Now, of course, there
would be nothing -- we find nothing wrong with an annual
challenge requirement if you choose to challenge that
year's figures, because obviously it's a specific event.
But most unions seem to require annual objection. So,
you have to say again and again: I don't want to pay
for your politics.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, but what
happens --
MR. YOUNG: But that's not raised in this
case.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But going back to the --
forget about special assessments. I think in one of the
briefs, I know in one of the briefs, someone says
elections happen every 4 years. So, in the normal cycle
of union activities, in an election year they're going
to divert more of whatever accessible moneys they have
to their lobbying efforts, and the following year
they'll go back to normal for 3 years.
You're not challenging that normal variation
in the -- in the distribution of the moneys, correct?
MR. YOUNG: Correct, Justice Sotomayor. And
that, too, may vary from union to union, from State to
State even. As some of the Justices I'm sure know,
Virginia has called for --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, I guess my problem
is I don't see how that, given your argument, is any
less alone than this special assessment where the
labor -- where the objecting members at the end of the
year will get notice of what has happened that year,
will have an opportunity to place their Lehnert
challenges and get them ruled upon, and will, as
Justice Breyer said, have a benefit because they're
going to either pay more if the Lehnert -- pay less if
the Lehnert challenges are upheld or pay more if -- if
they're not.
But I'm not quite sure how this is a
different loan.
MR. YOUNG: Well, we disagree with the
union's characterization of its supposed benefit. But I
-- Justice Sotomayor, I see my time has expired, and I'd
like to reserve a balance for rebuttal. I will try
address your question more thoroughly when I stand up
again.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Collins.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEREMIAH COLLINS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. COLLINS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Justice Ginsburg is absolutely correct
that what we have suggested to the Court is that the
court of appeals decision be vacated, with the
consequence of reinstating the district court judgment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why do -- why did
you give up once the case was granted here? You didn't
consider that until the case came before this Court.
MR. COLLINS: That's correct, Your Honor,
and the reason for that is when the events in this
matter were new and the then union officers' actions
were being challenged, the instinct was we're going to
defend the case. And, as time went on, there was no
rethinking of that situation. When the case was granted
here over our opposition, noting that we didn't think
that the questions presented were really presented, the
officers of the union, who are not the ones involved in
the original case, thought about the situation and came
to the realization that they have no stake in the
procedures that are at issue here. This is a local that
had never done a mid-year increase in the past. The --
what was contemplated as a temporary increase here
turned into a permanent increase. The dues went up to
1.5 percent of salary a year after this increase ended.
JUSTICE ALITO: What does this local, and
what will the other locals, do in the future when
special assessments are made? Will they provide notice
or will they go back to the old system?
MR. COLLINS: This local -- and I won't
belabor the term "special assessment" at the moment, but
when we get to the merits, I think there's a
misunderstanding around that, Justice Alito. But this
local has put in a procedure which frankly would satisfy
the Petitioners' concerns for the future if future
conduct was legitimately at issue here. But it is not,
for two reasons.
First, when we state that the district court
judgment be reinstated, that's a judgment that was not
appealed by the Petitioners. That defines the limits of
what they can attain from this case, whatever this Court
may decide, and that decision gives whatever protection
it gives against future conduct. Now, it gives
essentially none for a very good reason. This was a
case, as has been noted, brought only about a one-time
event. There were no allegations of an ongoing
practice. There was no request for declaratory or
injunctive relief to prevent --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Collins, as I understand
Mr. Young's argument, there is a serious dispute about
the adequacy of this notice, and it might be a dispute
about whether it was clear enough, about that it was
satisfying claims, or it might be a dispute about
whether it allowed refunds easily enough, but that Mr.
Young is contesting whether the notice complied with the
district court's order.
Now, as long as that's true, don't we have a
live case before us? Somebody has to answer that
question about whether your notice complied with the
order, and if it's the case that a court has to answer
that question, doesn't that depend on the questions
presented here, the substantive questions?
MR. COLLINS: No, it doesn't, Justice Kagan.
And the Court's explained in a number of cases,
beginning I think with Walling v. Reuter and also,
obviously, Munsingwear and U.S. Bancorp, a case can be
in a posture where this Court, in disposing of it, needs
to grant certain relief or clarification of the status
of prior orders; and yet, the case is moot on the merits
such that the Court cannot appropriately reach the
merits.
That's what we have here. If there is a
dispute -- and I'll explain in a moment why there really
isn't. But if there is a dispute, for example, as to
whether an individual failed to get their refund because
the notice was inadequate, that dispute is not affected
by and requires no decision of this Court.
If the district court judgment is
reinstated, then the question of whether we have fully
provided all relief called for by that judgment, which
we believe we have, would be before the district court
for decision, unaffected by --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But this is not --
this is not an incidental matter. I mean, the whole
point of your friend's argument with the Hudson notice
is they want people to understand what's happening with
the -- their union money. And they say this notice
didn't let people know that. And if the case is not
moot and if they prevail, they will have a right to be
heard on what the notice should say. And that will make
a difference in how many people opt out or how many
people don't.
And I guess I'm following up on Justice
Kagan's question. That's a very important part of this
case, what the notice is going to say, and if we accept
your view that it's moot, that issue goes by the
wayside.
MR. COLLINS: I think that's incorrect,
Mr. Chief Justice, for two reasons: First of all, the
district court required a certain kind of notice to be
given. We are stating the district court judgment
should be reinstated. If the notice we have given does
not comport with what the district court judgment, which
was not appealed by the Petitioners, requires, it will
be provided by the district court.
We are -- we are not contesting -- the
Petitioners are looking a gift horse in the mouth.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I don't
see how that -- I don't see how that works.
The notice is only required by the district
court if the case is not moot. If the case is moot by
the notice you sent out, the district court doesn't have
a case on the basis of which to order a different
notice.
MR. COLLINS: No, I don't think that's
correct, Your Honor. A case can be moot in this Court
-- and this is what I believe Munsingwear, Walling v.
Reuter, and the other cases, U.S. Bancorp more recently,
explain. And, at first, it seems paradoxical, but it is
not paradoxical. A case -- there can be remaining
issues potentially in the district court, such as
whether the check that the plaintiff paid bounced or
not, that could potentially have to be resolved by a
district court. And it -- but it means, at least in
terms of prudential mootness, there is not a substantive
merits issue remaining for the court to be deciding.
And it's really quite simple. The Petitioners, as I
say, are looking a gift horse in the mouth.
The apex, the acme, that they can achieve in
this case, is what they got from the district court, and
it was reversed. We are saying give it back to them.
Take back the reversal, reinstate the judgment.
Whatever they won, they will have. We believe we have
already given them everything they want. If we have
not, the district court will do that.
But let me explain the second point, if I
may, Mr. Chief Justice, which is that there is no
legitimate issue here about whether the notice was
adequate. Mr. Young stated quite incorrectly that the
notice we have provided is the same as the notice the
district court struck down. That's absolutely
incorrect. The district court said that the 2005 notice
issued before the dues increase obviously did not give
specific notice of the dues increase, although it stated
that dues could be increased.
The district court specifically held, at
Petition Appendix 73a, that the 2006 notice, which
described the so-called fund and the dues increase, and
the purposes of it, was completely adequate. And the
notice the district court -- one also has to realize the
district court was requiring the union to refund only
the non-chargeable portion of activities attributed to
this increase.
A certain kind of notice would be needed for
that to justify how the union was computing what it was
saying with the chargeable portion to refund. But what
the union has done here is provide greater relief than
the district court ordered. We have refunded every
penny that anyone who requests had paid during the
increase.
So, there's no serious question that the
notice that the union sent out, which explained what the
increase had been spent on, sufficiently informed
individuals as to whether they now want to get back
every penny, as we've offered them, of what they paid
under the increase.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But -- I want you to
move to the merits. It may be a good time to do that.
MR. COLLINS: Fine. Turning to the
merits --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can I clarify a point?
I thought I heard and maybe I just didn't look at the
union regulations, the new ones -- is it limited to
180 days? I thought I heard your adversary say that
the --
MR. COLLINS: It -- no, it has a provision
that it can't be repealed without 180-day notice. There
can't be a sudden repeal of the new procedure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I see.
MR. COLLINS: But I do want to make clear,
we think nothing -- our position on mootness is not
dependent on the Court determining that the new
procedure will be in effect forever. Our position --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me what
the burden is on a union to give a second Hudson notice
whenever there is a special assessment? Meaning do you
happen to know how frequently unions impose special
assessments --
MR. COLLINS: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- and what the
incremental cost is to the union of giving such notice?
MR. COLLINS: That requires a fairly
extensive answer, I believe, Justice Sotomayor, partly
because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Try to summarize it. I
wasn't looking to monopolize you.
MR. COLLINS: I understand, but I believe --
I believe the word "special assessment" is being used
here with a meaning that doesn't correspond to what this
union did. I can say this much: There's never --
there's been only one other case in any Federal court
that I'm aware of, and only in a district court, there's
been no other appellate court, dealing with any kind of
assessment, a temporary dues increase, and how it
affects Hudson rights.
So, this is a -- a non-event in the real
world. There are -- there are no challenges that have
-- that have been made previously to any kinds of
assessments or increases.
But unions use assessments in two -- in many
different ways. And let me contrast one way with what
happened here, and I think it will show why there's no
serious question here about a need for a notice.
Some unions have a dues structure which
covers only certain kinds of activities. And they
contemplate a new kind of activity that they would not
normally pay for out of dues or fees. They say often
with -- with a vote, which was not required here. There
was -- there was no vote required or taken here of
bargaining unit members for what occurred in this
instance.
But you may have a union that says: We want
to make a kind of expenditure that's really
unanticipated. It's not what we normally do with our
dues. We're going to put it to a vote. If you approve
it, we'll collect it. We'll probably put it in a
segregated fund separate from our treasury.
That kind of an assessment can raise
potential issues, I would acknowledge, under Hudson.
It's worlds away from what we have here because all that
happened in this case was that the union increased, from
percent to 1.25 percent of salary, the regular
membership dues and the fees based on those dues that
were deducted by employers and paid into the union's
general treasury --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is it incorrect that this
was for what was termed a "Political Fight-Back Fund"?
MR. COLLINS: It was -- some union
communications described it as having that sole -- that
purpose. The October 27th letter, which was the most
detailed explanation, said it had two purposes,
basically to fight back at the bargaining table and to
fight back politically.
But what's essential, Justice Alito, it was
never suggested nor was it ever the case that this money
would be in any way segregated or treated as a separate
entity, so to speak. So, we have the Schermerhorn
problem here. Basically, Petitioners' position is based
on the fallacy exposed in Schermerhorn of trying to take
part of a unified general treasury and treat it as if it
were a distinct entity, because --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let me give you this
example, and maybe you'll say that this is different
from your case and the rules should be different in
these two cases. The annual dues for particular -- for
members of this union are 1 percent of their salaries,
and let's say that amounts to -- or it's a certain
percentage of their salaries, and let's say that amounts
to $500 annual dues. And let's say that, in the prior
year, 90 percent of the money collected by the union was
used for chargeable purposes, 10 percent for
non-chargeable purposes. So, someone who objected, a
nonmember who objected, would be able to get back $50.
Now, during the course of the year, the
union levies a special assessment or whatever you want
to call it, and for this 90 -- the percentages are
exactly reversed: 90 percent is for non-chargeable; 10
percent is for chargeable. So, now a nonmember who
potentially wants to object has $450 at stake. Now, in
that situation, why shouldn't there be separate notice?
Aren't the economic incentives quite different?
MR. COLLINS: If I understand the
hypothetical, there could be a problem there if the
assumption is then that the union really is beginning a
kind of spending that's really foreign to the way it's
spent money in the past.
What needs to be explained here, though,
Justice Alito, I don't think one would guess from
anything that has been said today that we're talking
about a period of time when the union's chargeable
spending increased and its non-chargeable spending
decreased. We're talking about a period of time when
objecting nonmembers did not even pay their pro rata
share of the concededly chargeable expenditures, meaning
they did not pay one penny for any political activities.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, as I said, my
hypothetical may be very different from what happened
here, and maybe it's an unrealistic hypothetical; and
you can answer that. But if -- if it were to occur,
should there not be Hudson notice?
MR. COLLINS: Well, the problem -- it would
be a closer question, but I think not, because, again,
it would be caught up in the subsequent year.
JUSTICE ALITO: But what if the money is
going to be used for an election campaign? What if it
is going to be used to weigh in, in favor of one
gubernatorial candidate against another, in favor of one
slate of legislative candidates against another? And on
those issues, the nonmembers may have very strong
partisan and ideological objections. So, why should
they not be given a notice at that time --
MR. COLLINS: It would depend --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- and given the opportunity
not to give what would be at a minimum a -- an
interest-free loan --
MR. COLLINS: Because --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- for the purpose of
influencing an election campaign?
MR. COLLINS: It would depend,
Justice Alito. I think in your hypothetical, one might
be able to say -- there might be more facts needed, but
one might be able to say that what is occurring is
something that could not be anticipated reasonably by
the person who got the notice.
In this case, however -- and this is crucial
to this case -- the notice in 2005 told every nonmember
that, of our $38 million budget, we spent 43.6 percent
of it last year on non-chargeable activities. And if
you do not object, we will spend whatever amount out of
our roughly $40 million budget in the coming year on
various activities as we perceive the need, including
specifically ballot initiatives, which were specifically
mentioned in the notice as one of the things the union
spent its money on.
Now --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought your
point, though -- this was a very special ballot
initiative. That's what the literature suggests, that
this was not sort of the normal run in the course --
every 2 years, every election cycle, we spend something.
That's why it's a special assessment.
MR. COLLINS: Well, I don't -- I wouldn't
call it a special assessment if one uses that term as
it's usually used, to mean a very short-term assessment
apart from general union functions for a new kind of
function.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, it's not
short-term; it's just until November 7th or whatever.
MR. COLLINS: But it's nothing new under the
sun, Mr. Chief Justice. And we can see that -- for
example, the record reflects the audit for 2005 shows us
that, in addition to the money that was attributed to
the dues increase and spent in opposing these ballot
propositions, additional money, approximately
$2 million, was spent on those same purposes from the
pre-increase dues.
So, ballot -- opposing ballot initiatives is
nothing new for this union.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can you think of for a
second -- to go back to Justice Sotomayor. Now, I would
like you to see, I think, why she asked the question.
As I understand it, the way it works now is
at the beginning of, say, September -- say it goes
September -- September. September of year two, we look
back to year one, and we see what the percentages were.
And now we in the union calculate a budget for year two.
And we go and get approval or opt-outs on that basis.
Now, what I thought coming in here is that
the problem was going to be, if you have to have a new
notice in the middle of the year for special political
assessments, you're going to discover that half the time
you don't know if they're special political assessments.
It's an impossible line to draw. It's really tough.
You're making the argument that however you
draw the line, we're on the right side of it, not the
wrong side. Isn't that what -- basically what you're
saying? It's not a special assessment. It wasn't
really -- et cetera. Okay.
Now -- but there's a new argument that's
come along that I hadn't focused on, that we can avoid
the administrative problem by saying all special
assessments require a new notice, whether they're for
political purposes or not. Hence the question that I
was trying to get -- I was very interested in your
answer. If we had that rule, which avoids the problem
of saying which is which, how does that affect the
union? Not necessarily yours but unions in general.
How often is it that you draw up your budget for year
two in September, you put it into effect, and then
during the year, you discover you need more money from
people for any reason, and, therefore, you change what
you thought they were going to contribute? How often,
if you can give us an estimate -- and you're in a better
position than I. Does it happen a lot, rarely, a
little? What do you want to say?
MR. COLLINS: I -- I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And a footnote: And if
it happens a lot, how burdensome is it?
MR. COLLINS: I will get to that, Justice
Sotomayor. I have tried to determine how frequent it
is, and I've been unable. All I've been able to
determine is there's no litigation over it. How
often -- and I've been able to determine that so-called
assessments take many different forms from -- and I
think there are crucial distinctions -- from funding
what would -- a kind of charge that would not otherwise
be funded out of dues for some short period of time, to
the opposite extreme, what we have here and what I don't
think would be called an assessment frankly by anything
I've read, a temporary dues increase which became
permanent and which simply increased the total flow of
dues and fees into the general treasury and which went
for the usual -- the kinds of activities the union had
always funded. And in that regard, there's one --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you please answer
my question?
MR. COLLINS: The burden?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right? The burden.
MR. COLLINS: The burden consists of two
things, Justice Sotomayor. The -- if a union has to
give a new Hudson notice in a situation like this,
whereas I've been trying to explain the spending that
went on is really not different from what one would have
reasonably anticipated given the notice, then we have
litigation and disputes about the need for new notices
whenever any number of things happen, because one thing
that happened here that is undisputed but hasn't been
discussed is that collective bargaining costs were up
six-fold in 2005 over 2004, and they were up six-fold in
2006 over 2005.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One reason -- I
mean, we're dealing with the situation where the union
is compelling nonunion members to give them money for
political activities. We allow, as I understand Hudson,
as I read it, because you can't figure out what that is,
you wait until the end of the year. In other words,
it's a compromise for administrative convenience.
Normally, you wouldn't allow it at all, as -- at least
under the law as I read it, you would not allow people
to take money -- you would not allow the union to take
money from people who don't want to spend it on
political activities so the union can spend it on
political activities. But we allow that in the course
of the year because it's impossible as you go on to sort
these things out. I thought the argument on the other
side was when you have a special assessment, an
additional charge, there you don't have the
administrative problem. You can tell it's .25 percent.
So, you can't take that until you tell them, do you want
to object or are you happy -- are you fine with having
this spent on political purposes?
MR. COLLINS: The reason, Mr. Chief Justice,
that it isn't that straight forward is quite simply that
all of these questions about it's a special assessment,
we can figure out what it is, we can treat it
separately, flounder when one realizes that the
so-called special assessment is simply a dues increase,
because if I were to try to imagine -- let's try to
imagine the notice that could have been given. If I was
giving a new notice in the fall of 2005 to explain to
all nonmembers how things look now compared to what
they -- how they may have looked when the Hudson notice
was given, I would say the following, completely
consistent with all the facts of record in this case as
revealed in the audits. I would say: We've determined
we need more income. Part of this is because we
anticipate $3.7 million in fight-back expenses this
year. Another part is we expect more than $3-1/2
million of additional bargaining costs this year, and we
expect a lot of other changes in our costs.
On the Petitioners' theory -- and this is
why Schermerhorn is the complete answer to their
theory -- there's a constitutional violation if the
union says we're going to view this increase as paying
for our additional political costs, and it's going to
free up our bargaining -- our general treasury for the
bargaining. That's a violation. But if you say we're
going to treat this increase as covering those new
bargaining costs we told you about, that's going to free
up our general treasury for the political costs --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But on the -- I'm
reading from the district court opinion. It said that
this assessment would be used -- and they're quoting
from union material -- "for a broad range of political
expenses, including television, radio advertising,
direct mail, voter registration, voter education, and
get out the vote activities in our work sites and in
communities across California." And it further said,
quote, "The fund will not be used for regular costs of
the union such as office rent, staff salaries or routine
equipment replacement."
MR. COLLINS: But two points,
Mr. Chief Justice: First, as the court of appeals
pointed out, there were other statements that said the
money would be used for both purposes.
But, as Schermerhorn points out,
Schermerhorn says even if you specifically say this part
of our dues income is going to be earmarked for this
purpose, it's artificial when you're dealing with a
general union treasury, not a separate segregated fund,
to give that separate legal status. And that -- because
that is why -- my point to you, Mr. Chief Justice, is
nothing in the world would have changed here.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose that the --
MR. COLLINS: If --
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose that the proponents
of Propositions 75 and 76 had come to the union and
said, would you please give us an interest-free loan for
money because we want to use this money to -- to
persuade the electorate to enact these; but don't worry
because we're going to pay it back right after the
election, when we've achieved our electoral ends.
Would -- would the union provide the money
because it's all going to come out in the wash?
MR. COLLINS: I -- I really can't answer
that question. I don't know. I --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, I -- gee, I really
doubt that you -- that they would. But what's the
difference? If you look at this from the perspective of
a nonmember who doesn't want those ballot initiatives to
be defeated, saying that we're going to give you your
money back -- we're going to use your money to achieve a
political end that you oppose, but don't worry because
we're going to give it back to you next year after we've
achieved our political end -- how does that solve the
problem?
MR. COLLINS: That's not the situation here,
Justice Alito. The nonmembers were told in June 2005 in
the Hudson notice that if you don't object, we may spend
millions of dollars on political activities, including
ballot initiatives. If a person didn't want to support
that, they merely need to object. What then happened --
and this is what gets lost in the messaging about the
dues increase. What actually happened in the real world
in the period that followed is that, compared to the
numbers in the 2004 Hudson notice, the union spent less
on non-chargeable matters and more on chargeable
matters. And the only reason there's a case here in the
Court is that the union, for whatever PR purposes,
whatever it may have been, instead of saying we're going
to treat the increase as covering our vastly increased
bargaining costs, thereby freeing up money for politics,
we're instead going to describe this increase as being
attributable to our political costs, thereby freeing up
money for bargaining. But what the union is spending
its -- its money on is bargaining. More money --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It -- it seems to me that
this answer is -- is so confusing that the Court
probably should consider whether or not an opt-in
requirement is -- is preferable. I -- we're talking --
in the first exchange, you had with Justice Alito, he
gave you a very simple question: 90 percent and 10
percent. Then, it's reversed. Special assessment for
90 percent political. And the point there was that
you're taking someone's money contrary to that person's
conscience. And that's what the First Amendment stands
against. And you simply wouldn't answer that question.
You would -- and then you say, well, maybe that it's --
it's fungible, it's hard to --
MR. COLLINS: No, but --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It seems to me that you're
avoiding --
MR. COLLINS: No.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- a very, very critical
question on the constitutional rights of these objecting
members.
MR. COLLINS: I won't avoid the -- I don't
believe -- I was not meaning to avoid it,
Justice Kennedy. What I thought I said is, if you are
springing something on someone that's not anticipated in
the notice that gave them their rights to object, then
there's a problem.
My point is very simple. Anyone reading the
2005 Hudson notice, if that person was asked -- if I
don't -- if you -- if I don't object, might the union
spend $3.7 million next year on ballot initiatives that
I may not want to oppose? The answer would be yes. The
notice made it perfectly clear.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Let me ask you this --
MR. COLLINS: And the person can object.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- by way of background:
In collective bargaining negotiations, do the unions
consider the -- as one factor the importance of ensuring
that the governmental employer has fiscal stability?
MR. COLLINS: That's generally considered,
yes, by unions.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, isn't that
ultimately a political judgment, so that even collective
bargaining involves a core political judgment?
MR. COLLINS: And that's exactly what the
Court said in Abood. And the reason that exclusivity
and agency fees are permitted in -- in serving an
important government purpose is that the government has
concluded that its interest lies in having an exclusive
spokesperson who -- with whom it can negotiate so that
it won't have an array of different employment relations
or different --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you -- you concede, in
ordinary collective bargaining, there are critical and
important political -- significant political judgments
that are being made by the union in the course of
collective bargaining with chargeable expenses?
MR. COLLINS: Absolutely. And Abood
explicitly says that, and Abood then says that,
nevertheless, the government -- we're talking about a
regulatory scheme to promote the government's interest
in orderly labor relations. The government needs to
make arrangements and agreements on terms of employment.
It has a vital interest in having an exclusive
representational arrangement where that can be
accomplished. And that, the Court held in Abood -- and
it's not challenged by Petitioners -- that justifies the
degree of impingement that's inherent in the fact that,
as Your Honor correctly says, all bargaining,
particularly in the public sector, has political
elements in it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Young, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM J. YOUNG
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. YOUNG: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Young, I hope this
won't use up much of your time, but I do have a pressing
question to make sure that we're just not spinning our
wheels here.
What if the union here had simply said all
this additional assessment will go to bargaining
activities, and then simply used its original
assessment, the portion that had been anticipated to be
used for bargaining, for political activities? It could
do that, couldn't it?
MR. YOUNG: It would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, it's not committed
to -- to, you know, an 80-20, or whatever the division
is, simply because that's what's given out in the first
notice. It can indeed use its -- the anticipated
portion for bargaining for political activities.
MR. YOUNG: It would be free to do so,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, why are we wasting our
time? I mean, all the unions are going to do is say
this is a general assessment for bargaining purposes,
and then use their -- their general funds for the
political thing.
MR. YOUNG: Because the nonmembers still
have that right to challenge, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But they don't lose it;
they're going to do it the following September. The
attractive part of your argument from the beginning was
that this is somehow a forced loan. And I understand
the attractiveness of that. But it goes back to what
Justice Breyer said from the beginning, which is, given,
as has been recognized, that money is fungible and that
you can't really often predict what's going to happen in
the future, it's been developed a system that cyclically
gets money to the people back.
MR. YOUNG: And money is fungible to a
degree, Justice Sotomayor -- Sotomayor -- excuse me.
And I respect that argument, but let's remember the
facts as we have them here. In the facts of this case,
it was a segregated fund. There's a separate portion, a
separate line item in the union's notice for both --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So, you win, and
it'll never happen again. It'll never again be called a
segregated fund for politics.
(Laughter.)
MR. YOUNG: I lose, Justice Scalia, and it
will happen all the time, I'm afraid.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, but the -- the problem
if you win in this case, and then there is this other
way of getting to the same -- the same result, is that
the other way of getting to the same result, while
permissible, is far less transparent. And people won't
understand it, and it -- it encourages a kind of slyness
that seems highly undesirable.
And the virtue of the present system is that
it does require some forced loans, that's true, but it
does wash out in the wash, and it ends up being fair to
the objectors. And it's simply hard to think of a
better system that doesn't provide more administrative
problems than the existing one.
MR. YOUNG: But --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, that's -- go ahead.
MR. YOUNG: And I thank you, Justice Breyer.
I'm sorry for interrupting.
It -- I understand that, Justice Breyer.
And for ordinary union dues, that's why when Justice
Sotomayor asked me at the beginning of the argument
whether we're challenging the ordinary Hudson system, I
answered no, because that system is perfectly adequate
for ordinary union dues.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The problem is that I'm
being told by your adversary -- and since we don't know,
I'm always afraid of writing a decision in a vacuum,
okay?
MR. YOUNG: Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That unions structure
their business in a myriad number of ways, that some
have a very small due each year and a larger special
assessment for special projects. And I assume there's
endless variety.
You're proposing a rule that every single
time an assessment outside of annual dues is imposed,
that a new Hudson notice can be given. And you're
suggesting, Justice Scalia, that all they have to say is
we think it's going to be for chargeable effect.
MR. YOUNG: Well, the -- I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Briefly, counsel.
MR. YOUNG: Yes, and I thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice.
So, Justice Sotomayor, the answer is that
I'm saying it would -- it would be brief -- and my
friend Mr. Collins is saying that it doesn't happen that
often. So, the burden is minimal. Unions have other
options than extracting this money from unwitting
nonmembers -- interest-free loans, internationals.
And I thank the Court for its attention.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel,
counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the case in the
