IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MICHAEL D. TURNER :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 10-10
REBECCA L. ROGERS, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 23, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
LEONDRA R. KRUGER, ESQ., Acting Principal Deputy
Solicitor General, Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; on behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting reversal.
STEPHANOS BIBAS, ESQ., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; on
behalf of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
LEONDRA R. KRUGER, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as
amicus curiae, supporting reversal 25
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
STEPHANOS BIBAS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 33
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 58
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in case 10-10, Turner v. Rogers.
Mr. Waxman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SETH P. WAXMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. WAXMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Due process requires the assistance of
counsel before an alleged civil contemner can be
incarcerated. That categorical rule flows from the
imposition by a court in a formal adversary proceeding
of what this Court has termed, quote, "the awesome
prospect of incarceration." Certainly --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's -- it's a formal
adversary proceeding in a very limited sense and not in
the sense that caused us to require counsel to be
provided in criminal proceedings where the other side is
armed with the legal knowledge that the poor defendant
does not have. Many of these proceedings do not involve
counsel on the other side, do they?
MR. WAXMAN: Well, Justice Scalia, the
answer is yes and no. I don't think that you can call
this nonadversarial because the -- because South
Carolina, as a matter of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm talking of counsel. Is
it not true that many, perhaps most, of these
proceedings do not have counsel on the other side? It
is the wife who is trying to get payment of -- of the --
of the defaulted alimony and does not have counsel --
MR. WAXMAN: I think it is -- the contrary
is true. According to the government statistics, 70
percent of noncustodial parents either have no income or
have income less than $10,000, and, therefore, in a
State -- in every State that accepts TANF funds, which
is every State, they are represented by the State
agency, and South Carolina in this case has made a rule
that in-State cases -- and that also includes nonwelfare
cases where the -- a custodial parent has chosen to be
represented by the State -- the State entirely carries
its prosecutorial burden by filing a rule to show cause
and an affidavit showing the arrearages, and that places
the burden, which South Carolina says is a heavy burden,
on the defendant to prove inability to comply as a
condition of maintaining his liberty. In this --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if we agree with you,
isn't this going to create an imbalance? Now, in this
case, Ms. Rogers was not represented by counsel at this
proceeding, was she?
MR. WAXMAN: Ms. Rogers -- in most of the
proceedings, and it does vary from one to the other. In
all -- let's put it this way: In all of the
proceedings, the charges and the State's prima facie
case of willful contempt was established by a State
employee.
JUSTICE ALITO: Yes. The State employee
sends out the -- the rule to show cause and proof that,
evidence that the -- the noncustodial parent is in
arrears on the child payments. So, let's see what would
happen if counsel is then appointed in one of these
cases, where both the custodial parent and the
noncustodial parent are indigent and perhaps not very
well educated.
Counsel is appointed for the noncustodial
parent, and counsel comes in and says this is the income
of my client, and he's hurt, he was hurt on the job, all
his -- his income is Social Security disability
benefits, and he doesn't have enough money to pay child
support. Now, the custodial -- the non -- the custodial
parent who has no attorney says: He's not really hurt,
I see him, I see him walking around, he's going hunting,
he's shooting baskets, he's driving around in a new car.
It may not be the -- the title may not be in his name,
he's -- he's out on the street corner, he's buying
drugs, he's drinking alcohol, but I don't have a lawyer,
and I can't prove any of this.
So you've created a great imbalance there,
haven't you?
MR. WAXMAN: Not at all, Justice Alito.
First of all, in all -- in the -- in the majority of
cases the department of social services is in fact the
real party in interest and the moving party, and in any
private case, for a nominal fee the custodial mother can
have the department of social services act in that role
as Federal law requires the State to do. Second of
all --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, why don't you argue for
a rule that -- that the State must provide counsel for
the defendant in these cases where it has provided
counsel or there is paid counsel on the other side?
Wouldn't that be fair?
MR. WAXMAN: That would certainly be more
than fair, and the number of instances -- let -- let's
be clear about this. The number of instances in which
the State will be required to appoint counsel for the
alleged civil contemner will be in cases where -- I
mean, there's no reason why the State of South Carolina,
when it issues the summons and the affidavit, says fill
out this form and let us know whether you have assets or
have income --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When you --
MR. WAXMAN: In all of those cases where
they believe that this is a turnip, not a deadbeat dad,
they will proceed with remedies other -- other than
incarceration. It's only when they want to proceed in
the face of a form that shows indigence and inability to
have counsel, that the State has to provide a lawyer
before it -- before it puts this man in jail.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When you asked --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Waxman, in your
opening statement, you said whenever, in civil contempt,
a person is subject to incarceration he or she is
entitled to counsel. In your opening statement, you
didn't limit it to cases like the case we have before
us; that is, where the defense is I'm unable to pay.
Therefore, I can't get out of jail.
Are you limiting -- are you limiting your
argument to the case of a noncustodial parent or a
former husband who says I just haven't got the
wherewithal to pay? Or are you making a broader claim
that anytime someone is subject to incarceration they
must have counsel?
MR. WAXMAN: It is definitely the broader
claim; that is, this -- this decision about counsel has
to be determined ex ante, because the State -- and this
is our -- I suppose our more limited request for a
categorical rule. Where you have a State that has
placed the burden on the noncustodial parent --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, my -- my question
just follows from what I think Justice Ginsburg must
have in mind. My understanding is that it's a
commonplace if the witness declines to testify even
though the witness has immunity, or the attorney or the
witness declines to produce a document, the judge says
you will remain in jail until you comply. In most of
the States, I think he's allowed counsel, but does the
broad statement that you -- or the broad argument that
you responded, that you're making when you answered
Justice Ginsburg's case, apply there, so we are in
effect saying in all these cases you must have appointed
counsel?
MR. WAXMAN: No, no, no. Our submission is
any case in which the State proposes to deprive somebody
with an unqualified right to liberty of that liberty by
actual incarceration, there is a right to counsel. Now,
there is a right to appointed --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You're committed to
custody until you testify.
MR. WAXMAN: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: "Mr. Bailiff, take him
out."
MR. WAXMAN: There -- the cases have
recognized a distinction, Justice Kennedy, between
direct contempt and indirect contempt. And direct
contempt, which is a witness in the courtroom refuses to
testify, the cases have -- both civil and criminal --
have not required the appointment of counsel or a jury
trial or anything like that. In -- in a case where the
grand jury witness refuses to testify, the cases all, to
my knowledge, do require the appointment of counsel
because there may be a defense, and someone is being
deprived of their liberty.
Now, I think it's important -- Justice
Ginsburg, you asked me if I have a more limited rule,
and in this instance, the limited rule is that certainly
counsel requires -- certainly the due process clause
requires the appointment of counsel where the State
places the affirmative burden on the contemner to
demonstrate as a matter of law and fact that he was
unable to comply, and, thus, that incarceration would
not be unlawful punishment, but lawful coercion. And
that is, I think, an important distinction. The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Waxman, the
Solicitor General suggests that the failure in this case
or the failure to appoint counsel arises from a due
process complaint that the -- that the -- that the
Petitioner here didn't know that he had indigency as a
defense or what he needed to prove or to bring to court
to prove that. Why wouldn't the Solicitor General's
solution of saying, as long as a State tells a defendant
that they have a burden of proof and some contours of
what proof they need to supply or -- on that issue, that
that would satisfy due process? What can a lawyer do
when someone comes in and says, I'm not earning any
money, I can't earn it, blah, blah, blah, end of story?
MR. WAXMAN: The reason --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What do you need? Why
do you need --
MR. WAXMAN: The reason it doesn't satisfy
-- even if the -- even if the defendant is advised that
there is an inability-to-comply defense and that a
sentence imposed where there is an inability to comply
is unlawful under Gompers and Bagwell, and for that
matter under South Carolina law, is that the showing
that the -- the burden that the defendant has to
shoulder, the shoulder -- the showing that the defendant
has to make is both legal and factual, and neither one
of them is straightforward. It's legal, for example,
because there are lots of legal questions built into the
unable-to-comply defense, including what it means to be
unable to comply. Intentional underemployment, the
allegation made in this court that he's using up all his
income on drug use, the ability to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He admitted that.
MR. WAXMAN: Well, no, he admitted that he
was a --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: At least up until the
accident.
MR. WAXMAN: Yes. Exactly.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It was up until then.
MR. WAXMAN: But the point is that --
intentional underemployment, the drug use, the ability
to incarcerate somebody so that they can reduce their
arrearage on a work release program, perhaps the
requirement that he sell his $1,500 car -- those are all
legal questions as to whether the defendant -- they
constitute an inability to comply.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And you don't think that
an individual is capable of saying, I can't -- I'm --
yes, I am, or no, I'm not using up my money on drugs;
that's my preference?
MR. WAXMAN: I mean, the -- the first of
all --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or I have a $1,500 car,
but I need it to be able to do something else?
MR. WAXMAN: Justice Sotomayor, even leaving
aside all of those undecided questions under South
Carolina -- legal questions under South Carolina law,
even as to the facts that you've addressed, the burden
is not insignificant. Recall that a mere assertion -- I
mean, in this case this man filled out a form saying
that -- certifying that he had no income and one asset,
a car worth $1,500. In order -- the -- the courts have
said that assertions don't satisfy it. He has to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Where is that form in
the record?
MR. WAXMAN: Hmm?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Where is the form in the
record?
MR. WAXMAN: The form is in the trial
record; we did not include it in the -- in the Joint
Appendix. We can make it available to the Court. It --
it is in the trial record, and we didn't understand at
the time we were filing that the United States would be
making an argument that the submission of a, quote,
"simple form" would satisfy due process.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, you --
MR. WAXMAN: I thought of lodging it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel.
MR. WAXMAN: But I think the Court's lodging
rules --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel!
MR. WAXMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have stressed
that the burden in this case is on the defendant. Would
your position be different if the burden were on the
complainant?
MR. WAXMAN: I think the case would -- our
case would not be as strong. To be sure, in the
criminal -- in the criminal contempt context, the
burden, of course, is on the State and to prove beyond a
reasonable doubt, but there is an acknowledged right to
counsel, and there was for decades before this Court
considered criminal contempt to be a crime within the
meaning of the Sixth Amendment.
So, I think we would still -- even if the
burden had shifted, the broader rule we're asking for
is, look, the -- here the State is sending a man to jail
repeatedly on the premise of exacting compliance with
court orders and on the theory that he holds the keys to
his own pocket because he can always choose to comply.
And our submission is that when the State uses that
sanction on the basis of that theory, due process
demands that it guarantee the assistance of counsel to
assure that the district court is right and that the
sentence imposed is lawfully coercive and not
unconstitutionally punitive.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Waxman --
MR. WAXMAN: That's our --
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- suppose the Court thinks
that -- suppose the Court looks at this record and
thinks this is a broken system and a violation of due
process, but requiring a counsel in every case may go
too far, and there may, in fact, be alternate procedures
that a State could adopt that would comply with due
process. And I know that this is not your submission;
it's, instead, the solicitor general's submission. But
if pressed on that point, what procedures do you think
would be capable of giving a person in this situation a
fair shake at this?
MR. WAXMAN: Certainly -- I mean, we think
that, given the way the adversary system works and given
the legal nature of the determination that a judge makes
depriving somebody of liberty, and given the significant
burdens that are faced in carrying the burden to
establish that, there are none. Due process requires
the application of what this Court in Lassiter called
the general rule or the presumption that civil or
criminal, when the State chooses to absolutely deprive
somebody fully at liberty of his liberty, it must
provide counsel.
I mean, I suppose the closest second would
be what Justice Powell, providing the fifth vote in
Vitek, provided, which is even in that case where the
decision was being made by a mental health professional
and the issue involved the transfer from somebody in
State prison to a State mental unit, a much diminished
liberty interest -- even Justice Powell, providing the
fifth vote, said, well, in light of the nature of the
decision being made and the decision-making body, I
wouldn't always require counsel --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I --
MR. WAXMAN: -- I would think that a trained
mental health professional would work.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Waxman, for those of us
who think the Due Process Clause doesn't contain
whatever we think it ought to contain, but -- but
contains what the people who ratified it thought it
contained, what's the earliest case that you have which
adopts the proposition that you're now espousing, that
whenever a civil contempt citation is imposed upon an
indigent person, that person is entitled to counsel as a
matter of due process?
MR. WAXMAN: Justice Scalia, if I had such a
case, it would have appeared quite prominently in my
brief. There is no such case, but let me make two
points about history and what the Due Process Clause
means, notwithstanding what some of us might like it to
mean.
First of all, history -- the history is
very, very complicated, and it doesn't dictate the
answer. The traditional distinction along the lines was
not between civil or criminal contempt, but direct or
indirect contempt, and as I know Your Honor knows
because you've written it, traditionally at common law,
I mean, counsel was provided for civil cases and in
misdemeanor cases, but not felony cases.
The criminal/civil distinction in contempt
arose in this Court around the turn of the 20th century,
and it arose so that the courts could exercise more
supervisory review over the imposition of criminal
contempt by courts.
Now, in Cooke and Oliver, this Court, as I
said, long, long before it recognized that criminal
contempt was a Sixth -- a crime entitled to all Sixth
Amendment protections, held that because of the nature
of the deprivation of liberty, the appointment of
counsel was required. And our submission here is, as
this Court has recognized, the distinction between civil
and criminal contempt is the question of whether you
have coercive imprisonment or imprisonment as
punishment.
And in almost every case, the sentence
involves some aspect of both, and where the only thing,
the only thing, that keeps the coercive imprisonment
from being unconstitutionally punitive absent a jury
trial right and proof beyond a reasonable doubt and
counsel, is the ability to comply with the court's
order. And that burden is put on the defendant, even
though it is the State's burden to prove willfulness,
due --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you think --
MR. WAXMAN: -- fundamental fairness as due
process --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whenever there is an
erroneous judgment in a civil contempt case, it becomes
a criminal contempt case; is that -- is that what you're
saying?
MR. WAXMAN: This -- this Court has said in
Bagwell and in Gompers that, in the event that the
sentence applied -- in Bagwell it was a fine; in Gompers
it was imprisonment -- served only punitive purposes and
could not be coercive because the defendant could not
comply, that sentence was unlawful because it had not
been imposed following a proceeding in which the
government --
JUSTICE BREYER: It doesn't -- I'm still
curious -- are you finished?
MR. WAXMAN: But, yes -- just in -- I'm
sorry, Justice Breyer, just to finish this sentence --
that is the sine qua non of the distinction, and the --
and unlike, for example, the immigration context and the
other contexts that the Government is relying on, this
is a situation in which the consequence of an error,
that is an erroneous outcome renders the detention an
unlawful criminal penalty. That is not true in any
other context.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you saying all the --
all the trappings of criminal procedure come with it?
This case is focused on a right to counsel, but what
about burden of proof, what about a jury trial?
MR. WAXMAN: No, Justice Ginsburg, this
Court has made -- we're talking about a determination
ex ante, before the man is sent to jail, in this case
for repeated long periods, should he be appointed
counsel. This Court has already said that, in civil
contempt proceedings, there is no requirement of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt and there is no requirement of
proof of a jury trial, just as following Gault, this
Court said there is no requirement of a jury trial in a
juvenile commitment case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: My goodness, if -- if
you're relying for that proposition only on the fact
that we've already said it, why don't you also say we've
never said what you want us to say now? I mean, if
that's the only argument, we've already said it. If it
was wrong, we should unsay it.
MR. WAXMAN: It wasn't wrong, Justice
Scalia, and as we've pointed out, the majority of States
and all seven circuits that have spoken to this question
have all held that there is, in fact, a right to
appointed counsel before the State in an -- in an
assertedly civil contempt proceeding can deprive a human
being of his liberty.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But if all of the arguments
you're making to us are correct, why shouldn't the other
accompaniments of a full-dress criminal trial apply --
MR. WAXMAN: Because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- so he has counsel, but
the burden's been put on him, rather than on the State,
to prove, in fact, that he -- whether or not he is
indigent?
MR. WAXMAN: Because the proceeding is
civil. It is not our contention that this is a criminal
proceeding, and this Court in Maggio and in Hicks v.
Feiock made clear that shifting the burden, so long as
the -- so long as the imprisonment is meant to be
coercive, shifting the burden is not unconstitutional
and because --
JUSTICE ALITO: Why is it that --
MR. WAXMAN: I'm sorry -- and because it is
a civil proceeding --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's an illogical
distinction, is what I'm saying.
MR. WAXMAN: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Maybe Justice Alito
can --
MR. WAXMAN -- I'm not sure, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- can ask his
question.
MR. WAXMAN: Yes, Justice Alito?
JUSTICE ALITO: Why isn't something like
what the Solicitor General suggested adequate here? The
State provides a very clear form for the noncustodial
parent to fill out, and then in court the judge goes
through it step by step: Are you working? How much are
you making? Any -- do you have any other money? What
expenses do you need for living?
And then if you run into some of these
complicated legal problems or arguably complicated legal
problems that you referred to, maybe in particular cases
there would be need for the appointment of counsel. But
why isn't that adequate to deal with this situation
rather than a categorical rule that you have to have
counsel appointed in every case where there's an issue
about ability to pay?
MR. WAXMAN: It's -- that submission is
inconsistent with how the adversary process works, and
more importantly, Justice Alito, it misunderstands the
nature of the burden. Unlike in Gagnon v. Scarpelli,
where the mine-run of cases only involved the parole
revocation board to determine whether somebody had
subsequently been convicted, here the mine-run of cases
involves things that -- that an uncounseled, lay, often
undereducated, often incarcerated defendant can't do.
For example, just the --
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think the issue here
is more complicated than the issue about whether
somebody's probation should be revoked?
MR. WAXMAN: Well, what Gagnon v. Scarpelli
said was in any -- in the mine-run of cases, all that is
required with respect to somebody who has a highly
reduced liberty interest in an informal proceeding is
whether or not they have subsequently been convicted,
yes or no. And if it's any more than that binary
factor, counsel probably is going to be required. And
our submission is the mine-run of these cases involve
the marshaling of evidence and testimony that
uncounseled, uneducated defendants --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Waxman --
MR. WAXMAN: -- are not likely to be able to
do and legal questions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Waxman, you mentioned
Lassiter, and you mentioned something that Lassiter said
in passing, but what was at stake there was deprivation
of parental status. And the Court said sometimes, in
some cases, yes; but we're not going to make an
across-the-board rule.
Now, that deprivation, some people think, is
the worst possible, for a custodial parent to be told
you're no longer a parent, you no longer have a child.
And yet, the Court said we're not going to provide
counsel in every case, because in some cases the person
can get a fair hearing without counsel.
MR. WAXMAN: Right. And what the Court --
and recognizing that Lassiter is dicta, because it did
consider that context, what it said is we have to -- we
have to do the Mathews v. Eldridge balancing against a
generalization, what -- a "preeminent generalization"
that exists in our case law, which is that there is a
presumption that an indigent defendant has a right to
appointed counsel only when he loses or may be deprived
of his liberties. Since that doesn't apply here, we
have to do the Mathews v. Eldridge balancing against the
presumption that cuts the other way.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: My concern is -- and it's
been brought up in some of the other questions that
Justice Ginsburg asked earlier. I just have the sense
that there are thousands of these hearings around the
country, and they're -- and they're very important in
order to ensure child support, and that if we adopt your
rule, in many cases where counsel are now waived or not
present because of the -- the noncompliant parent is
going to ask for counsel and that we're going to change
the entire landscape of domestic relation proceedings,
the Heisenberg principle.
MR. WAXMAN: Justice Kennedy, the vast
majority of jurisdictions require counsel and provide
counsel, and there is no -- we would think that if this
were --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In every case? I mean,
doesn't the defendant have to -- or the -- or the
noncompliant parent have to ask for counsel?
MR. WAXMAN: I believe the rule is that if
you have a right to counsel, the court is required to
advise you that if you -- that you have one, and if you
are unable to afford --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: My question is: Do you --
are there any data -- are there any data to show that in
most of these cases, counsel does, in fact, appear?
My --
MR. WAXMAN: I'm not aware --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: My assumption is not, but
I just --
MR. WAXMAN: I'm not aware of data one way
or the other. We're only asking this Court to conform
this Court's due process jurisprudence with the vast
majority of State and lower Federal courts that have
found it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Does that go for alimony
and palimony as well as child support?
MR. WAXMAN: It would go to any instance in
which an alleged civil contemner is facing
incarceration --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, the answer is yes, it
would cover.
MR. WAXMAN: Yes, and can demonstrate an
inability to afford counsel in the same way that happens
in misdemeanor cases.
May I reserve the balance of my time?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Waxman.
Ms. Kruger.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF LEONDRA R. KRUGER
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING REVERSAL
MS. KRUGER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In civil contempt proceedings to enforce
orders for child support, due process requires a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on the simple and
straightforward, but critical, question that
characterizes remedial sanctions in this area: whether
the nonpaying parent has the ability to pay. Such --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Kruger, you say that the
procedures here were inadequate but that counsel in
every case is not necessarily required. You say
alternate procedures can provide people in this
situation with a fair shake.
But then, when you look at the procedures
that you actually say would comply with due process,
they are remarkably anemic. Basically, you say that a
form has to be provided. You don't require that there
be anybody attached to the court, the kind of person
that Justice Powell might have been talking about in
Vitek, some kind of caseworker to assist the person with
whatever questions he might have about the form or about
how to fill it out. You don't require that the court
make any findings. You don't require that the court
even ask any questions.
Apparently, your idea of the procedure is
just to give a person a form. Am I reading you right?
MS. KRUGER: No, I don't think you are,
Justice Kagan. I think that we would say that there are
three fundamental requirements for due process in this
area. The first is both information regarding the
nature of the inquiry that's going to be made at the
hearing --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. I'm not
hearing you. Could you speak more loudly?
MS. KRUGER: I'm sorry. Certainly.
The first is -- as, Justice Sotomayor, you
referenced earlier, the first is information in advance
of the hearing that a critical question to be answered
at the hearing is going to concern ability to pay and a
form or other type of procedure that would elicit
information that's relevant to the alleged contemner's
financial condition.
The second would be a hearing at which the
alleged contemner has the opportunity to respond to any
further inquiries that may be triggered by information
that's already been provided. This is, I think, a
common feature of many systems outside of South Carolina
which, by case law, have recognized that when a court
has concerns that information on a financial affidavit
might be misleading or inaccurate, they have a duty to
inquire further and to require supporting documentation
as necessary to confirm or dispel concerns about the
accuracy of the information.
And then, finally, I think we would require
an express finding that the -- the alleged contemner has
the ability to satisfy the purge conditions such that
the person can be said, not only theoretically, but also
realistically, to have the keys to the jail cell in
their pocket.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, as I -- and
then I think one of the deficiencies in addressing your
argument is that I don't really know what the State's
procedures are. Your -- your co-counsel, or Mr. Waxman,
has said that there was actually a form. I don't know
what that form looks like.
The only thing that does seem missing that
the State clearly provides is a requirement that the
judge explain what the basis of his contempt finding is.
I'm looking at 60a and 61a, and this judge left it
completely blank. So, is this a due process violation
facially, or is this a due process violation as applied,
meaning it's just not clear to me whether South -- the
State's process, in fact, has all of the elements that
you're speaking about or how I make that judgment and
whether the -- we didn't grant cert on the question of
whether, as applied, there was a failure or not.
I mean, one of the difficulties in this case
is that there was really very -- no findings by the
judge whatsoever.
MS. KRUGER: I think that's right, and I
think it's also right that South Carolina, at least
insofar as the record reveals, doesn't require a finding
that the alleged contemner has the ability to comply
with a purge condition, as opposed to requiring a
finding of willful violation of the court's order.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, the -- the form,
the order for contempt of court itself, 61a, does
require the judge to fill out an answer as to whether he
thinks the defendant is gainfully employed or has the
ability to make the payments. So, it was just absent
here.
MS. KRUGER: The -- the question on the form
relates to a past condition, as opposed to present
ability to comply with a purge condition. So, the two
inquiries are distinct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why -- why isn't the
requirement that the judge satisfy himself that there's
a willful failure to comply with the order? Why doesn't
that amount to saying the judge has to satisfy himself
that this individual cannot pay, or can pay?
MS. KRUGER: Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's not willful if he can
pay.
MS. KRUGER: Well, if --
JUSTICE SCALIA: If -- if he can't pay.
MS. KRUGER: If he can't pay --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You know what I mean.
MS. KRUGER: I do know what you mean.
(Laughter.)
MS. KRUGER: I understand you, Justice
Scalia. I think there are two separate questions, both
of which concern ability to pay, but one of which is
retrospective and the other is prospective.
The question whether the alleged contemner
has willfully violated a child support order is a
retrospective question. During -- that the -- the
alleged contemner missed child support payments because
he wasn't gainfully employed and didn't have the ability
to comply. And then the question for purposes of
determining an appropriate sanction is, does this person
have the present ability to comply such that sending
that person to jail might reasonably be expected to
induce them to -- to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I see.
MS. KRUGER: -- carry out their financial
obligation?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, did -- just
to be clear, your answer to the question presented is
no, right? It was not error for the South Carolina
court to say there's no constitutional right in this
type of a proceeding to appointed counsel?
MS. KRUGER: That's correct, Mr. Chief
Justice. We think that there is no categorical right to
appointed counsel in all civil contempt proceedings
or --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there a State -- we've
been told that, in many States, appointment of counsel
for an indigent, noncustodial parent who has -- who has
child custody arrears, that counsel is automatic. You
have described something less than counsel. Is there
any model, any State where there is such a procedure so
one might find out how it's working?
MS. KRUGER: I don't think that there is any
one place you can look in order to see what features
States are employing. We know anecdotally from talking
to individuals who are responsible for running programs
in individual States that they do ordinarily, even in
States that don't categorically require the appointment
of counsel, satisfy each of the three procedural
protections that I outlined earlier in response to
Justice Kagan.
So, for example, in New Mexico, which hasn't
recognized a categorical right to appointed counsel,
there is a solicitation of financial information in
advance of the hearing. That information is reviewed by
a caseworker, who will make the decision whether or not
to refer the case to civil contempt proceedings. There
is a hearing at which further information is explored or
elicited, and ultimately there's a determination made
whether the alleged contemner has the ability to comply.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about an aid who is
not counsel? I mean, the family court has a lot of
auxiliary people like child advocates who are there to
assist people who need some kind of representation, but
not necessarily a lawyer. Is that any part of yours --
of what you would propose?
MS. KRUGER: I think it would certainly be
open to the Court to consider whether or not having the
assistance of a layperson who may not necessarily be a
lawyer would be a requirement of due process, but I
think given the nature of the inquiry which goes to
financial condition, it's the kind of information that
individuals provide on a regular basis without the
assistance of either competent lay people or lawyers
with legal expertise. It seems unnecessary to satisfy
the commands of fundamental fairness in order to create
that requirement across the board; in much the same way,
I think it's unnecessary to appoint counsel in every
case, as opposed to taking the modest and relatively
inexpensive steps that we've outlined in order to ensure
a meaningful opportunity to be heard.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is the form you have in
mind something different than the form, the IFP form,
that would be filled out say, by a 2255 petitioner?
MS. KRUGER: I don't think it would, Justice
Ginsburg, but precisely what the form would contain
would have to be tailored to the law in the relevant
jurisdiction. So, where the determination is made on
the basis of assets and income, it would be appropriate
for the form to elicit that information. Where in other
jurisdictions the law is clear that the other
information may be relevant to that inquiry, it would be
appropriate for the form to elicit that information as
well. But I think in substance the form would look very
much like the form that this Court sees on a regular
basis attached to its petitions for writs of certiorari
and would also look very much like forms that are
commonly applied in jurisdictions across the country in
child support programs in order to establish the amount
of child support obligation in the first place. South
Carolina employs such a form for that purpose, and I
think it would be a relatively trivial matter for South
Carolina to use a similar form for the purpose of
enforcement.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Kruger, could you say a
bit more about the question that Mr. Waxman and Justice
Scalia were talking about: how often these proceedings
have the State on one side, how often they have the
custodial parent on one side, you know, whether there is
counsel for the opposite side in many of these cases?
MS. KRUGER: There is in some, but not all,
Justice Kagan. It's true that the State is often,
though not always, represented in these proceedings, not
always by lawyers as opposed to caseworkers or other
nonlawyer personnel who work for the departments of
social services.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms.
Kruger.
Mr. Bibas.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STEPHANOS BIBAS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. BIBAS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Mrs. Rogers and custodial mothers and
parents like her need simple, fast, civil procedures to
probe fathers' chronic failures to support their
children. Today I'll make two points. First, this case
is moot. Second, a per se right to appointed counsel is
not essential to prevent fundamental unfairness.
First, this case is moot. On remand, there
is no possible redress for Petitioner. He seeks an
advisory opinion but fails to bear his burden of proving
that his case will evade review because he could get a
stay. Litigants must preserve questions by seeking
stays or supersedeas where available. Only where there
is no procedure of which Petitioner could have availed
himself to stay confinement, because a State statute had
a blanket denial of bail pending appeal, did this Court
in Sibron find that a dispute could not be stayed and so
would evade review.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The South Carolina
Supreme Court, as I understand, heard this case after he
was released, so they didn't consider it moot.
MR. BIBAS: Your Honor, the issue was not
briefed or argued or raised. My client had no lawyer,
filed no brief, made no argument. So, we don't know
what they considered or held. They made no reference to
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Suppose --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it was a fact, was it
not, that he was already released?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, that's correct, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I suppose -- we have
held, haven't we, that States can have different
concepts of mootness than the Federal one?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor, that's right.
And South Carolina deals with this issue -- obviously,
in this Court the question is an Article III question.
And because the evading review doctrine is an exception
to Article III's normal requirements that Federal courts
have jurisdiction only over live cases or controversies,
it should be construed narrowly, only where essential to
preserve review. Here Petitioner didn't ask for a stay;
if he had asked --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, do we have
jurisdiction over any matter that isn't rendered in a
final judgment in State court?
MR. BIBAS: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, if we don't have
jurisdiction over anything but a final judgment, how
could we ever grant a stay if the State refused to?
MR. BIBAS: I -- your -- if --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The State refused to
grant a stay.
MR. BIBAS: I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And why would South --
why would the State here have granted a stay, if it
believes there's no Sixth Amendment right whatsoever to
counsel? How could that litigant ever evade mootness?
MR. BIBAS: Your Honor is correct that the
relief would be coming from the South Carolina State
courts, and South Carolina ruled 241(c) appears to be
tailor-made for this situation. And it instructs courts
to consider whether a stay is necessary to preserve
jurisdiction of the appeal or to prevent a contested
issue from becoming moot. Our position is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can you point to any
case involving support payments in which the South
Carolina court has ever granted a stay?
MR. BIBAS: The closest I can point to is
Berry v. Ianuario, a South Carolina State court case
involving parental termination -- termination of
parental rights from a family court, where the South
Carolina Supreme Court stayed the matter. And so, if
Petitioner had asked, there's a substantial likelihood
the court would have granted a stay through the South
Carolina Supreme Court. At this point, under Rule 23,
this Court could affirm a stay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did the Petitioner know
about Rule 23? Where had he learned about that? He
didn't have counsel, right?
MR. BIBAS: He had counsel as of no later
than 3 weeks after the trial court hearing. He had
counsel for 11 months of his sentence.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay, before -- before it
got up to the --
MR. BIBAS: That's right, 11 months before
the case became moot.
On the merits, a civil contempt case does
not, as my adversary suggests, quote, "sound in criminal
contempt" and require counsel, quote, "precisely to
ensure that the proceeding remain civil."
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is it correct for me to
think of both the Petitioner's argument and your
response as a Mathews v. Eldridge problem?
MR. BIBAS: No -- Your Honor, I believe the
main argument here, and the only one the Petitioner
argued in the courts below, is an absolute categorical
right that any loss of liberty equals an absolute right
to counsel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it -- it does seem
that absolute right and Mathews v. Eldridge is not quite
a -- a good fit, but it seems to me that most of Mr.
Waxman's argument can be subsumed within the Mathews v.
Eldridge framework.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, that is his fallback
argument, though it wasn't developed in the courts
below, but I think it's important to note that because
his argument approaches and, in fact, leads with an
absolute claim -- to note the breadth of the rule. So,
picking up on your question to Mr. Waxman, Justice
Kennedy, it's important to note not only that
Petitioner's rule would reach other civil contempts
beyond child support, but because any loss of liberty is
the overwhelming factor in his calculus, it would apply
to tens of thousands of immigration and extradition
cases each year.
Petitioner's reply brief does not deny this,
saying only that they might or might not be
distinguishable. And immigration, we would submit, is
an a fortiori from this case. The legal issues there
are more complex, the deprivation is more severe, the
confinement not purgeable. Any ruling --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But just -- just assume
that we could somehow block out that category. If you
could focus just on the domestic relations support
proceedings, would there be a basic change in the way
those proceedings are being conducted in other States,
if we ruled in favor of Petitioner and said there's an
absolute right?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Justice Kennedy, there'd be
a massive change. Trial judges need to know ahead of
time which sets of procedures to apply, civil or
criminal.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Isn't it -- isn't it true
that most States in child support cases, when the
defendant says I have no money, will appoint counsel?
MR. BIBAS: That is not true of most States,
Justice Ginsburg. My understanding is 15 States
recognize it as a constitutional matter, 11 additional
States by statute, rule, or practice appear to recognize
a statewide right to counsel. So, there's a bear
majority. At least 17 States do not have a statewide
right, and the remaining 7 are unclear.
So, we're talking about reformulating rules
in a huge number of States that probably affect hundreds
of thousands of cases. I'd ask the Court to consider
the Office of Child Support Enforcement study that's in
the appendix to the Senators' brief. It's the best
empirical evidence we have of how these proceedings
work.
And the evidence is relevant both to the
need for these procedures in the balancing test Justice
Kennedy refers to, but also the apparent relatively low
reason to believe there's a large error rate here.
According to that study, many parents -- non-supporting
parents are cited for contempt and purged of their
contempt; many fewer are, in fact, confined. It is --
appears to be the threat that coerces enforcement and
deters violation. Many parents do not pay up until
after the contempt hearing and confinement is imminent.
So, States would have to appoint counsel in a large
number of cases, most of which wind up purging. So, the
first point to note is that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought the point was
it's -- it's only if the defendant -- the claim is only
if the defendant does not have the keys in his pocket
because he has no money. So, in cases where typical a
recalcitrant spouse won't pay until he's threatened with
jail, that wouldn't come in this category. I thought
Mr. Waxman was speaking about people who do not have the
keys in their pockets because they simply cannot -- they
do not have the wherewithal to pay.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor, but very, very
many non-supporting parents protest the same. And so,
it is true that the slice of those brought to civil
contempt hearings is only a small fraction of the
overall caseload.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, and I -- and I
suppose you could say that in -- in advance that the
judge and the appointing authority simply wouldn't know.
MR. BIBAS: Exactly, Justice Kennedy. Trial
judges need to be able to protect themselves. They need
to be able to know when they go into a hearing whether
to apply civil or criminal procedures, and that's this
Court's lesson in Hicks v. Feiock.
Hicks said a judge needs to know ex ante
based on a couple of simple rules, quote, "If the relief
imposed here is in fact a determinate sentence with a
purge clause, then it is civil," then civil procedures
apply. And if the remedy runs to the injured party,
then it is civil.
But to -- even cases that have overturned
erroneous civil contempts, do not, as my brother
Mr. Waxman suggests, become punitive and criminal.
Maggio and Shillitani recognize that they remain civil.
Shillitani declined to find a right to indictment or
jury trial because it was a civil case.
To go back to the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I -- I took the
Solicitor General's position to be -- they may accuse me
of not being accurate in what I took their position to
be, which is the rule would be simple. You, a State,
are free to run these procedures as you choose, but not
to provide counsel, you have to meet some minimum
Mathews v. Eldridge requirements. And so, the rule is
simple. The State can do what it wants, but it has to
provide minimum due process, and they've previously set
forth the three. All right?
So really the answer is, no, you're not
automatically entitled to a lawyer if you're providing
minimum due process. If you're not, then you have to
provide a lawyer.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right? What's wrong
with that rule? That, I think, is what the Solicitor
General is suggesting. So, first, what's wrong with the
rule? And then, second, in a case in which I did not
see and haven't yet a form that really talks about or
tells the contemptor about his defense and what he needs
to prove, yes, he did get a hearing but not a hearing
that explored his statement that he'd been looking for
work and couldn't find it, and a form, a judgment that
doesn't address his current ability to pay. How does
the South Carolina system comply with those minimums of
due process?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor. First, I'll
talk about the Solicitor General's suggestions that you
raise and then talk about the specific procedures here.
We think the Solicitor General's suggestions are
interesting, they're worth exploring. They were raised
for the very first time at the merits stage here; so,
there's been no development. We don't know what other
States are doing, the range of options out there, the
nonconstitutional measures which in the criminal context
for guilty pleas were developed through rulemaking, Rule
, lots of testimony and inquiry. That's appropriate
for development when presented and allowing those other
bodies the first crack at them.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Bibas, I have a
question about -- about the position of the Government
in this case. The Government agrees with you that you
don't need counsel, but says that we ought to reverse
the judgment anyway because there were -- because the
other aspects of due process which the Government
asserts would make it unnecessary to provide counsel did
not exist in this case.
Did you think, under our ordinary rules,
we -- we can do that?
MR. BIBAS: No, Your Honor, that's beyond
the question presented.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Question presented was just
whether counsel was necessary, right?
MR. BIBAS: That's correct. And I
suppose --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's fully within the power
of the Government to say why, you know, in general
counsel is not necessary because these other procedures
are good enough. But then to come forward and say,
moreover, those procedures were not applied in this case
and, therefore, you should reverse, that's -- that's a
new point, it seems to me, isn't it?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor, and as Justice
Sotomayor pointed out, that's not what this Court
granted certiorari on. And this is a case --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What about you -- you
stressed that this falls on the civil side. So, why
shouldn't we take Rule 54(d) as our model and say that
instructs the court that you give parties the relief to
which they are entitled, even if they haven't asked for
that relief, even if they've asked for something that
they can't get?
MR. BIBAS: Justice Ginsburg, I don't
believe this is a question about relief. I believe this
is a question about what constitutional right is
implicated. This case arises from a State court. The
failure to raise the issue below is jurisdictional and
is not -- that issue is not before the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't know that that
answers my question, because the way I phrased the
question was very specific. South Carolina -- there's
no constitutional right to counsel in every proceeding,
but the question presented was whether South Carolina
erred that an indigent defendant has no constitutional
right to appointed counsel in any civil contempt
proceeding. And if the answer to that is, if the civil
contempt proceeding does not comply with minimum due
process requirements, counsel is required.
MR. BIBAS: Your Honor, I respectfully --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Then isn't that an
answer to the question presented?
MR. BIBAS: I don't read the question
presented that way, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We can argue about that
later.
MR. BIBAS: Okay. Fine.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay? The point is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would think that the rule
would be that if -- if South Carolina has not complied
with minimum due process procedures, minimum due process
procedures are required, not counsel is required.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Justice Scalia. In a case
presenting that issue, that's the appropriate remedy.
To go back to the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Think of what the
Government says should happen. You should give them a
form and the form should say do you have money to pay or
not. All right. So, what did happen? Did the judge
ever ask him?
MR. BIBAS: Here's what happened, Justice
Breyer: The rule to show cause, at Joint Appendix 50a,
said in all capital letters "must bring proof of
employment." This was Petitioner's sixth hearing. He
was familiar with the issues before. At Petition
Appendix 17a --
JUSTICE BREYER: Did he bring some proof of
employment?
MR. BIBAS: He did not. He had --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, why would
you put him in jail? He has no job.
MR. BIBAS: All right. He had -- he
explained that he, in fact -- tried to explain why he
didn't have the money, that he had been -- both his
drugs and 2 months of disability. The judge, on the
next page, Petition Appendix 18a -- he heard the
testimony, he saw his demeanor, he didn't believe him
and found him in willful contempt.
And, finally --
JUSTICE BREYER: You mean he didn't believe
him about what? That he had no money?
MR. BIBAS: That he did not have the money.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So, he -- he thought
he did have the money.
MR. BIBAS: That's our reading of Petition
Appendix 18a.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do we --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, we couldn't really
tell, could we, Mr. Bibas? Because he completely
ignored the question. The entire transcript is less
than two pages long. Mr. Turner talked about how he had
no money and he was disabled. The court completely
ignored him. The court also ignored the questions on
the form for the order of contempt about whether he had
any money. The court ignored that as well.
MR. BIBAS: Your Honor, none of those -- you
are correct; none of those is filled out. But what I
wanted to explain is that due process looks at the
totality of the State procedures, and the State has
three mechanisms in place by which Petitioner, having
counsel, could have challenged this. He could have
challenged both the factual and legal findings on
appeal. Family courts repeatedly overturn such
judgments on appeal.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm actually trying to
find --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand all of
this discussion. The question presented is not what due
process procedures are required in these cases. That is
not the question presented.
JUSTICE BREYER: Just out of curiosity --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is simply whether
counsel is necessary. Isn't that the only matter that
we should be discussing?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine, but I'd like to ask a
different question.
I'm trying to find out what happened here
that was different from what the Government suggests.
The Government suggests provide a piece of paper and to
ask certain questions. What I'd like to know is what's
different in this proceeding from what the Government
suggests?
MR. BIBAS: There was --
JUSTICE BREYER: That would have -- perhaps
on no one else, but could have an effect on the way I
decide the case.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor. There was no
such form provided, and there was not a form --
JUSTICE BREYER: I understand there was
no -- look. If he asked the questions orally --
MR. BIBAS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- I might be tempted to
say it doesn't matter. So, I'm trying to say what
really differed from what the Government wants?
MR. BIBAS: Whether in a form or orally, a
judge could ask such questions, as Justice Sotomayor
pointed out. There's a form in the appendix.
Whether -- what happened here or not is not the
question. The record is insufficient because Petitioner
didn't develop it.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Government is not a
party here, is it?
MR. BIBAS: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's just an amicus. So,
this expansion of the -- of the question presented from
whether counsel was necessary to what are the due
process procedures required is all at the suggestion of
an amicus; is that right?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor. And so, to
focus on --
JUSTICE BREYER: And skip that one. What
I'm trying to figure out -- and I'm sorry, I may be the
only one trying to -- I'm trying to figure out what, in
general, is the fairness of such situations in -- where
the woman is normally the one with the child, the man is
normally the one who doesn't pay.
Is it true, for example, that in most such
situations across the country, the woman has a lawyer,
but the man doesn't? Is that true or isn't it true?
There must be some organization that's studied that.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor. That's -- we
don't have good nationwide statistics. What I can say
is our understanding is that, first of all, Petitioner
is incorrect in saying that the government has a lawyer
here who is prosecuting. He is conflating the clerk of
the court issuing a ministerial rule to show cause with
the presence of a law-trained prosecutor. That is not
the case in South Carolina. That is not the case in
very many of the States.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So, the answer to
what I think of, in my own mind only, as very relevant,
whether the woman has a lawyer but the man doesn't, is:
I don't know.
MR. BIBAS: It -- it is not across the
board.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that is the answer? We
don't have good information on that?
MR. BIBAS: We don't have good statistics as
to how often.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. Fine. Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, do you know
why we're not hearing from the State of South Carolina?
MR. BIBAS: Because the State was not a
party to the proceeding.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. I
understand that they were involved below. They decided
not to become a party before the State supreme court; is
that right?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why aren't they
defending their procedures?
MR. BIBAS: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It may be an unfair
question, since you don't represent the State.
MR. BIBAS: Right. I don't know. All I can
say is Mrs. Rogers went -- anticipating that she would
receive child support, Mrs. Rogers went off welfare in
03. After that point, the State ceased to have a
direct financial interest, and the State has written a
couple of letters in the Joint Appendix saying that
because we are not a party to the suit, our financial
interest is not directly implicated.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think it would be
a great financial interest if they have to provide
counsel in these thousands and thousands of cases.
MR. BIBAS: That is a -- that is a broader
systemic interest, and the State did, in fact, join an
amicus brief to that effect in this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could I ask a question
about your mootness point?
MR. BIBAS: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You say it's --it's not
capable of repetition and yet evading review, because
should this happen again, he could get a stay, as he
could have gotten in this case.
Do you have any case of ours which -- which
uses that reasoning and says the fact that in a future
case you may be able to get a stay suffices to establish
that this is not capable of repetition yet evading
review? It's -- it's a new argument to me. Is there
any case of ours that applies it?
MR. BIBAS: The closest is this Court's
decision in St. Pierre. A number of lower courts that
we cite have also followed St. --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that can't
possibly be true, because we have cases applying the
rule that this is capable of repetition, yet evading
review. If the rule were you have to get a stay, we
wouldn't have any of those cases.
MR. BIBAS: They -- no, Your Honor. In
abortion cases, election cases, stays are practically
impossible. This is a different category of case, where
stays are available, and those cases also seek
prospective relief.
If I might go back to the financial interest
that you pointed out earlier, the reason the State would
care here -- it's not that -- there's a State fisc
interest that's substantial, but the reason that matters
to my clients is because the huge fiscal burden here
could deter many States from this enforcement. In fact,
it has.
In New Jersey, after the State supreme court
recognized in Pasqua a right to appointed counsel, New
Jersey stopped using civil contempt enforcement. When a
State has to appoint counsel and stops doing so, it
removes deterrence in a massive number of cases. That's
a --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do we have any -- any
computation about what it would be -- what the counsel
fee would be, as opposed to keeping someone in prison
for a year?
MR. BIBAS: We don't have those numbers, but
I also believe that's not the correct inquiry, Your
Honor, because it's not just the few people who are
confined.
As I was saying earlier, if the percentage
of those going to these hearings were actually confined
is in the single digit percentages, as some of the
numbers in the States' appendix suggest, then you're
getting a huge leveraging effect of many people being
coerced into paying before going into confinement or
immediately after going into confinement. So, the State
can permissibly weigh those costs and benefits, and
that's for the State legislature.
To go back to Justice Breyer's question
earlier about what due process might require, I think
it's important to focus on that these procedures are
straightforward, informal procedures, navigable by
laymen. The most natural thing in the world when being
accused of not paying is to say: But I can't pay. And
to follow it up with an explanation. I applied for this
job; I'm out of work; I got sick. There are things
that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Did anybody look at housing
courts?
MR. BIBAS: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, housing courts -- I
would think it's fairly common somebody owes somebody
$25, or whatever it is, the judge says pay it into
court, and what happens if they don't pay it into court?
MR. BIBAS: We haven't looked at that, Your
Honor, and I'm sure the same arises in administrative
appeals and small claims court, any number of places.
Here it's a simple intuitive issue, and South Carolina,
like other States, uses relaxed, informal rules of
evidence and procedure. There are effectively no rules
of hearsay or authentication.
JUSTICE ALITO: There are things the judge
could have asked, though, that -- and put on the record,
and it might have cleared this up. He could have -- the
Petitioner here said he wasn't working and he couldn't
work because he had been hurt, so the judge could have
asked for medical records to substantiate that.
And then the Petitioner admitted that until
recently, apparently, he had been taking meth, he had
been snorting coke. The judge could have said, all
right, you had the money then to buy those drugs; now,
where did you get that and why do you no longer have
that source of money? He could have gone through a few
simple steps, couldn't he, to make this -- to eliminate
the problems?
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor, and whether
that's salutary or ought to be considered in a future
case, it's not the question here. But that could be
worth exploring. It is much lower cost than appointing
counsel across the board.
It's important to note that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's a little difficult to
write the opinion, if you are to prevail, saying there's
no absolute right, but there might be in some other
case, depending. We don't give much help to the system
that way, because it might be that ultimately we would
find that the balancing test is more complex than simply
appointing the counsel.
MR. BIBAS: I don't believe this Court has
to do that, Your Honor. In -- in cases such as Gagnon
and Lassiter, this Court laid out factors, said there's
no categorical right to counsel, and the lower courts --
our examination of the post-Gagnon cases suggests most
of them have said, well, this is a pretty routine case,
, 90 percent of the time --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, then you do think we
should lay out the factors? And, if so, what are the
factors?
MR. BIBAS: I -- I don't believe that it's
necessary because we can't conceive of a legal issue
here so complex that categorically a lawyer is
necessary.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, I don't understand
how we could say that if you do not meet minimum due
process procedures, you must meet more than minimum due
process procedures. I mean, once we say that it's
enough if you do A, B, and C, but this State has not
done A, B, and C, how can we say therefore you must
appoint counsel? All we can say is you must do A, B,
and C. I don't know of any instance where we impose
more than the due process minimum because you have
failed to comply with the minimum.
MR. BIBAS: Yes, Your Honor. Perhaps to go
back to Justice Kennedy's point, if -- if the Court were
concerned about more specific guidance, it could point
to at least in situations that involve relaxed informal
rules of procedure, where no rules of hearsay
authentication, no jury trials, informal discovery,
judges handle questioning, no State prosecutor, at least
there, there might be no right to counsel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I -- I just don't
know that all those things are properly before us.
MR. BIBAS: Well, then, the appropriate
thing is to answer the question that was raised by
Petitioner in this case and not to go -- no need to go
beyond that, I would suggest.
Finally, let me point out that the closest
analogue in the legal system to the question here about
inability to pay child support is inability to afford
counsel. Our criminal justice legal system has
extensive experience with that under the CJA, the
Criminal Justice Act. In the Federal system and in most
States, the burden is on the defendant to show his
inability to pay counsel. He doesn't --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Bibas, practically
when those forms are used, the person fills out a form,
and mostly they're just accepted, aren't they?
MR. BIBAS: Your Honor, I don't believe
they're rubber-stamped. The statistics that I have seen
show denial rates of 10 to 20 percent, in some counties
as high as 35 percent. So, there is a meaningful
inquiry and meaningful denials, and all of those cases
would violate due process on Petitioner's logic. That
cannot be the tidal wave to hit the criminal justice
system. That is not an appropriate extension of due
process because the issues here and there are simpler,
far simpler than in Lassiter, a formal trial-type
adversarial procedure where nevertheless no categorical
right to counsel was required.
It's important to go back, if one looks at
the roots of the right to counsel in Powell and Gideon
and Zerbst, Powell talked about the need for the guiding
hand of counsel who are skilled in the science of law in
order to deal with technical defects in the charging
instrument, to deal with incompetent, irrelevant, or
evidence. In proceedings such as this, where there are
no formal rules of pleading or evidence, there is not a
need -- certainly not a need for a categorical right to
counsel.
If there are no further questions, may I
conclude?
Litigants can themselves argue the
commonsense issue of ability to pay, just as they can
address their ability to afford counsel without first
having counsel, and the cost of appointing counsel
across the board would deter States from enforcing
custodial parents' and their children's rights, as it
has in New Jersey. Thus, this Court should dismiss for
want of jurisdiction or else affirm.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Waxman, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF SETH P. WAXMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. WAXMAN: I have three points. Thank
you, Mr. Chief Justice.
First of all, I mean this -- the crux of
this dispute comes down to whether this is some -- akin
to some sort of simple form that can be filled out that
any layperson, no matter how uneducated, can deal with.
Second, the question is how much of a burden
is this going to be on the States?
And, third, the question of whether or not
what counsel suggests as the Utah model or what he
denigrates as the New Jersey model would be a way to
square this circle.
First of all, counsel says he can't conceive
of a legal issue that can arise in this case. Let's
just look at this case as an example. There was
allegations of -- an admission of drug use. Does or
does that not constitute an inability to pay? That is a
legal question. It is not a factual question.
Inability to comply is a legal defense, not a factual
excuse.
The allegation was he's not employed, but
maybe he's not looking for work or he's underemployed.
Is that inability to comply for purposes of a coercive
contempt sanction? That is a legal question.
Our suggestion is he could be incarcerated
so that he could be placed on work release in a county
jail program and reduce his arrearage. Is that or is
that not a permissible application of a coercive
sanction of incarceration? The cases that we've seen
have said no, but it is an open legal question.
Even as to the marshaling of evidence, it is
his burden not to just say, oh, I can't pay. He
submitted a form that he filed for his disability
payments that said I have no income and I have a car
that's worth $1,500. Did he have to pay that car --
sell the car to pay or not? That is a legal question.
In terms of burden, the State is paying --
there are approximately 15 percent of the State's jail
population in any given year that are noncustodial
parents that are serving terms, in this case two 6-month
terms and a year term, at the cost -- according to the
statistics, at the cost of between 13- and 17,000
dollars a year. South Carolina, because it refuses to
comply with the requirements of the Federal program, has
already paid $72 million to the government in fines and
owes another 10. And if you want to really reduce the
cost, Justice Kennedy, and make this manageable, take
the system that they are applauding in Utah or
denigrating in New Jersey. When the court sends out its
order to show cause, it says: Please fill out this form
showing whether you have income, whether you have
assets, and whether you are unable to hire counsel. If
the --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, we don't have the
Social Security disability form, but if the judge
credited that and accepted that your client is -- was
unable to work and had only the assets listed on that
form, would he not then automatically be -- have shown
that he had an inability to pay?
MR. WAXMAN: I think the answer is yes, but
we don't know whether the judge even looked at the form,
and we know from South Carolina law that a mere
assertion is not the marshaling of evidentiary support
that's required to carry the burden.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:12 a.m., the case in the
