IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
TALK AMERICA, INC.,               :
Petitioner            :  No. 10-313
v.                         :
MICHIGAN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY,  :
DBA AT&T MICHIGAN                 :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
and
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ORJIAKOR ISIOGU, ET AL.,          :
Petitioners           :  No. 10-329
v.                         :
MICHIGAN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY,  :
DBA AT&T MICHIGAN                 :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 30, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:07 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOHN J. BURSCH, ESQ., Solicitor General, Lansing,
Michigan; on behalf of Petitioners.
ERIC D. MILLER, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Petitioners.
SCOTT H. ANGSTREICH, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF                                  PAGE
JOHN J. BURSCH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners                     4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ERIC D. MILLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as amicus
curiae, supporting the Petitioners               19
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
SCOTT H. ANGSTREICH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents                     29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOHN J. BURSCH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners                     55
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:07 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
next this morning in Case 10-313, Talk America v.
Michigan Bell, and the consolidated case.
Mr. Bursch.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN J. BURSCH
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. BURSCH:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Interconnection is the lifeblood of local
phone competition.  That is why, in section 251(c)(2) of
the Telecommunications Act, Congress guaranteed that
competitors would have interconnection at the location
and at the method of their choosing and at TELRIC rates
irregardless of market impairment.  The question in this
case is whether that 251(c)(2) obligation encompasses
the tens of thousands of existing entrance facilities
that even today are interconnecting competitive and
incumbent networks.  And the answer --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Did you get -- you get
(c)(2) at TELRIC rates?
MR. BURSCH:  Yes, you do, Your Honor.  You
get (c)(2) and (c)(3) at TELRIC rates.
And so, the answer to the question presented
is yes, for three reasons:  First, because the FCC says
so.  And, as the expert agency charged with interpreting
and implementing the Act, that conclusion is entitled to
deference.
Second, the FCC's conclusion is consistent
with the plain text of the statute and the implementing
regulations.
And, third, the FCC's conclusion is
consistent with the policies embodied in the Act,
because the practical result of affirming the Sixth
Circuit opinion in this case is that a competitive
carrier, like Sprint for example, will be forced to
either charge its customers more for interconnection or
lay tens of thousands of duplicate entrance facility
cables, and those are precisely what the Act were
designed to prevent.
I'd like to start with the Sixth Circuit
opinion -- and, specifically, this is at page 20a of the
Talk America cert petition appendix -- because this goes
to the heart of AT&T's position and the Sixth Circuit's
conclusion with respect to the orange plugs and cords
analogy.  You'll recall that the Sixth Circuit said this
was like a situation where a homeowner had a plug in
their garage and a long orange cord extending out to a
park, which the court called the entrance facility, and
then the competitive carrier would be that person in the
park.
On page 20a of the petition appendix in
footnote 9, about halfway down, this is the key flaw in
the Sixth Circuit's reasoning:  The Sixth Circuit says,
"If you, as the homeowner" -- that's the -- I'm sorry,
that's the incumbent -- "had said that they may plug
into the surge protector, then the big orange extension
cord is just an 'entrance facility.'  But, if you had
said they must plug into the big orange extension cord,
then the big orange extension cord becomes the
'interconnection facility' and, consequently, the park
goers" -- the competitors -- "may plug into it."
The problem with this is that the Sixth
Circuit was wrong in that the incumbent doesn't get to
choose where the point of connection is.  The statute
and the regulations and the FCC make clear it's the
competitor that gets to choose.  So, if the competitor
chooses the end of the extension cord where it connects
to the CLEC network in the park, then even the Sixth
Circuit agrees with us and the Seventh, Eighth, and
Ninth Circuits that the entrance facility is the
interconnection facility.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I have just one small
question on that.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Suppose that there are two
competitors and each of them wants to connect, but each
of them wants to connect at a different point and in a
different way.  Must the incumbent accommodate both if
they're technically feasible?
MR. BURSCH:  Justice Kennedy, the answer is
yes.  The statute gives the competitive carrier the
opportunity to choose the point and the method, all at
TELRIC rates.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Doesn't it say something
about feasible?  It -- it doesn't -- it doesn't give
free choice entirely.  It says -- what are the words?
That the -- the interconnection doesn't have to be put
just anyplace if it's not feasible or it's undue expense
or something to that effect.
MR. BURSCH:  Justice Ginsburg, the statute
and the regulations make clear that it must be
technically feasible, but there is an almost
irrebuttable presumption that when there are already
facilities in place performing that function, that is
technically feasible.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But you -- you want the
incumbent here to -- to build the -- the orange cord and
extend it to wherever you have your switching equipment.
And what they say is, no, you -- you bring your
switching equipment here; we'll -- we'll allow you to
connect at, you know, the end of our facilities; but, by
God, you -- you make -- you make your own connection
to -- to the switches.
Now -- now, moreover, you're -- you're
making them -- you'll pay them for the orange cord, but
only at TELRIC rates, which are not realistic.  Now, why
-- why are they wrong and you're right, especially when
you have legislation, the purpose of which was to
encourage the independent building of new facilities?  I
mean, it's clear that the Act wanted these new entrants
where -- where possible to build new facilities, and not
simply to glom on to the extant facilities of the
incumbents.
MR. BURSCH:  Three responses to that
argument, Your Honor.  First, this case is about
existing facilities, not about facilities to be built,
although there's a lot of talk about that.  This isn't a
head-on challenge to the statute or the regulations.
The procedural posture is that this was AT&T trying to
get out of arbitration agreements that it had for
existing entrance facilities.  And so, that's the
posture of our case.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, but the logic of your
case, as you described it, would also require AT&T to
build out the orange cord.
MR. BURSCH:  Right.  And -- and two
additional points, Your Honor, on that.  First, they say
this is a large obligation because we're talking about
miles and miles.  That is not the position that AT&T
took with the FCC when they were commenting on the TRRO.
At page 16a of the Michigan blue brief, in footnote 397
of the TRRO, the FCC acknowledges AT&T's statement that
entrance facilities involve very short distances.  In
addition, we have the FCC's regulation and the Local
Competition Order, paragraph 553 --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me, excuse me.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Extant entrance facilities
I assume they were referring to.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.  I believe that's correct,
yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Okay.  Well --
MR. BURSCH:  They're very short distances.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.  But if you ask for
a longer distance, they would presumably have to build
it.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, not necessarily --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And charge you TELRIC
rates.
MR. BURSCH:  Right, because the FCC has
promulgated in -- in 521, the meet-point obligation,
which is another way that you can have interconnection.
And that demonstrates two things:  First, that sometimes
AT&T as the incumbent is required to build out
facilities, that it's not just a passive obligation.
But, in addition, when they're talking about
meet point, they say that it's up to State commissions
to decide the appropriate and reasonable distance.
So, even if we were presented with the
case -- not this case, but a different case -- where
you're talking about what's the appropriate length of
the facilities, the FCC has already acknowledged there
could be some reasonable limits on that.
And the most important fundamental point,
the fourth point on this, is that Congress already in
(c)(2) said you're going to have interconnection without
regard to market impairment, and so we're not going to
look at the availability of other entrance facilities in
the market.  If a competitor asks to have this location
and this method and it's technically feasible, they do
get the TELRIC rates.
And the competitive carriers would take
issue with the presumption that TELRIC rates are -- are
unfair.  You know, the regulations do contemplate that
they're going to recover not only their cost but a
reasonable profit.  And we can disagree about the
congressional wisdom of requiring rates like that, but
in the Verizon case, this Court definitively put to bed
the question of the reasonableness of the TELRIC rates.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Where would I read this?
As I read the statute, the statute says the cheap system
here is where they provide -- they have a duty to
provide the incumbent interconnection, okay?  That
requires some physical stuff.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  And they have to --
they -- you have to -- you're not charged a lot for
that; there's a limit on what they can charge you for
the interconnection.
MR. BURSCH:  Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, somebody is going to
have to decide whether if Pacific Tel and Tel is being
tried to forced to connect with Maine, you know, they
have to pay for a wire across country to get the
interconnection or not.  That seems unreasonable.
Across the street, maybe they do.
My candidate would normally be the FCC or
some regulator decides that kind of thing, and it's up
to them to say whether this is or is not what's needed
for interconnection.  That would be an intuitive account
I would have, without having read the statute in depth.
So, now what do I read to find out how this
works?  What is it that distinguishes something that is
ridiculous, like my California example, from something
that makes a lot of sense, like they're next door and
have to make 50 feet of wire.
MR. BURSCH:  Justice Breyer, if you look at
paragraph 553 of the Local Competition Order, which
appears at page 27a of the Michigan blue brief --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Michigan blue --
MR. BURSCH:  At least that's where it
begins.  If you flip over to -- to page 28a, this is the
second page of the paragraph.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Where -- where -- 28a,
okay.
MR. BURSCH:  Very good.
About halfway down the -- that paragraph
there, it says:  "Regarding the distance from an
incumbent LEC's premises that an incumbent should be
required to build out facilities for meet-point
arrangements" -- so, again, this is in the meet-point
context -- "we believe that the parties and State
commissions are in a better position than the commission
to determine the appropriate distance that would
constitute the required reasonable accommodation for
interconnection."  So, again --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  So, it's up to the
State commission.
MR. BURSCH:  Exactly.
JUSTICE BREYER:  This is the FCC speaking?
MR. BURSCH:  The FCC is speaking --
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  And the State
commission says -- they say it's up to the State
commission.  And the State commission here said?
MR. BURSCH:  Well, here, the State
commission didn't say anything, because we're talking
about existing facilities.  There's no one requesting a
new entrance facility to be built, for example, from
Lansing to Detroit.  That's not this case.  This case is
about the existing facilities.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Mr. Bursch, the -- the key
to your case is -- is that an entrance facility is
interconnection, right?
MR. BURSCH:  Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You have to equate those
two -- those two terms.
MR. BURSCH:  I do.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  What do you rely upon to
equate them?  Because the -- as I read the regulations,
they -- they use them as separate terms.
MR. BURSCH:  Regulation 51.5 defines
"interconnection" as the mutual -- or, I'm sorry -- as
the linking of two networks for the mutual exchange of
traffic.  There is no dispute that an entrance facility
physically links a competitive network with an incumbent
network; thus, when that entrance facility is used for
the mutual exchange of traffic, it is providing
interconnection.  And that's exactly what the FCC has
concluded.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Doesn't -- doesn't the
interconnection -- doesn't it have to be part of the
internal system of the incumbent carrier?
MR. BURSCH:  It has to be part of their
network.  But in the TRRO, the FCC made clear repeatedly
that entrance facilities constructed by incumbents are
part of their network.  And so, there's really no
dispute that it can be part of the network.  And so --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  You say that this is a
link, and your -- the opposition says that it's a --
that it's transport.  Is that correct?
MR. BURSCH:  It is transport.  By
definition, interconnection has to include transport
because it involves the mutual exchange of traffic from
one to another.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But the -- but the reg
says interconnection does not include transport.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, we address that point at
length in our reply brief, because AT&T advances that
argument, and it's really a fundamental misconception or
misunderstanding of the regulation.  51.5 --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I have -- I've got it in
front of me.  It says, "This term does not include
transport."  But you -- you say it does?
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.  Well, the entrance
facilities do include transport.  All interconnection
facilities --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  No, I'm talking about --
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- interconnection.
MR. BURSCH:  Right.  What 51.5 -- I assume
that's what you're looking at.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Yes.
MR. BURSCH:  That -- that goes to a term of
art or a phrase of art, "transport and termination of
traffic."  And as the FCC made clear in its regulation
51.701, which is at page 35a of the red brief, what
they're really distinguishing there are the two types of
charges.  You have 251(c)(2) interconnection charges and
you have 251(b)(5) transport and termination of traffic
charges.  And those are two separate concepts.
The interconnection charge runs from the
competitive network to the incumbent network.  The
transport and termination of traffic charge runs from
the point of interconnection to the incumbent's end
customer, and that's very clear.  The Ninth Circuit
specifically acknowledged that point in note 16 of the
Pacific Bell case.  But common sense tells you that has
to be right because under AT&T's view, the way they
interpret 51.5, there would be no interconnection
obligation because there's always going to be transport,
a mutual exchange of traffic when interconnection is
involved.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Is that right or --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Do you read --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Is there a mutual
exchange of traffic when you're talking about
backhauling?
MR. BURSCH:  No, there is not, and we don't
take that position.  The mutual exchange is when a
competitive customer talks to an incumbent customer or
vice versa.  Everything else we can call backhauling,
and that's not what's at issue when we're talking about
251(c)(2).
JUSTICE BREYER:  Can I go back to my
question?  Because I haven't gotten an answer.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  You see, I would think --
you said, well, this is an existing facility.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  But my intuition would be
that makes no difference whatsoever.  You could have
some kind of mechanism that connects two companies.
Now, half of it is a simple wire and half of it is bells
and whistles.  And so, we have to decide which part is
the part that's necessary for the interconnection and
which part is some kind of -- well, I don't know, extra
bells and whistles, and therefore, since it's not an
impairment kind of problem, they have to pay full price
for it.
That, again, seems like the kind of job that
Congress would leave up to a commission, but I guess I
want you to tell me:  Who's to decide that kind of
thing, and how do we decide it?
MR. BURSCH:  Are you talking about the
distance, or what the bells and whistles are--
JUSTICE BREYER:  I don't know what it is.
Often, these things are not distance.  Often, a
connection is all kinds of complex things, you know?
And some are necessary and some aren't.  But I can --
can't you imagine with me the same kind of California
problem arising, but it just arises in -- in kind,
rather than in distance?
MR. BURSCH:  Well, as far as --
JUSTICE BREYER:  My -- if I'm so far off
base you can't get the question, forget it.
MR. BURSCH:  No, not at all, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I mean, I might not be able
to get an answer.
MR. BURSCH:  I think it's a very good
question.  And really --
JUSTICE BREYER:  You don't have to think
it's that.
MR. BURSCH:  I'll take it in two parts.  You
know, again, with respect to distance, in the meet-point
context, the FCC has already delegated in LCO paragraph
553 appropriate and reasonable distances.
With respect to the bells and whistles, it's
really not that complicated.  You've got a cable.
That's your entrance facility, you know, typically a
fiberoptic cable.  And there's going to be a conduit
that it needs to run through.  There might be, you know,
risers or spacers with little twisty ties or something
similar to that, zip cords, that will allow the cable to
be run into a building and up a wall and connect into
the appropriate place.  But to the extent those are
interconnection facilities, those are necessarily part
of the 251(c)(2) obligation.
And unless there are any further questions,
I'll reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
MR. BURSCH:  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Mr. Miller.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ERIC D. MILLER
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONERS
MR. MILLER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
There are a lot of statements by the FCC at
issue in this case, but I'd like to focus on two
statements by the commission in its published regulation
and orders that, taken together, resolve the question
presented here.  And the first is the commission's
determination in 47 CFR 51.305(e), which appears at page
5a of Michigan's brief, that it is the competitor, not
the incumbent, that gets to select the point at which
interconnection takes place.
Specifically, that regulation says that if
an incumbent wants to deny a request for
interconnection, it has -- at a particular point, it has
the burden of proving that interconnection at that point
would be technically infeasible.  And that undercuts a
key premise of the decision below, which was that as
long as the incumbent provides interconnection at some
technically feasible point that it has selected, then
it's discharged its obligation, and if the competitor
doesn't like it, that's just too bad.  They can build
their own facility if they want to interconnect
somewhere else.  That's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Counsel, underlying that
question is an issue that I think Justices Ginsburg and
Scalia were asking.  Technically feasible is different
from economically ridiculous or economically burdensome.
How does that, "economically burdensome" -- does it get
considered by anyone so that -- because one could
imagine, as Justice Breyer said, that a competitor could
come in and say, now, build me the Taj Mahal as an
entrance facility or as an interconnection facility.
So, is there anyone controlling for that latter issue?
MR. MILLER:  In terms of the definition of
"technical feasibility" -- that's a defined term in
section 51.5 of the regulations, and it does not include
economic considerations.
Nonetheless, as the commission explained
when it adopted those regulations in 1996 at paragraph
209 of the Local Competition Order, competitors have an
incentive to ask for an economically efficient means of
interconnection because they have to pay for it.  I
mean, the -- they don't pay as much as AT&T would
like -- because they're paying TELRIC rates -- but they
do still have to pay for interconnection, so they have
incentive to ask for a reasonable method of it.
And what's at issue in this case, to get to
the second part of your question, is not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  That's why it's only
technically feasible, because the economic burden is --
is not on the company.  It has to provide it at the
place if it's technically feasible, but it doesn't pay
for it.
MR. MILLER:  That -- that's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Mr. Miller, you
began by saying there were two regulations that disposed
of the case.  You got one.  What's the second?
MR. MILLER:  The -- the second is the
commission's determination in the Triennial Review
Remand Order in response to the D.C. Circuit's remand of
its previous order, that entrance facilities are,
indeed, part of the incumbent's network because the
statutory obligation, of course, is to allow
interconnection at any technically feasible point within
the incumbent carrier's network.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Where do I find that?
MR. MILLER:  That's in paragraph 137 of the
Triennial Review Remand Order, which appears at page 10a
of Michigan's brief.  And in the preceding paragraph,
the commission traced the history of its definition of
the dedicated transport network elements in the Local
Competition Order, its revision of that in the Triennial
Review Order, in which it had said that the facilities
are not part of the network.  The D.C. Circuit then
vacated that.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  What section are you
referring to?  On page 10a?  Which one is it?
MR. MILLER:  Well, I've -- I've just gone
back to the previous two pages, but it -- 10a is
paragraph 137, where the court says, "In response" --
excuse me -- where the commission says, "In response to
the court's remand" -- that's the D.C. Circuit's remand
in the USTA case -- "we reinstate the Local Competition
Order of dedicated" -- "Order definition of dedicated
transport."  And that was a definition of a network
element that included entrance facilities.  So, what the
commission was saying there by its reference back to
that definition --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You -- you do not need to
provide unbundled access under (c)(3) to entrance
facilities, right?
MR. MILLER:  That -- that's correct, and the
court of appeals, I think, perceived a contradiction
between saying that this isn't something to which you
have to provide unbundled access under (c)(3), but it is
something that has to be made available for
interconnection under (c)(2).
And there is no contradiction there because
these are separate, independent statutory obligations,
and what's particularly significant about the difference
between the two statutes -- statutes is that (c)(3) has
an impairment test.  You only have to make available
those network elements without which the competitor
would be impaired in its provision of service.
(C)(2) does not have an impairment test, and
that's because Congress recognized that interconnection
is absolutely fundamental to any effective telephone
competition.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So, what's the
definition difference between entrance facility and
interconnection facility?  How do we know which is
which?
MR. MILLER:  If you're referring to the --
what the -- in the way the commission used those terms
in the --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, no, I'm not.  I want to
know what's the difference.  Tell me in English what the
difference is.
MR. MILLER:  An entrance facility --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, no.  I mean, how do we
know which is which?  We see some big lines and stuff in
it; how do we know which is which?
MR. MILLER:  The -- an entrance facility, as
the commission explained in the TRRO, is just the link
between the incumbent's office and the competitor's
office.  And an interconnection facility is anything --
any part of the network that's being used for
interconnection.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's a genus and -- and the
entrance facility is the species --
MR. MILLER:  It can be.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- in your estimation?
MR. MILLER:  It -- it can be when it is used
for interconnection.  It could also sometimes be used
for other things, but we're talking about the situation
where the competitor wishes to use the entrance facility
for interconnection.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm sorry.  Could
you run that by me again?
MR. MILLER:  The -- the entrance facility is
just the link between the two offices --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Okay.
MR. MILLER:  -- the incumbent and the
competitor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Got it.
MR. MILLER:  That can be used for a couple
of different purposes, but one of the purposes for which
it can be used is interconnection.  And when it is being
used for that purpose, it is appropriately described as
a -- as an interconnection facility.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Miller, would you,
before you sit down, explain what is the Government's
position when an agency is asked to file a brief?  The
Sixth Circuit asked -- invited the FCC to file a brief,
it did, and then the Sixth Circuit disagreed.  And there
was some suggestion that when an agency files a brief
here in this Court, as opposed to a court of appeals, it
deserves more weight.
MR. MILLER:  We -- we agree with the view
expressed by Judge Sutton in his dissenting opinion
below, that there really is no reason to distinguish
between amicus briefs, particularly those filed at the
invitation of a court, in the court of appeals, from
those -- filed here.  In this case, of course, the
question of --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But there may be a -- a
reason to give less weight to briefs in this Court,
different from the briefs filed with a court of appeals.
And you've taken a different position here on -- on the
issue of whether, when backhauling is included, it's
part of the -- it's -- it's part of the interconnection
facility?
MR. MILLER:  No.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I do not think you made
that distinction below about, you know, oh, it is part
where there is back -- where there is not backhauling,
but where there is, it isn't.
MR. MILLER:  I think our briefs in -- in the
two cases are consistent.  Our brief here provides more
detail in explaining the commission's orders, but in
both cases, we have taken the view, as the commission
has consistently taken the view since the TRRO, that
entrance facilities don't have to be made available as
unbundled elements for purposes of back haul, but they
do have to be made available when the incumbent seeks to
use them for interconnection.  And I think this is
precisely the sort of case where --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Wait.  They have to be as
unbundled elements?  I thought they never had to be --
MR. MILLER:  No, they -- they --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- made available as
unbundled elements.  That's (c)(3).
MR. MILLER:  That's right.  Then they are --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Your argument here is that
only have to be made available under (c)(2)?
MR. MILLER:  Exactly.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Which is not unbundled?
MR. MILLER:  Right.  And it's only for
purposes of -- of interconnection.  And I think this is
precisely the sort of case where deference under Auer is
appropriate, given that you have a highly complex
statute regulating a very complex, dynamic industry, and
so the commission's regulations involve not only the
exercise of --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You certainly encourage us
to throw up our hands.  There's no doubt about it.
(Laughter.)
MR. MILLER:  I -- another way of saying that
would be that it's appropriate to recognize the
commission's not only policy-making discretion but
technical expertise in the industry that's being
regulated.  And certainly the commission has tried to be
as clear as it can in its regulations, but this is an
area where some level of imprecision is probably
inevitable.  And I think that's why it's appropriate to
defer to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, I don't know why --
why it's so hard.  I mean, I got out my orange cord, and
I --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But I -- I wasn't sure of
if -- if it was a transport or link.  That -- that's my
concern.
MR. MILLER:  Well, I guess I would say maybe
we need to put the difference between interconnection
and transport in concrete terms.  It would be the
interconnection charge which is at TELRIC rates under
252(d)(1).  There would be a flat fee for setting it up
and then a flat monthly fee just for having the link
there.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Oh, continue.
MR. MILLER:  Thank you.  And that's
independent of usage.
Then, separately, each time a call is made,
there is a charge under 252(d)(2) for the transport and
termination of the call.  And that goes both ways.  So,
when the competitor's customer calls the ILEC, the
customer -- the competitor pays the ILEC for terminating
the call and vice versa.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you,
Mr. Miller.
Mr. Angstreich.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SCOTT H. ANGSTREICH
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
In this case, the agency is trying to use an
amicus brief to interpret a few sentences in orders from
years ago to create a new legal rule without ever going
through a process that would result in judicial review.
In fact, in the Triennial Review Orders, where the
agency supposedly announced this new obligation, it
assured incumbents like AT&T that it was not altering
its interpretation of the statutory interconnection
duty.  And the Government correctly concedes here that
before those orders, the Government had never
interpreted the statutory interconnection duty to
require companies like AT&T to sell a fiberoptic cable
at TELRIC rates.  Yes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Counsel, I know you're
saying that, but everybody's arguing about what the --
what the TRO and the TRRO say or don't say.  But I go
behind that and I go -- I think the Government's entire
argument is not based even on those.  It's based on the
LCO regulations themselves.  They've cited two, which is
51.305 and 51.321.  They're not relying on those TROs in
their back and forth there; they're relying on the
regulation.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, Your Honor, I
actually read their brief differently, and I note that
in the Sixth Circuit, they didn't rely on any
regulations at all.  The argument was entirely based on
paragraph 140.
But going to the regulations, at the same
time they promulgated those rules, the government did
define interconnection to exclude transport, and when
they defended that exclusion --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So, how do you address
their point that there are two different charges at
issue?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  There are --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That one -- that
interconnection by definition includes transport.  It's
hard for me to think of how it doesn't because they've
got to travel from one place to another, so --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Your Honor, when the FCC
explained this to the Eighth Circuit, what it said is
there are really three things going on.  One is (c)(2),
is the duty to interconnect at a point, not to provide a
whole host of facilities that get you to the point, but
literally the duty to interconnect at a specific point
in the world; selected by the competitor to be sure, but
that only tells you where interconnection occurs.
That's the point.
The commission then said:  Okay, then there
are other obligations in the statute.  One of them is in
section 251(b)(5), and that's what obligates the
incumbent to accept telephone calls that are sent to
that point and to send telephone calls through that
point to the competitor.
And then, there's the third thing, and this
is directly from the government's brief to the Eighth
Circuit, where they explain that section (c)(2) --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The Sixth Circuit?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  The Eighth Circuit.  We
cite this at -- from 1996, this is the contemporaneous
view of the agency at the time it promulgated the
interconnection regulations.  It's defending those
regulations against a challenge that they are too
narrow.  And what the agency says to the Eighth Circuit,
which then deferred to this interpretation, is if
section (c)(2), interconnection, included routing and
transmission, (c)(2) would overlap with other sections
that, one, describe a duty to route and transmit
traffic, telephone calls; and, two, a duty to lease
facilities that will be used for routing and
transmission.  Footnote:  Those duties are (b)(5) and
(c)(3).  To the extent there is a duty to lease the
facilities, the fiberoptic cables that competitors are
going to use to get to the interconnection point of
their choice, that duty has to arise, the commission is
saying here, only under section 251(c)(3).
And we know it doesn't arise under that
section because these aren't things that are bottleneck
elements.  These aren't things that competitors can't
get themselves.  Competitors are interconnecting today.
Wireless carriers, other competitors, everyone in the
State of Ohio has since 2005 not been paying TELRIC
rates, and as the amicus brief showed, there has been no
detriment to competition.  Interconnection is occurring.
And so, what the Government is trying to do
here is impose this leasing obligation under the
interconnection duty in a way that never gave AT&T and
other incumbents any opportunity to challenge it.  They
never explain how it squares with the text and structure
of the statute, with their prior statements, or why
there's any policy basis for interpreting what they
claim is an ambiguous statute to require TELRIC pricing
for things that are not bottleneck elements.
Back in the Local Competition Order, Justice
Sotomayor, when they adopted the TELRIC methodology,
they recognized -- this is in paragraph 702 --
interconnection services -- that's what they called it
back then -- are bottlenecks, not things that
competitors can build themselves or buy from third
parties in the marketplace, as the agency has found is
the case since 2005.  They never --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, now you're reading
limitation into the statute.  All the statute says is
you're obligated to provide interconnection services.
It doesn't say how or limit it only to things that are
not bottlenecks or things that are bottlenecks.  It just
says you're obligated to do X.  And that's what the
agency's saying.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  I understand this, Your
Honor.  But if the agency had ever done that through
notice and comment with a rule and published it in the
Federal Register -- which they concede that before 2003
they hadn't done that as to entrance facilities -- and
they claim they had no occasion to address the
question -- and then in 2003 we get a single sentence in
a paragraph of an order where there was no notice they
were considering interconnection duties, no publication
of a new regulation, no publication -- nothing that
would have, you know, told AT&T and other incumbents you
should seek judicial review of this if you think it's
wrong.
And now we're being told 8 years later that
when they said "facilities" in that paragraph, they
meant entrance facilities.  And we're being told 2 years
later when they said "interconnection facilities," that
they meant entrance facilities, even though when they
were asked that question by the Sixth Circuit they said
we didn't define that term.  And Mr. Miller might want
to say they've just said a little bit more now, but
they've said something radically different.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I -- in that regard, in
all of these years, are -- you mean to tell me there is
no other incumbent that has provided interconnection
services at an entrance facility and charged TELRIC
rates?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Prior to 2003 and 2005,
when there was an unbundling rule in place -- and the
commission had always recognized when it established
that unbundling rule in 1996 that competitors would use
unbundled transport facilities to connect to incumbent
switches, so to connect to those interconnection points.
And, sure, prior to 2005 when the unbundling rule was in
place, competitors would lease these facilities and pay
TELRIC rates and use them to get to the interconnection
point, but there was never during that time any
statement that even if there was no impairment, section
251(c)(2) would require the exact same thing to get to
the interconnection point.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  What happened to the
unbundling rule?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  It got -- it was gotten rid
of.  It doesn't exist anymore.  So, now AT&T has said
those things you used to buy under the unbundling rules,
we don't have to sell them to you at TELRIC rates
anymore.  We have a tariff.  We've always had a tariff.
We'll sell them to you at just and reasonable rates
under the tariff.  You can build them yourself, as
competitors and wireless carriers are doing.  You can
buy them from the third parties that build them and
advertise their offering of them.
But what you can't do is say all of a sudden
that the interconnection duty had always required the
exact same thing as the unbundling duty, at least not
without going through a rulemaking where you lay out
your policy grounds.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why was the unbundling rule
abandoned?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  It was abandoned because
the record evidence showed unambiguously that
competitors don't need these things from incumbents.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's not a bottleneck?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  It's not in any way, shape,
or form a bottleneck.  And I guess that gets to the
second point I'd make, which is that, again -- and I
don't think they rely on the regulations, Justice
Sotomayor, and they've never -- and the Government
concedes in footnote 6 that the regulations themselves
don't get them to where they want to go.  They need
these statements they made in 2003 and 2005.  And even
if you credit their new position that when they said
facilities and interconnection facilities, that was just
an imprecise way of saying entrance facilities, those
statements don't get you to the rule that they're
endorsing.
What the agency actually said is that
competitors will have access to these facilities -- and
let's pretend that means entrance facilities for the
time being -- will have access to entrance facilities at
cost-based rates to the extent that they require them to
interconnect, and that's paragraph 140 of the Triennial
Review Order and -- remand order, and they said the same
thing, although they used the word "need," not
"require."
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Which is (c)(3).
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, I think the point is
what they -- this is why we think the right reading of
those statements is that the facilities they're
referring to are things they actually do require and
need, which are the things inside AT&T buildings that
they can't replicate, that it's strange for them to have
said you're going to get these facilities you require,
but to have meant something that they don't in fact
require.
But even if you want to read, again,
facilities and interconnection facilities to mean
entrance facilities, the rule that they're endorsing --
and, you know, Michigan now wants, if it's in the ground
we have to provide it; if we'd have to build it, we
don't have to provide it.  It's the first time we've
heard of that in the scope of this litigation.  The
Government seems to only be willing to -- to talk about
those few facilities that had been gotten under the old,
now-gone unbundling rules, but that's not the
distinction that the commission drew when it said this
thing that's supposedly imposing an obligation on AT&T
and other companies.  It limited it to those things that
competitors require.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But that's -- that's
(c)(3).
MR. ANGSTREICH:  But that's what --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: (C)(2) says you just --
you have to.  It imposes an affirmative obligation to
provide interconnection -- an interconnection.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, it imposes an
obligation, Your Honor, to provide interconnection at a
point -- it's at a point within our network.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me.  That's your
point, I thought.  I thought it is precisely your point
that it is (c)(3) rather than (c)(2).
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, that's -- my point
is, yes, if there is a facilities leasing obligation, it
has to exist under (c)(3).  That's absolutely right,
Justice Scalia, that -- we think that's the right
reading of the statute, we think that's what the FCC
told the Eighth Circuit, we think it's what the FCC said
in the Local Competition Order.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I don't -- what I --
there's no way for you all to go to the FCC and decide
what part of this thing is -- or any State regulator,
what part of it is -- part of what's necessary to
facilitate interconnection and what part of it is really
providing the work primarily of the -- simply
transporting services?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER:  What part is doing
something else?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  There's really no
dispute --
JUSTICE BREYER:  There's no way to do that?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  No.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay, so a judge has to
say, on the basis of what, on the basis -- the judge has
to say on the basis of the statute, which just uses the
word "interconnection"?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  The Michigan commission
decided that the FCC in that paragraph 140 created this
obligation.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.  But the -- the --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's wrong.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me.  I -- I thought
it was conceded that -- that none of this is -- is
necessary under (c)(3).  I thought that's what the
Eighth Circuit said and which is why they eliminated the
unbundling obligation under (c)(3).
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's -- that's absolutely
right, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So, it is accepted by both
sides, I think, that this is not necessary.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's right, and because
it's not necessary, you can't read, as the government
tries to, belatedly, years after the fact, those
statements in their orders from 2003 and 2005, those few
statements in these matching orders --
JUSTICE BREYER:  It doesn't help because
it's a network element if it's in (3), and what this is,
is something that's going to be needed to -- to
interconnect.  If it's -- if it's in -- if it's in the
first one.  And I don't know which is which, and I
gather that sometimes it would be tough.  And what
courts use to do with the ICC when they got into this
kind of situation is a doctrine called primary
jurisdiction, and they'd ask them for a brief.  All
right?  So, if that's what we've done hypothetically, we
have the brief.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, why don't we have to
follow the brief?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Because the brief here
doesn't do what a decision on a primary jurisdiction
referral would do, which is square what the agency is
doing with the text and structure of the statute with
prior statements that contradict --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Do you agree that it has to
be needed to interconnect?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The whole problem here is
it doesn't have to be needed to interconnect.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Our --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It has to be needed under
(c)(3), but under (c)(2), it's -- it's up to the -- to
the new company to say I want to interconnect here; and
-- and the incumbent cannot say, oh, no, you -- you
don't have interconnect here; you can interconnect
somewhere else.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That -- Your Honor, that's
absolutely right, Justice Scalia.  They get to pick a
point.  The point has to be within our network.  Rule
51.305 identifies a series of illustrative points, all
of which exist inside AT&T buildings.  And that's what
they've done.  They've picked a point --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But wait a minute.  Does
-- don't the regulations now and the commission's TRO,
et cetera, say that an entrance facility is within your
network?  You haven't challenged that.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  We do disagree.  I mean, at
the time of the Triennial Review Order, they said it was
outside of our network.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And it's now they --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's when they also
supposedly adopted this rule.  So, somehow, this rule
they've adopted has to coexist with the notion that
these things are outside of our network.  But in or out,
I think it's important to recognize they're not
claiming --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  If they're in your
network --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Pardon me.  I think -- if
you have the Network Engineers' brief, figure 4 on page
19, I think it does a very good job of illustrating what
it is we're talking about.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Like orange wires and such?
(Laughter.)
MR. ANGSTREICH:  They draw them in black,
but yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  In black?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Figure 4.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Figure 4 on page 19.  What
the competitors in this case and Michigan have long said
is that the competitor has picked as its point of
interconnection a point inside the box on the right
labeled Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier Central Office.
And then they need some fiberoptic cable to bridge the
gap to that interconnection point.  That's how Judge
Sutton understood it in dissent.  That's how Judge
Batchelder understood it in the majority.
And all the interconnection duty talks
about, all any of the interconnection regulations talk
about, is letting the competitors pick that point.  How
they get to the point is up to them.
JUSTICE BREYER:  That's not what the statute
says.  The statute says the carriers have a duty to
provide interconnection.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, in carrying out a duty
to provide, you say that's just picking a point.
Somebody could equally well say, no, it's a duty to
provide means to get to the point.  Now, either of those
seem equally consistent with the language.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Your Honor, there's more
language that I think forecloses those interpretations.
It's not just the duty to provide interconnection.  It's
the duty to provide interconnection for the competitor's
facilities and equipment --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  -- at a point within the
incumbent's network.  Nothing in that statutory language
says that the duty is to provide the competitor with the
facilities and equipment --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, it doesn't say that,
but it doesn't say the opposite.  And, therefore, you
might have an agency reasonably deciding that to provide
-- to fulfill that duty, you must provide equipment
reasonably necessary to allow the competitor to connect.
That's equally sensible.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  And, Justice Breyer, you
might have an agency that did that.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  We don't have an agency
that did that.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Apparently, you have an
agency that never really said one way or the other.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  And that means that
Michigan was wrong when it thought that the agency had
said it, and the Sixth Circuit was right when it agreed.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, it used to say the
other.  You -- you contend it used to say the other, and
it has never, by proper means, gainsaid its prior
position.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's correct, Justice
Scalia.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I don't see what the
other -- I didn't hear anything that said they said the
other.  They've said when you have wires and you're
using the wires for communication, then they don't fall
outside this; that's true.  But if you're using them for
interconnection, and they're necessary to use for
interconnection, maybe it does fall inside this.  I
don't --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, Justice Breyer,
again, we point you to their definition of
"interconnection" where they excluded transport from
interconnection and explained to the Eighth Circuit's --
you know --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Excluded -- they excluded
transport -- all transport to the point of
interconnection, where you could not provide the
facility to interconnect unless you had the transport?
Is that what they did?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  What they said is --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Did they do that?  Yes or
no?  I bet the answer is no.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  What they -- I -- Your
Honor, I just -- I don't think you're describing it in
the way that consists --
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  -- comports with the
language of the Act.
What they said is a duty to lease facilities
that will be used for routing and transmission of
telephone calls to the point, that's (c)(3).  That's not
part of the interconnection duty.  When they contrasted,
in their Local Competition Order, paragraph 172, they
said what interconnection does is it lets the competitor
pick the place where they're going to drop the traffic
off.  But it is section (c)(3) that lets the competitor
say:  I'd prefer to use incumbent facilities at TELRIC
rates to get to that point.
They have made that very distinction.  But
what they're trying to do through their amicus brief
here is to turn (c)(2) into a facilities leasing
provision.
Now, again, we don't think this Court needs
to say that they could never have promulgated a rule
with reasons that would get you there, but they've never
done it.  If they had done it, we would have had the
opportunity to seek judicial review.  They would have
had to explain themselves.  We've never had that
opportunity.
When they've said -- put, you know -- I
think it's important, when they put out these sentences
in the Triennial Review Order and Triennial Review
Remand Order that supposedly told us of this new
obligation, they never asked for notice about this, even
though, in their notice of proposed rulemaking, they
said, should we get rid of entrance facilities under
(c)(3)?  They didn't say, and if we do, what would that
mean for (c)(2)?  They didn't ask the question.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I thought they said,
moreover, that they were not amending (c)(2),
specifically.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's exactly right.  In
the orders themselves, they assured AT&T and others that
they weren't changing anything with regard to (c)(2).
JUSTICE BREYER:  But there are -- there are
cases, I think, in primary jurisdiction where what a
district court has done, anyway, is to hold the case
while the ICC went and had a proceeding.  And I'm sure
that hasn't been used in a long time.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  No, that is still used,
Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER:  It is?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  But I'd point --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, maybe this is the
case for it.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Well, I don't think
there's -- and I'd point to this Court's decision by
Justice Ginsburg in Northwest Airlines v. Kent, 510 U.S.
355, where this Court said:  Nobody has asked us to
invoke the doctrine of primary jurisdiction; we're not
going to do it; instead, we will adopt an interpretation
of the statute that will suffice for the purposes at
hand.  And as the Court later recognized in Brand X,
that leaves it open to the agency, in a rulemaking, to
actually do the work that, as Justice Scalia noted, the
agency has never done here.
And so.  It's -- rather than imposing
something through a combination of amicus briefs and
statements that don't actually set forth the rule that
the agency is trying to defend here, we'd have a real
rulemaking --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  -- and a chance --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I guess the problem I'm
having is that you tell me on the one hand that up
until, what, 2005, you were always paying the cost plus
profit rates, the TELRIC's rates, for interconnection at
a -- at an entrance facility.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's not quite right,
Justice Sotomayor.  Up until 2005, companies like Talk
America were allowed to get both the actual physical
linking at TELRIC rates and the transport facility at
TELRIC rates, but under two separate statutory
provisions.  They were getting the transport facility
under (c)(3); that's gone away.  They were getting the
linking under (c)(2).
Now, there were other companies like
wireless carriers.  They were getting the linking at
TELRIC rates under (c)(2), but they were paying full
freight for the transport, because they have never been
allowed to get unbundled network elements.  So, this
notion that there's going to be a price increase to
wireless carriers is a fiction.
But what -- so, competitors were doing two
things under two provisions.  One of those has gone
away.  And it was only after it went away that anybody
raised this notion that maybe that transport facility
had always been required under (c)(2) also.  But that's
nothing the commission has ever done in a rulemaking.
It never did that in the proper way in the
Triennial Review Order or the Triennial Review Remand
Order.  As Justice Scalia noted, it assured AT&T and
other incumbents that it wasn't changing the law.  When
it published things in the Federal Register, which is
where it's supposed to publish substantive rules, it
identified specifically the elimination of entrance
facilities as unbundled network elements, and said not a
word about any continued duty to provide them under
section --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, it did in its
footnotes.  It said -- that's what the whole dispute is
about, which is we're not changing the obligation to
provide interconnection services.  So, it said it
clearly.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  It -- it said it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Its view --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  -- but then the question,
Justice Sotomayor, is:  Well, what was that obligation?
And the government concedes in footnote 6 that prior to
making those statements, it had never interpreted that
obligation to include the duty to lease that transport
facility.  It claims the question never came up because,
while it was an unbundled element, it didn't matter.
Now, I think it's quite telling that while
it was an unbundled element and we were having 10 years
of litigation about what the right standard is for an
unbundled element, nobody even thought to say:  By the
way, all of this litigation is beside the point with
respect to the use of these facilities when we attach
them to an interconnection point.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The Eighth Circuit's
decision would have been unnecessary and the revision of
the rule?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Exactly, Justice Scalia.
It's very strange that no -- I mean -- and I think from
the fact that nobody thought to say it comes to what we
view has happened, is that this is a rear-guard effort
to preserve TELRIC pricing for things that the
commission has said should no longer be available as
TELRIC -- at TELRIC pricing.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Maybe the commission didn't
like the Eighth Circuit's decision.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  I -- I think it's probably
a fair statement that the commission does not like the
decisions vacating its unbundling rules, but
nonetheless, that's what happened, and the new rules get
rid of this element.
Again, what the Michigan commission found
was that the FCC had specifically determined that there
is a leasing obligation under (c)(2).  That never
happened.  The Sixth Circuit was right about that.
There is no leasing obligation that the commission has
ever established.
I think, Justice Breyer, to go back to your
question, whether they could do it is a separate
question.  I don't think they could.  I think we have an
incredibly good chance to prevail if they were to ever
promulgate such a rule, but they never did it.  They
said things directly to the contrary.
JUSTICE BREYER:  It all didn't matter
because, in fact, they got the TELRIC rates under (c)(3)
until they changed the impairment part?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So, who cared?  And now
after that, they care.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  Right, they care.
JUSTICE BREYER:  And now -- now -- now the
other side cares, of course.  And so, now -- now we're
faced with a situation where they're just putting this
in the brief for the first time, but they can't base it
on anything the commission actually did?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  That's exactly right.  And
if the commission had actually --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Amd I'm glad it's right
because I don't know what I'm talking about.
(Laughter.)
MR. ANGSTREICH:  I'm glad -- I'm glad we're
at least agreeing with each other, Justice Breyer.
But -- and I think that really is the key administrative
law point here, is that if the agency in the Triennial
Review Order or Triennial Review Remand Order had
actually said what they say in their brief, we never had
occasion to consider this question before.  Now we're
considering it, and here is why we think it's
appropriate to read (c)(2) to impose leasing.
And despite the fact that, you know --
again, the commission claims that the statute's
ambiguous.  They'd need a policy reason why it's
appropriate to read this ambiguous statute to require
TELRIC pricing for things that third parties are
actually investing in and selling at marketplace rates,
why it's appropriate to undercut those third-party
business models with this TELRIC pricing for something
the competitors can and are building themselves, third
parties are selling --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  If we accept their
policy arguments, what does that do to your main
argument?
MR. ANGSTREICH:  I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Because I think they've
explained it to my satisfaction why this is necessary
because (c)(2) requires interconnection.  Congress has
made a judgment that interconnection is the mainstay of
competition in this area.  So, if I accept that --
MR. ANGSTREICH:  With due respect, Justice
Sotomayor, I don't think they've made that policy claim
here, and in particular this is not a case about whether
interconnection is going to occur.
Competitors and wireless carriers are
picking their points of interconnection.  They are
interconnecting today.  They have been doing it.  And
wireless carriers never had TELRIC priced transport
facilities, and yet they're interconnected.  Competitors
in nearly a dozen States that have addressed this issue
and disagreed with Michigan and agreed with the Sixth
Circuit are interconnecting today using their own
facilities, using third-party facilities.  And when they
come to AT&T and say we'd like to plug our facility into
this point, AT&T says, absolutely, and does the work
necessary to get those two things connected.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It doesn't say it that
happily.  It really doesn't.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  You're right.  It
certainly --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, okay.
MR. ANGSTREICH:  It's -- it's an imposition
on AT&T.  But the notion that in any way, shape, or form
the price of the cable will alter the interconnection of
telephone networks is simply false.  Yes,
interconnection is an important policy, and Congress
said we have to provide it at points within our networks
selected by competitors.  And we do that.
But Congress didn't say, and the FCC has
never said, that we also have to provide them whatever
it is that they want to use to get to that point.  And
there really is -- and I think some of the questioning
pulled that out, though they want to say I think because
the Government won't endorse the absolute position the
Petitioners were taking in their opening briefs, that
this is only about things that used to be ordered as
unbundled elements or things already in the ground.
But their position, their interpretation of
the statute has no stopping point.  It would cover
anything a competitor might ever want to use to get
telephone calls to the interconnection point.  And
they've never defended that limitless reading.  And if
the agency ever wanted to adopt it, we would challenge
it.  And as I've said, I like our chances, but until
they do it, Michigan was wrong to conclude that the
commission had done it, and the Sixth Circuit was
correct to reject that.
If there are no further questions, I'll sit
down.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Bursch -- Bursch, you have 4 minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN J. BURSCH
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. BURSCH:  Your Honors, everything you
heard in the last 30 minutes is premised on the idea
that the FCC is doing something new and that there was
never a promulgated regulation.  That is demonstrably
false.
If you turn with me to page 32a of the red
brief, this is the FCC's regulation, promulgated all the
way back in 1996, which defined the scope of the (c)(2)
interconnection obligation.  It's 47 CFR 51.321.  And
this goes directly to the points that Justice Sotomayor
was making.
On page 32a, the FCC says that an incumbent
must provide interconnection at a particular point upon
a request by a telecommunications carrier, such as a
competitor.  "Technically feasible methods" -- this is
in sub (b) -- "include, but are not limited to" -- and
they give two examples:  collocation and meet points.
But this isn't the be-all-end-all of interconnection
obligations.  These are exemplary.
To take an analogy, assume you had a high
school cafeteria, and the school board said you have to
provide vegetables to students when they ask for them,
and you have to give them the vegetable that they ask
for; those include broccoli and green beans.  And they
don't say anything else.  Then you have a separate
obligation in (c)(3), and the school board says until we
see that the kids have enough nutrition, you must give
them peas.  That's entrance facilities unbundled under
(c)(3).
So, some time goes by, and the school board
says, okay, the kids are getting enough peas; we're
going to wipe away that second restriction, but the
initial restriction, the obligation in 321, is still
there; and if a student asks for peas, it's within the
scope of 321 because broccolis and green beans were
representative examples, and peas are another one.  And
that's where entrance facilities fit.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why did they fight the
Eighth Circuit litigation?  Why did -- I mean, it --
you're telling me it made no difference whether (c)(3)
allowed them to do what they wanted to do and what the
Eighth Circuit said they couldn't do, right?
MR. BURSCH:  The premise -- no, that's
incorrect, Your Honor, because if you have an entrance
facility under (c)(3), you can use it for more things
than you can under (c)(2) because under (c)(3) you can
have it for backhauling and still get TELRIC rates.
Under (c)(2), you're limited to interconnection.  So,
it's a different question.
But the idea that somehow the FCC can --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Very slightly different.
That's not that big a deal.
MR. BURSCH:  Backhauling is a big deal to
competitors.  And so, to say that they did something new
in the TRRO is wrong.  And to prove that point, if you
look at the comments --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Incidentally, where do
you -- where do you get that backhauling restriction
from?
MR. BURSCH:  The backhauling --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes, yes.  The --
MR. BURSCH:  From the TRO and the TRRO, and
the FCC discussed that distinction in the Sixth Circuit
briefing at pages 6 to 7.  So, this isn't anything new,
either.
So, the fact that this is not something new
is demonstrated conclusively by comments in the TRRO
proceedings from Bell South, which is now an AT&T
subsidiary.  And Bell South says, at page 59 of its
comments, fully recognizing the obligation that went all
the way back to 1996 in reg 321:  Because entrance
facilities may be required for interconnection purposes
and Congress explicitly enacted provisions that govern
carrier obligations to provide interconnection in
251(c)(2), it was altogether reasonable for the
commission to exclude these network elements from a
definition of ILEC dedicated transport intended for
unbundled access under 251(c)(3).
So, even incumbent carriers knew what the
FCC was doing in paragraph 140 of the TRRO, and there
was nothing new there.
One other small point with respect to the
Network Engineers' map.  This entrance facility right
here on page 19 already exists.  We're talking about
existing facilities.  And it's true, as the Sixth
Circuit said, that if the point of interconnection is
here at the ILEC switch, then that's where
interconnection takes place, and this entrance facility
is -- is truly providing transport, not interconnection.
But when a competitive carrier chooses its
own switch as the point of interconnection, this is the
end of the AT&T entrance facility, then interconnection
takes place there.  And even in the Sixth Circuit's
view, that entrance facility is interconnection under
(c)(2).  And as Congress has said, that's the obligation
that is immutable because it is so important,
fundamental to competition.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
MR. BURSCH:  Thank you.
(Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the case in the
