IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MISSOURI, :
Petitioner :
v. : No. 10-444
GALIN E. FRYE. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, October 31, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CHRIS KOSTER, ESQ., Attorney General, Jefferson City,
Missouri; on behalf of Petitioner.
ANTHONY A. YANG, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
for United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Petitioner.
EMMETT D. QUEENER, ESQ., Assistant Public Defender,
Columbia, Missouri; on behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CHRIS KOSTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ANTHONY A. YANG, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States,
as amicus curiae, supporting the Petitioner 18
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
EMMETT D. QUEENER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CHRIS KOSTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 49
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 10-444, Missouri v. Frye.
General Koster.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CHRIS KOSTER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. KOSTER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
But for counsel's error, defendant would
have insisted on going to trial. That is the test for
prejudice. But in Mr. Frye's case, that test was not
met. The truth is, despite counsel's error, Mr. Frye
knowingly waived his right to trial and solemnly
admitted his guilt. Under both Hill and Premo, Mr. Frye
has failed to show prejudice, and therefore his guilty
plea remains voluntary, intelligent, and final.
Mr. Frye may not assert ineffective
assistance by alleging that, but for counsel's error, he
could have gotten a better deal on an earlier date.
That is not the standard. And the court of appeals
should be reversed.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, sometimes one's
experience has to be challenged. I, for one, have never
heard of a case in which parties are discussing a plea,
except in the most unusual of circumstances, and they
advance a court date to enter the plea. In most cases,
they just wait till the court date and tell the judge:
I'm ready to plead guilty.
This is such an unusual case, because the
plea happens on day one. The court below is assuming
that between day one and day five, or three or four, the
guy would have come in and pled guilty, would have
advanced the later court date?
MR. KOSTER: Well, the plea -- the plea
occurred on March 3rd, 2008 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, that's the second
plea, but --
MR. KOSTER: It went -- the -- right. The
plea offer --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm talking about the
plea deal.
MR. KOSTER: The plea offer expired on
December 28th, 2007, I believe, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He commits the crime on
the 29th or the 30th -- he commits a second offense on
the 29th or 30th?
MR. KOSTER: That actually was a fifth
offense, but yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. My point is,
how reasonable could it be for the -- for a court to
assume that the plea offer had been made and that he
would have taken it before the January court date that
was set?
MR. KOSTER: It would be less than likely,
but not impossible, I would say. And it would depend on
a myriad of circumstances, many of which are as -- as --
could be just dependent on the defense counsel's own
personal schedule.
But the scheduling of a plea once -- once an
agreement has been made between a prosecutor and a
defense counsel, the scheduling of a plea I think is
largely a basis of convenience and does not
necessarily -- is not necessarily based on the
preliminary hearing date or any future scheduled date.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I suppose the
defendant might think, you know, there is really bad
evidence out there that they don't have yet. And if
I -- I want to nail this deal down as soon as possible.
I mean, that would be a reason to -- to move things up
and get the plea in early, wouldn't it?
MR. KOSTER: It could be. I would say that
that is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I mean, I don't know
how often that happens.
MR. KOSTER: That's possible. I don't --
right. But it's also exactly another reason to keep the
discretion of offering these plea bargains and the
ability to take these plea bargains back solely in the
hands of the prosecutors of the country.
JUSTICE ALITO: I'm really puzzled by what
as a practical matter is at stake in this case. Under
the State court decision, the defendant has the option
of either pleading guilty to the charge, in which case
he will be right back where he is now, or he can insist
on a trial.
And if he insists on a trial, you need to
prove that he was driving with a revoked license. That
seems to me -- if there ever was a slam-dunk trial, that
seems to me that's the slam-dunk trial. You introduce
the records of -- showing that his license was revoked,
and you have the officer testify on such and such a date
he was driving. So, I don't really see what is involved
in this case.
MR. KOSTER: The last part of the question
was?
JUSTICE ALITO: I don't see what is at stake
here. I don't see what that -- as a practical matter,
this seems to be -- to me to be a case about nothing.
Am I wrong? Am I missing something?
MR. KOSTER: As a former -- as a former
prosecutor myself, I would agree with this. This
gentleman went into court. He had two options before
him. There was not a third option. The -- the plea
that was -- that left reality on December 28th was not
there on March 3rd. He had a binary choice between two
options on March 3rd. He chose not trial. By choosing
not trial, it leaves us without a situation where either
Hill or Premo prejudice can be shown.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But we take the case on
the assumption that he hadn't heard of the earlier
better offer. Am I wrong about that?
MR. KOSTER: In this case, the defendant was
unaware of the earlier better offer. That is correct.
But in this case also, the defendant went out 2 days
later and picked up a fifth charge. So, one of the
considerations that I think has to be left with the
Court is that the possibility that this particular
defendant was ever going to see this plea offer is
almost nil. This was his fifth arrest for driving while
revoked.
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, aren't we taking
this on -- isn't there an assumption that there's a
finding, or some lower court judge made a finding that
if he had known about the better deal that was offered,
he would have taken it?
MR. KOSTER: That -- what is in the record
is that he would have taken the 90-day deal on the
misdemeanor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. KOSTER: But there is also an important
element in the record, that when he went in front of the
court on March 3rd and the felony offer was given to the
judge, which was 3 years and defer on probation plus 10
days' shock time, the judge in Columbia, Missouri, gave
the felony offer the back of his hand.
And so, while, yes, the record says that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, then that's a causal
problem. You're saying that, even if he had accepted
it, it would have gone to the judge, and the judge would
have turned it down anyway. The judge wouldn't have
accepted it.
MR. KOSTER: If the judge --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that your point?
MR. KOSTER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, then there's a --
somebody must have found somewhere that this made a
difference.
MR. KOSTER: That --
JUSTICE BREYER: That the failure to tell
him about the special offer of the misdemeanor did in
fact make a difference because he would have accepted it
and he would have ended up with it.
MR. KOSTER: Well, and that is the problem
that brings us here today. The Missouri Court of
Appeals said that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. KOSTER: -- through a -- a
misinterpretation, we believe, of the Strickland
standard and, more importantly, a misreading of where
Hill and Premo takes us. Cert was granted on this case
just at the same time that Premo was very clearly
re-articulating the Hill standard.
And so, the court of appeals had gone back
towards Strickland with a very broad reading just as
this Court was coming down with an opinion that very
clearly re-articulated the Hill standard, the two-part
performance and prejudice test.
And that's what we are asking be reversed.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose he had snapped up
this deal as soon as it was offered. By the time he
appeared before the court to answer a formal plea of
guilty, would the court have known that he had in the
interim been arrested yet again for driving without a
license?
MR. KOSTER: The court probably would have
known as a result of a pre-sentence investigation. And
perhaps more importantly, Your Honor, the prosecutor
himself would have known about the -- the second arrest,
and he would have withdrawn it.
And if I may, it's not always -- we've
concentrated so far in the case before and today on
subsequent criminal actions. You know, back home in
Missouri, the criminal reporting system, we still use on
five-part carbon paper that you've got to press hard
with a pen to get down to the fifth page. It is also
possible that the prosecutor learns at a subsequent date
of a criminal history that is -- that is material that
predates the plea offer. And so, in both directions,
it's important that prosecutors have full discretion to
take these pleas back.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, regardless, your
legal position is that there is no basis for setting
aside the plea if an earlier, better offer was not
communicated.
That's your legal position, right?
MR. KOSTER: My legal position is that a
finding -- a conviction was entered on March 3rd. He
pled guilty. The question before the Court is, what
satisfies a standard by which we are going to unwind it?
A Sixth Amendment violation would satisfy that standard,
and if -- if there was a Sixth Amendment violation, if
the plea was truly involuntary, we would unwind it.
But the search for a better deal that is
antecedent to the events of March 3rd is not the Sixth
Amendment violation that should begin unwinding --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: You say -- you say
there's --
MR. KOSTER: -- 97 percent of the
convictions in the country.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- no Sixth Amendment
violation when the counsel fails to communicate a
favorable offer to the defendant. That's your position.
MR. KOSTER: No. Respectfully, Your Honor,
that is not my position. My position is that
ineffective assistance is a two-part test, that there
was a performance breach in the failure to communicate,
but once the performance breach is accepted, then it has
to be run through the Hill standard to find whether
prejudice has occurred, and then we would find a Sixth
Amendment breach. But we -- we do not get there
logically because the offer did not exist after -- after
December 28.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I -- I didn't
understand that to be your position.
There -- there is a statement in your brief
that the question is whether plea negotiations that did
not result in a guilty plea constitute a critical
confrontation that gives the rise to effective
assistance of counsel during such negotiations. So, I
thought your position was that so long as the plea
negotiations don't result in a guilty plea, effective
assistance of counsel doesn't even come into the
equation.
MR. KOSTER: I -- there's a question in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, you can say yes or
no. I mean, you could retract -- retreat from --
MR. KOSTER: Is the question --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that, I suppose, if you
want.
MR. KOSTER: Is the question whether I
believe that plea negotiations are a critical stage?
JUSTICE SCALIA: When they do not result in
a guilty plea.
MR. KOSTER: I believe they are not -- I
believe that -- that plea negotiations are not a
critical stage under the laws of this Court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's what we took the
case for. We didn't -- we wouldn't have taken the case
if we were concerned about what happened in March and
what happened in February. We took the case because of
your position, that this is not a Sixth Amendment
violation in these circumstances.
MR. KOSTER: I do not -- there is a factual
question as to whether or not plea negotiations in this
case really ever engaged when all that ever occurred was
the prosecutor sent a letter to the defense attorney.
Only in the most technical of readings --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but we don't care
about that. You know, what do we care about that? I
mean, we don't take cases to figure out those -- those,
you know, picky, picky factual questions. The issue
that I thought was important here is whether this is a
critical stage when -- when the defendant is not -- does
not accept the -- the plea and plead guilty.
MR. KOSTER: Plea negotiations I don't
believe are a critical stage, because the fate -- in the
back and forth between a prosecutor and a defense
attorney, the fate of the accused is not -- is not set.
And these -- of course, these negotiations can take
place over a very long time. Either party can get up
from the table and walk away at any time. And then,
perhaps most importantly, the -- the dialogue of the
negotiations are not used against the defendant at
critical stages, which would contrast it, I suppose,
with a Miranda situation in a custodial interrogation
where that would be a critical stage.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And if it were a critical
stage, I suppose that counsel would be ineffective, not
only if he was a lousy lawyer and didn't know the law,
but if he was a bad negotiator. I mean -- right? Being
a good criminal lawyer means you -- you got to be a good
horse trader, right?
MR. KOSTER: I agree that that would be one
of the extensions, if critical stage analysis --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. You tell him to turn
down a deal --
MR. KOSTER: -- was applied to plea
negotiations.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- that in fact, you know,
was a pretty good deal, that would be ineffective
assistance of counsel. So, you must -- you must know
how to handle yourself in the used car lot, right?
MR. KOSTER: I understand that that would be
one of the ramifications --
JUSTICE KAGAN: So, Mr. Koster --
JUSTICE BREYER: This is on the basic
question --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's -- it's very odd for
you to say that -- to me -- that this is not a critical
stage. If it results in a guilty plea and the -- and
the attorney has not done sufficient research to uncover
a defense, it can be set aside then.  So, it's -- so,
you're saying it's not a critical stage depending on
what the end result is. That's very difficult.
I thought we were going to tell attorneys,
you have an obligation during the plea bargain process
to use professional competence. And you say, well, you
do or you don't. That doesn't make much sense.
MR. KOSTER: My understanding, Your Honor,
is that attorneys are guaranteed to the accused at
critical stages, such as arraignments, plea hearings,
trials, but then there is an implied guarantee that
comes with that critical stage, and that implied
guarantee is that their -- that the attorney appointed
will do research, analysis, and preparation that
prepares him for the critical stage.
But when David Boyce is sitting home on a
Saturday night with a file open in his lap preparing for
a case on Monday, that moment is not a critical stage of
trial, on a Saturday night in his den, but it prepares
for, it is precedent to, a critical stage. And the
failure to engage in that preparation analysis can lead
to performance and prejudice at critical stages, but it
itself is not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the -- the
question -- I make a counter-assumption. The problem
that I -- I have the feeling that I'd like you and the
others to comment on, is that you're worried deeply
about a practical problem, and that the practical
problem is that it would be too easy, as just was
suggested by the question, to find that the lawyer,
after the defendant is convicted, did a bad job during
the plea negotiation, in which case everybody will get
two or three bites at the apple. And one of the reasons
for that is every brief has been lifting the standards,
particularly in respect to prejudice, from Hill, which
was addressing a different question. It was addressing
the question of missed -- bad performance by the lawyer
at trial. And that's hard to track what the effects
are, and it isn't that hard to say the trial was unfair,
give him a new one.
That won't work here, I don't think. So
suppose what we did, instead of saying there was no
right, you simply said you have to prove with some
certainty, work out a standard, that there really was
inadequate assistance during the plea bargaining, and
you have to show something more than a reasonable
probability that this would have led to the plea, et
cetera. You have to show that it would have happened.
Or you have a -- in other words, you have
two tougher standards for this area, but you don't
reject the idea of inadequate assistance of counsel
during the plea bargaining stage. I'd like people's
views, insofar as they are willing to give them, on that
question.
MR. KOSTER: Ineffective assistance of
counsel is a -- is a term of art, and it is a two-part
test. I believe that there can be performance breaches
that occur between -- at the -- at the plea bargaining
stage, but that prejudice does not occur until we return
to a critical stage, which is -- is when that -- when
that plea, when the product of that plea negotiation is
returned to a critical stage, and then it has critical
stage protections over it, where the judge is there, and
there's an allocution and the rest of the protections --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, the open -- the
open plea that was made -- that's a critical stage. In
fact, he took a plea. But he, I think, has a plausible
argument that the plea he made, the open plea with no
bargain in the picture, that that plea was not
intelligently made because he didn't know that there had
been an offer for him to plead to a misdemeanor rather
than a felony.
MR. KOSTER: In Tollett -- may I?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. KOSTER: In Tollett v. Henderson, the
question of the defendant Mr. Henderson's knowing waiver
in that case, where the breach was infinitely more
egregious in my view, which was the 1948 court packing
that occurred and the African American citizens were
excluded from that grand jury pool.
Mr. Henderson's lack of knowledge about a
previous constitutional deprivation was not -- did not
make his waiver unknowing. Same with the analysis in
McMann and in Parker and in Brady, to say there is no
limiting principle that will allow this omission to
unwind the knowing quality of Mr. Frye's waiver and then
not open up the floodgates to all sorts of
pre-constitutional deprivations.
I'd like to reserve the balance of my time,
Your Honor. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Yang.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANTHONY A. YANG
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MR. YANG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
When a defendant pleads guilty --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you taking the same
position your -- I don't want to call him co-counsel --
Petitioner's counsel is taking, that you are not
entitled to an attorney at plea bargaining, unless you
waive your -- unless you waive your right to a trial?
MR. YANG: No, we're not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's not a critical --
MR. YANG: We are not taking the view. In
this case, the alleged deficiency is not really an
interaction between the prosecution and the defense
counsel in plea bargaining. The alleged deficiency is a
failure to inform the defendant of things the defendant
would want to know as going forward, and we're -- we are
willing to assume the defendant has a right to be
properly informed by counsel. But with any Strickland
claim, the relevant inquiry is whether or not the
defendant has shown cognizable prejudice as a result of
a deficient performance by the counsel.
And when a defendant pleads guilty in open
court, the conviction rests on the defendant's
assertion, an admission of his own guilt, and his
consent that there be judgment entered, a judgment of
conviction, entered without trial.
And because the conviction rests on a
consent judgment, it wipes free antecedent
constitutional errors. The one challenge that --
JUSTICE KAGAN: So, I think, Mr. Yang, what
Justice Sotomayor was suggesting is that your position
does in fact require you to say that if there were no
counsel at all in the proceedings, that would be
perfectly -- you know, there would not be a
constitutional problem with that. Once he pleads
guilty, it just wipes away the fact that no counsel has
been appointed for him.
MR. YANG: A -- a guilty plea wipes free all
kinds of constitutional violations that went before.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but the guilty -- I
mean, no, the reason that is not true is that the guilty
plea must be entered with advice of counsel. You
acknowledge that, don't you?
MR. YANG: Correct. And the guilty plea --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, the guilty plea doesn't
erase everything if it has been entered without advice
of counsel.
MR. YANG: Correct. When the counseled
guilty plea is entered, this Court has held that the one
remaining challenge that would be allowed is the
challenge to the knowing and intelligent waiver of the
right to trial, which is what the guilty plea is. Now,
in order to show that you were prejudiced --
JUSTICE KAGAN: So, does that mean, Mr.
Yang, a State could set up a system where it says we're
going to do all our negotiating with the defendant with
no counsel present in the room, but we're going to keep
a lawyer on board just in the courtroom to advise him
whether he should plead -- you know, what -- you know,
to advise him about the plea that he has struck, even
though he struck this plea with no counsel in the room,
and that would be perfectly okay?
MR. YANG: We are not saying that -- that --
JUSTICE KAGAN: All the negotiations could
be uncounseled.
MR. YANG: We are not taking the position
that States can deprive counsel or deprive counsel from
participation in the guilty plea process. But what we
are saying --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, I don't understand how
you can say that. It seems --
MR. YANG: No --
JUSTICE KAGAN: You are saying that, because
you're saying that in the end, the guilty plea wipes all
constitutional error away.
MR. YANG: Just as we're not saying that
there can be coerced confessions, not just like we're
saying that a statute can impermissibly burden the right
to trial by putting a death sentence on -- that's
available only when you go to trial. We're not saying
any of that is allowed. But what we are saying is
when a -- and that was the Brady trilogy, Brady and
McMann and ultimately in Tollett, which led to Hill.
What the Court recognized is when you plead
guilty in open court, you are waiving your right to
trial. And the relevant inquiry, the only inquiry once
the defendant has admitted guilt, is to determine
whether or not the waiver of the trial rights were
knowing and voluntary. And the reason that that is a
relevant inquiry is because you have a constitutional
right to trial, and due process requires that the waiver
of those trial rights be knowing, intelligent, and
voluntary.
And in Hill, the Court confronted the
question and said: You need to show deficient advice in
the context of pleading guilty; and in addition, you
need to show that that prejudiced you because, absent --
if you had received proper advice, you would have
actually not waived your right to trial; you would have
asserted your right to trial and gone to trial. That's
the standard that applies.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If defense counsel gives
wrong information to the defendant about witnesses that
can testify on his behalf and so forth, very bad legal
advice, that's -- that can be ground for setting aside
the plea, correct?
MR. YANG: It can, and because what's
relevant --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: All right, so -- and
that's because counsel pre the entry of the plea did not
adequately advise his client.
MR. YANG: Right, right. The key is that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why -- why is there no
problem when he doesn't adequately advise a client of
earlier better offers?
MR. YANG: It's a different prejudice. The
-- when you plead guilty and your counsel has advised
you wrongly in a way that would have changed your mind
about the merits of going forward on trial, you can show
that the waiver of the trial right is something that was
prejudiced. But because -- had you known, had you been
properly advised, you would have exercised the whole
panoply of rights that the Constitution provides one who
goes to trial, not only a right to a trial by jury but
all the trial rights that go with it.
But when you instead plead guilty in open
court -- and the claim here is not that the defendant
would have exercised his rights to trial. The claim is
he would have waived his rights to trial either way.
That is not prejudice to the -- that would overcome the
guilty plea, which again rests on --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Yang, there are
different kinds of unfairness. One kind of unfairness
is when you're badly advised and you, therefore, waive
your right to trial when you would have gone. But
there's another kind of prejudice, which is, you know,
you and 10 other guys are all in the same situation, and
those 10 other guys come up with a favorable plea deal
because their lawyers are paying attention, and you come
up with an unfavorable plea deal because your lawyer has
fallen asleep. And to the extent that we have an
effective assistance right that means something, that
unfairness needs to be addressed by it, doesn't it?
MR. YANG: Well, when -- again, once --
whether or not there was a prior error, once you plead
guilty, the question is not whether there were other
deals on the table; the question is whether that waiver
of --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, I guess that's the
question. Why isn't that the question?
MR. YANG: Well, right, but if it were the
question, it would call into -- this Court, in -- in
going back to Brady and then in Boykin, explained that
what's -- the relevant question when you enter a guilty
plea is whether you have waived your rights to trial
validly. And, in fact, that has to be spread upon the
record. Rule 11(b) has now been modified by this Court
to go through the things you have to check to make sure
that that waiver of your trial rights are knowing and
voluntary.
What we have here is not anything associated
with the waiver of trial rights. What really the
defendant is claiming is some entitlement be able to
take another deal that would not have resulted in trial.
But that is not relevant to the waiver of trial rights.
That would be recognizing another type of right. But
this Court has repeatedly held that there is no right to
a guilty plea, there is no right to plea bargaining;
once you have a plea agreement, there is no right to
enforcement. The only rights that come into play is
when that guilty plea is rendered into a judgment. And
when you don't get there, but instead you plead guilty
and you have waived your rights to trial, you have
consented to the entry of judgment, and even if you had
received better advice you would have consented to
the -- you would not have gone forward to trial, you
have -- the basis on which the conviction rests remains
valid. And that's what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have admitted that you
got what you deserved, right?
MR. YANG: Precisely. And this Court in
Premo addressed the exact same question. In Premo,
there was a contention that had counsel done better
before by filing a motion to suppress, it would have
been in a better position to secure a better plea
agreement from the prosecution. But the Court concluded
that, no, the relevant inquiry, once you have pled
guilty, is whether or not you would have, if properly
advised, insisted on your trial rights and gone to
trial. That's the standard set forth in Hill. And the
reason --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Yang, in your view,
is there any situation in which a defendant could regain
a plea opportunity that he lost due to counsel's
conceded inadequacy? And I think it is accepted that
not telling him of the plea offer was ineffective
representation. Is there any case where the defendant
could regain the plea opportunity that he lost?
MR. YANG: If he pleads guilty?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. If he doesn't seek
a trial, right.
MR. YANG: I'm sorry. I didn't catch that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. If he doesn't want
to go to trial and he's going to plead guilty, is there
any circumstance where he could regain that lost
opportunity?
MR. YANG: If he has -- if he has pleaded
guilty and he validly waived his rights to trial because
he would not have asserted them, then I think under Hill
what you have is a defendant who admits guilt, there's
no real risk of any kind of error in that determination,
and the judgment which must be set aside -- remember, we
have to set aside the judgment. The judgment rests on
the admission of guilt and the waiver of trial. The
judgment cannot be set aside at that point, because this
Court has long recognized the -- the special force of
finality with respect to guilty pleas. That's because
-- for several reasons.
First, guilty pleas are an important part of
the system, and it would be -- both delay and impair the
orderly administration of justice any time we open
another avenue to challenge guilty pleas. But, two,
once the defendant has stood up in open court and
admitted guilt, there is almost no risk of error, and
the defendant has gotten the proper sentence and the
proper conviction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. YANG. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Queener.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF EMMETT D. QUEENER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. QUEENER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Galin Frye entered a plea of guilty to
felony driving while revoked and was sentenced to 3
years in prison. His trial lawyer failed to inform him
that the prosecutor was willing to allow him to accept a
plea offer to a misdemeanor charge and recommend 90 days
in jail. Fundamental fairness and reliability of
criminal process requires that an attorney provide his
client information regarding matters in his case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why? Why is it unfair for
the law to apply to this individual the punishment he
deserved for the crime that he committed? I mean, the
object of the system is to put -- is to punish people
who commit crimes in a certain degree.
And here he admitted he did the crime, and
he got the degree of punishment that the law provides.
What could be more fair than that?
MR. QUEENER: Fairness includes a whole
range of sentencing options. And in this case, the
prosecutor was making a determination of what was fair
in this case when he made the offer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Ex ante, I suppose you
could say that. But when you look at it later, it's
clear that that would have been unfair. In fact, this
individual was perfectly willing to admit that he had
been guilty of more than what the prosecutor had
offered.
MR. QUEENER: Part of the consideration that
a defendant has to make during the plea bargaining
process or plea negotiation process is determining the
liability that he's willing to accept in entering a plea
of guilty.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's true, and he did
that when he entered the plea of guilty. You -- you do
not contest he was well advised when he entered that
plea that it was knowledgeable and he admitted that
that's what he had done and was willing to accept the
degree of punishment prescribed by law.
MR. QUEENER: Well, he was -- the guilty
plea in terms of what he was admitting to, he was
willing to and had to agree that he had committed the
crime of driving while -- while revoked. But the plea
was open in terms of sentencing, and he was allowed to
argue for something lower than the sentencing. He only
knew that was the available options at that time.
He wasn't aware that the prosecutor had made
available an option to him to limit his exposure for
that offense to 90 days.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I have a
two-part question.
MR. QUEENER: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. What exactly
made his plea unknowing or involuntary, number one?
And, number two, identify the right he was
deprived of, substantive or procedural, by his
attorney's failure to communicate the plea.
MR. QUEENER: The plea was unknowing and
involuntary because he was not made aware by his
counsel's unprofessional representation of all of the
circumstances available to him, the consequences of
entering that guilty plea, that would have included the
90-day on a misdemeanor if he had been aware of that.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose he had been told
that -- suppose he had been told that, and the
prosecutor said, well, yes, that's true; I made that
offer, but it's off the table now. And apparently, this
was then off the table. So, what good would it have
done him to know about something that happened in the
past but was no longer available?
MR. QUEENER: Well, this offer was only no
longer on the table at the time he entered the plea of
guilty, because it had expired, and that was a result of
counsel's ineffectiveness in failing to communicate that
to him. The lower court, the court of appeals, made a
finding that this offer was available, and he could have
taken advantage of it before it expired. And that was a
finding by the court below.
JUSTICE ALITO: No, I understand that, and
it may have been unfair, but I don't see why it's
involuntary. Because I don't see that -- advising him
that he had an option at some point in the past which
was no longer available really doesn't have much of a --
doesn't have any bearing on the voluntariness of his
plea to a later less-favorable offer.
MR. QUEENER: I -- that's -- it seems to me
that that's involuntary in the sense that he didn't know
it then. It's not that it's involuntary now because
that he knows it. It was involuntary because he didn't
know it then.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, suppose the case in
which a plea offer's made, not communicated, and
expires. Then there's a guilty plea hearing. And he
doesn't -- and the defendant enters a -- a guilty plea
but doesn't know about the prior offer. Is -- is there
injury?
MR. QUEENER: There is if there is an
increase in sentence. And that's the situation here.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, is the plea
involuntary? Is it -- pardon me. Is it unknowing?
MR. QUEENER: It is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And what would he -- what
would he have done had he known?
MR. QUEENER: It's unknowing in the sense
that he did not know the full consequences of --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, you know, Judge, I'm
really sorry I didn't accept responsibility 3 months
earlier.
MR. QUEENER: What he -- what's unknowing
about that is the potential consequence that he is
choosing in deciding to plead guilty. And if I may,
that's the second part of your question. The right that
he has is the right to make fundamental decisions in his
case, one of which is to accept a plea bargain and plead
guilty.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Doesn't -- doesn't the rule
that the plea offer may be withdrawn at any time by the
prosecutor -- indeed, even after it has been accepted --
doesn't that well enough establish that there is no
right to profit from that plea offer, that there is no
constitutional right he's been deprived of, given that
the prosecutor can withdraw it even after he accepts it?
MR. QUEENER: That can be -- excuse me --
that can be -- excuse me -- that can be withdrawn at any
time by the prosecutor, but we're not arguing that there
is a right to a particular plea -- a particular plea.
He is entitled to the right to make a knowing and
voluntary acceptance of a plea, a knowing and voluntary
guilty plea, and that requires that he know all of the
information. And the record that we have in this case,
there's nothing to suggest that that plea would not have
gone forward. The mere potentiality for withdrawing the
plea --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I had hoped you were
making some argument other than the knowing argument,
because as prior discussion has shown, even if he had
known, it would have made no difference to whether he
accepted the later plea.
Suppose he had been told, "oh, by the way,
there was an earlier plea. It's too late to accept it
now. Do you want to take this plea?" He says, "well,
oh, I'd like the earlier." "I'm sorry, the earlier plea
is gone. Do you want to take this plea or not?" He
would have taken it.
What does the knowledge of the earlier
lapsed plea have to do with whether his guilty plea is
knowing and voluntary? It doesn't seem to me to have
anything to do with that. So, I --
MR. QUEENER: Well, the knowing -- yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought you had some
other argument that was somehow a right to profit from
the earlier offer. And I find it hard to see that
right, given that the prosecutor can withdraw the offer
and, indeed, even withdraw it after it's accepted.
MR. QUEENER: The right is to enter that
plea knowing the full consequences of what he's doing at
that point, which includes the limitation on his
exposure for the offense. This is sort of a sentencing
issue. And an increase in sentence is a -- is
prejudicial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But he's -- the Missouri
Supreme Court said in what -- that the prosecutor --
they would not -- they would not order the prosecutor to
renew that earlier plea. So, they said the options were
you can get a new trial -- you can get a trial or you
can replead the open plea. But wasn't it -- didn't the
court say we will not order the prosecutor to reinstate
the earlier offer?
MR. QUEENER: That -- that is correct, Your
Honor. Their finding, more specifically, I think was
that they did not feel like they were empowered to do
so. We certainly believe that they can -- they are
empowered to do so in the sense that this is a remedy
provided for a constitutional violation.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, but what about as a
constitutional violation that, in a context of a world
where 95 percent of all people in prison are there as a
result of bargaining and guilty pleas arranged with
prosecutors -- in that context, it's fundamentally
unfair to deprive a person of his liberty for 40 years
instead of 6 months because the lawyer which he is
guaranteed fell down on the basic, fundamental, obvious
duty of communicating the relevant plea agreement?
MR. QUEENER: I agree with you completely,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you would also --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, is there any support
for me?
(Laughter.)
MR. QUEENER: That -- that is the issue
where, in terms of the sentencing outcome, this is
knowledge that he is required to -- that's required by
his attorney to provide him a sentencing of --
difference is a -- is prejudicial, excuse me, under
Strickland, and the remedy for -- I guess going back in
-- even more basic than that -- is that that ineffective
assistance of counsel is -- has to be remedied.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But if that's ineffective
assistance of counsel, surely it is ineffective
assistance of counsel to advise him to turn down an
offer that he should have snapped up. Isn't that
ineffective assistance as well? If it's absolutely
clear that this was a great deal, and the lawyer said,
nah, you shouldn't take it -- is that ineffective
assistance or not?
MR. QUEENER: I'm going to have to couch
that in terms of saying it would depend on the
circumstances. What you have to look at --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I gave you the
circumstances. It's clearly a super deal. Any good
lawyer would have told him to take it.
MR. QUEENER: Okay.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And this lawyer says don't
take it.
Is that ineffective assistance?
MR. QUEENER: That would probably not be
ineffective assistance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It would not be?
MR. QUEENER: The question would then be
whether or not there is prejudice from that, and that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, it would be ineffective
assistance, and the question would be prejudice. Is
that it?
MR. QUEENER: I think an attorney can
provide reasonable representation in making that sort of
an offer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, give me a yes -- a
yes or no to the question whether, if every reasonable
lawyer would have told him to snap up this offer, but
his counsel tells him, no, turn it down -- yes or no, is
that ineffective assistance?
MR. QUEENER: In that circumstance, it is
ineffective assistance, because he has to do what is a
reasonable standard of representation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then we're in the soup.
Then we're in the soup because every one of these pleas
is subject to the contention that, oh, there was an
earlier plea, or I should have -- I should have taken it
but -- I mean -- and I suppose that if he goes to trial,
then you would also say that trial should not have
occurred because it was the ineffective assistance of
counsel that caused him to turn down the plea, and,
therefore, we're going to -- right -- retry it and set
aside the trial?
MR. QUEENER: Under that circumstance, that
would --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. QUEENER: -- may well be --
JUSTICE BREYER: But, now, you've read these
cases, and now we're right on what I think is the point,
because we've both defined a possible constitutional
right, but there's a practical problem. All right?
Now, the States and others have dealt with this on your
side --
MR. QUEENER: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- for the last 30 years.
And, presumably, you, but not me, have read a lot more
cases.
Now, have they developed -- as you look
across those cases, are there some States or places that
have developed reasonably tough standards in respect to
what counts as ineffective assistance and in respect to
whether it made a difference that would help to
alleviate the concern that this would turn into a great
mess? Which it hasn't, apparently.
MR. QUEENER: As I understand these -- these
cases, the -- the standards being applied are the
Strickland standard. It's the high bar of deficient
performance and prejudice under Strickland. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, we get a lot
of Strickland cases, and the lower courts do, too.
MR. QUEENER: Correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's not much
comfort in terms of what the consequences of a decision
in your favor would be.
MR. QUEENER: I mean, that -- that's
certainly true. I mean, we -- we have --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, in the case -- where
the case goes to trial, prejudice isn't going to be very
hard to prove. The person turned down a 5-year deal and
gets -- and after trial is sentenced to 20 years. So,
you've got -- you're got prejudice right there, right?
MR. QUEENER: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: So, there's always going to
be a very good argument for prejudice where a person
turns down a favorable deal and then gets slammed after
a trial.
MR. QUEENER: I'm -- I'm going to qualify my
answer a little bit because I think where -- what the
Court has to -- to keep in mind is the rational decision
requirement that I think was reiterated in -- in
Padilla. You're going to have to look at whether or not
the defendant was making a rational decision in that
choice. It's not simply that there was another offer
out there. It -- was the decision rational on the part
of the defendant to accept or reject that offer that was
there?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, but the point is just
that -- I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, go ahead.
JUSTICE ALITO: The point is just that
prejudice isn't going to be very tough to show, is it?
You turned down a 1-year deal, and then later when that
was off the table, you accepted a 5-year deal.
MR. QUEENER: That may well be the --
JUSTICE ALITO: There's prejudice --
MR. QUEENER: That may well be the easier
part of the -- of the equation. But there's still going
to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? Because you have to
show a causal connection. So, you'd have to show --
show in the causal connection that he would have taken
that deal.
MR. QUEENER: That's -- yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And if -- if you're going
to use the words "reasonable probability" that he would
have taken it, it might be fairly easy to show. And
that's where in the back of my mind I'm thinking that
maybe we want something tougher than reasonable
probability, that you have to show that it really would
have made a difference.
MR. QUEENER: I -- I think reasonable
probability is a -- is a workable standard that we've
used for many years.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you are -- you are
leaving out of the picture the prosecutor's prerogative
to withdraw his plea. That you said that the court --
said it lacked authority to order the State to offer any
bargain, but also the court said, I'm not going to
require the prosecutor to renew an earlier offer.
One thing is clear in this case: The
prosecutor did nothing wrong. The wrong was on the part
of defense counsel. So, why should the judge disarm the
prosecutor, take away the prosecutor's right to change
his mind?
MR. QUEENER: The -- this is a remedy for a
Sixth Amendment violation, and that is to put the
defendant back into the position as nearly as possible
as he would have been in at the time and at the time the
offer was open. This is not a situation where the
prosecutor is being ordered initially or the first
instance to make an offer; it -- this is being viewed as
the offer that was originally made is still available
and open to the defendant.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but at the time, that
offer could have been withdrawn by the prosecutor. And
you're saying now it can't be withdrawn. So, you're
really not putting him back in the situation he was in.
MR. QUEENER: There's -- there's never going
to be a perfect remedy for any of these violations, I
don't believe.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think that's right.
MR. QUEENER: Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's one of the
things that causes us to be suspicious of whether
there's a constitutional violation --
MR. QUEENER: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- because there really
isn't any perfect remedy.
MR. QUEENER: There can't be a perfect --
JUSTICE SCALIA: In some cases, not even a
close to perfect remedy.
MR. QUEENER: I think this is close to
perfect, as close to perfect as we can get, which is
what is required for Sixth Amendment remedies, that it
mitigate it to the extent possible. And in those
circumstances where one party -- the interests of one
party may be infringed upon, if that happens -- they
can't be infringed upon unnecessarily. This is a
necessary infringement. The State bears the burden of
ineffective assistance of counsel, and if that's in a --
an erroneous sentencing, then the State has to bear the
burden for the erroneous sentencing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel --
JUSTICE ALITO: On the issue of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'll go this time.
Counsel, on page 24 of your brief, you quote
Alford for the proposition that a valid plea must be a
voluntary and intelligent choice among the alternative
courses of action open to the defendant.
MR. QUEENER: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: On the next page,
you say when Frye entered his guilty plea before the
trial court, he was completely unaware that counsel's
ineffective delay had forever foreclosed those options.
Now, I put the two of those together and
find you saying that this was a valid plea.
MR. QUEENER: No, it was --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The question of
validity is whether it's an intelligent choice, as you
quote, among the alternative choices of action open to
the defendant. The next page you say these options have
forever been foreclosed. So, they weren't open to the
defendant.
MR. QUEENER: Well, those were foreclosed
simply as a result of trial counsel's ineffectiveness,
which -- which caused him to be unaware that they had
been ever available to him, so that -- that how the plea
becomes involuntary is not that he's aware of what the
situation is at the time that he's entering the plea,
because there are many other circumstances that go into
his decision of whether or not to enter a plea. Those
alternatives were only no longer available to him as a
result of counsel's failure to perform his duty
professionally and communicate the offer.
JUSTICE ALITO: On the issue of remedy, as
the Respondent are you not limited to the remedies that
were provided in the judgment of the State court?
MR. QUEENER: No, I don't believe so,
because the State court, the court of appeals, simply
thought it was not empowered to put him back in the
position that he was in, and I think that is the remedy
under the Sixth Amendment for that violation.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, you didn't file a
cross-petition, and there wasn't one granted. So,
aren't -- aren't you limited to defending the judgment
below? Can you ask for a modification of the judgment
below in your favor?
MR. QUEENER: With the -- the second point
in the -- in this case is, what is the appropriate
remedy? And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that's -- is that the
question that the Court raised?
MR. QUEENER: Yes. Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, the Court was
expecting you to address it.
MR. QUEENER: But we did file the petition
challenging the -- the finding of the -- or the relief
provided by the court below.
JUSTICE ALITO: You think that because we
added a question, that acts as the functional equivalent
of a granted cross-petition that would permit
modification of the judgment in your favor?
MR. QUEENER: No, but the last I -- the last
I recall, that cert petition was still pending. I may
be wrong about that, I'm not sure, that it was just into
this case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are -- are you
recognizing that the remedy that the Missouri Supreme
Court did give was a futile remedy? That is, to plead
guilty, to have another open plea or trial, because this
defendant apparently doesn't want to go to trial.
MR. QUEENER: I think both of those are
futile remedies, and that's why it's really obvious that
the remedy has to be something else. This is not a
situation where he does have a very -- a very good
likelihood of succeeding at trial. That's not going to
do him any good. That won't get him a misdemeanor where
he'll be sentenced to 90 days. The open plea is
basically the same -- the very same thing that's causing
him the prejudice in this case. So, the remedy being
provided by Missouri Court of Appeals is essentially no
remedy at all for the prejudice that he suffered.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But why should -- now
that we know what the judge's sentence was, and part of
the plea offer was remade, the part about -- what was
it -- 3 years with 10 days in jail?
MR. QUEENER: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the judge said, no,
I'm not going to give him just 10 days; I'm going to put
him in jail for the whole 3 years. Now, if that's --
this is the sentence that the judge gave, he rejected
the -- half of the plea bargain, so surely he would have
rejected the more generous one.
MR. QUEENER: I -- I'm not sure that's
entirely the only answer we can draw from this record.
At the time that this -- or this guilty plea was being
entered and the sentence was handed down, this was an
open plea, it was not an agreement. If they had gone to
court on a plea agreement between the prosecutor and the
defense, and that was up for a -- an amendment down to a
misdemeanor and a reduced charge -- you know, that is
something more definitive. Then the judge would be
looking at what the parties had agreed to at that point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure I understand
the difference between an open plea and a plea
agreement. He just comes to the judge and says I'm
willing to plead to this without the prosecution having
offered it?
MR. QUEENER: The open plea basically means
there is not an agreement between the parties. Now,
they may each know what either party is going to argue
for or recommend, but there's not an agreement between
the parties.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. QUEENER: And I think that -- would
leave the court with a little more flexibility than --
than he might otherwise exercise if they came to him
with an agreement.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. Just to make
sure. I thought the earlier, the November 15th letter
agreement --
MR. QUEENER: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- always left it up to
the judge whether to accept either the felony with shock
treatment or the misdemeanor with 90 days. So, the
judge was always free to reject either of those two?
MR. QUEENER: I think the deference to the
trial court on probation was in that first one, the 3
years with defer to the court on probation. If they had
agreed on the 90 days in the misdemeanor, that would
have been a plea agreement between the two parties.
That would have been a definitive --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, he could still --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Binding the judge?
JUSTICE SCALIA: He could still --
MR. QUEENER: Not binding the judge. No,
that would not bind the judge. It never would. The
judge would have the opportunity, at that point -- the
only time -- the only thing the judge would have
discretion over at that point would be the actual amount
of sentence. If the prosecutor reduced that from a
felony to a misdemeanor, the judge couldn't reject that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He would have had to
accept it.
MR. QUEENER: He would have had to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But he would not have
had to accept the 90 days.
MR. QUEENER: He would not have had to
accept the 90 days.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you're --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What proof -- I'm sorry.
What proof did you have in the record that the judge
would have accepted the 90 days?
MR. QUEENER: I don't have proof in the
record that he would have. What I have in the record --
there is nothing in the record to suggest that that
would not have happened. The appellate court found --
in fact by making the determination that Mr. Frye was
prejudiced, necessarily made the conclusion that that
plea would have gone forward. The motion court said
nothing to refute that. There was nothing in the
court's findings that the court would not have accepted
that agreement had the parties come before it with that.
If there are no further questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
General Koster, you have 2 minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CHRIS KOSTER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. KOSTER: Thank you, Your Honor.
Two of the Justices questions raised the
concept of sentencing equivalency. And certainly
sentencing equivalency is an important goal, both at the
Federal system and we've tried at the State system. But
sentencing equivalency is not an avenue that the Sixth
Amendment is intending to reach. The essential question
here, to Justice Breyer's earlier question that I think
I didn't answer properly, is should we begin unwinding
these convictions in search of lost plea opportunities?
I think that we should not. It undermines
the -- there were long discussions in both Hill and
Premo about the importance of the finality of these and
our being able to rely on the finality of these
decisions. There's mutual reliance. There's State
reliance as well because, when these offers are made,
the State does not interview witnesses, the State does
not send evidence to the lab, the State does not, you
know -- sometimes even get to the point where the
charges are made. So, there's State reliance and --
which is synonymous with a reliance of justice on the
finality of these agreements as well.
And also, the search for these lost
opportunities that Mr. Frye is asking this Court to lead
us toward takes a point of representation beyond the
limited scope of the Sixth Amendment in Gonzalez --
Gonzalez-Lopez and other courts, the limited -- the
limitation of the Sixth Amendment that this Court has
always appropriately articulated.
For this and other reasons stated in our
briefing, the Missouri Court of Appeals should be
reversed. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the case in the
