IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
BILLY JOE REYNOLDS, :
Petitioner : No. 10-6549
v. :
UNITED STATES. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, October 3, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:06 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
CANDACE CAIN, ESQ., Assistant Federal Public Defender,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; for Petitioner.
MELISSA ARBUS SHERRY, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; for Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
CANDACE CAIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MELISSA ARBUS SHERRY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 24
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
CANDACE CAIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:06 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 10-6549, Reynolds v. United States.
Ms. Cain.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CANDACE CAIN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. CAIN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Recognizing that certain offenders convicted
before enactment or an implementation of SORNA would be
unable to comply with SORNA's initial registration
requirement, Congress included section 16913(d)
delegating to the Attorney General the authority to
determine whether and how to apply SORNA's registration
requirements to those offenders.
Mr. Reynolds is one of those offenders
because he was convicted, sentenced, and released from
prison a year before SORNA was enacted. But for a valid
exercise of the Attorney General's authority under
subsection (d), Mr. Reynolds had no obligation to
register under SORNA, could not initially register under
SORNA, and, therefore, was not subject to SORNA's
criminal penalties. Action by the Attorney General was
needed to bring offenders like Mr. Reynolds into the new
system.
And because both implementing SORNA and
determining whether and how SORNA would be applied to
pre-enactment offenders would require time and
consideration, Congress left the Wetterling Act
registration law in place for 3 years to ensure that all
offenders would be covered under the old law. And
until --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Was the -- is the
Wetterling Act retroactive?
MS. CAIN: The Wetterling Act, Your Honor,
was remaining in place for 3 years and had a sort of a
sunset provision under --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, I know.
That's going forward. But was the requirement to
register under the Wetterling Act -- did that apply as
of the enactment date or did that reach back?
MS. CAIN: Your Honor, actually the
Wetterling Act was not effective for a year into the
future.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, you think it
only applied to that year?
MS. CAIN: No, I'm sorry. The Wetterling
Act was enacted in -- in 1996.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, if the offense
were committed in 1994, did that person have to register
under the Wetterling Act?
MS. CAIN: They had to register, but there
were no criminal penalties. At that point, it was a
94 law called Wetterling, and then 2 years later under
the Lychner Act, criminal penalties were added.
Our reading better accords with the text and
congressional intent --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you clarify that
answer? The -- are you admitting that there were no
criminal enforcement options for the Attorney General
under the Wetterling Act for acts committed prior to
96? Is that what you're saying?
MS. CAIN: Your Honor, the Wetterling Act,
as it was enacted in 1994, was a registration
requirement without criminal penalties. In 1996, the
Lychner Act was enacted amending Wetterling and added
the criminal penalty, the Federal criminal penalty of
-year punishment for failure to register.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And that included all
individuals who had -- who had been convicted of -- of
sex abuse acts before 1996?
MS. CAIN: I don't know.
Our reading better accords with the text of
SORNA and congressional intent, but the Government
reading is simply not reasonable. If SORNA were to
apply to all pre-enactment and pre-implementation
offenders on day one, and the Attorney General could
then modify in the future, which would in fact -- in
effect repeal SORNA as to some offenders, then you could
have a situation where someone was convicted of an
offense and then have to be covered under SORNA, and
then later the AG could decide that that group was
not required to register.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, maybe -- maybe the
Attorney General doesn't have that power. But your
position is that whether this behavior, not registering,
is criminal or not is left up to the Attorney General,
is left up to the executive. Do we have other examples
where Congress says, well, we don't know whether this
should be a criminal offense; so, we're going to leave
it to the Attorney General?
It's quite different to say the Attorney
General will implement it in the technical details, but
to say that whether it's a criminal offense or not is up
to the Attorney General -- is there any other instance
where that's so?
MS. CAIN: Your Honor, I'm not aware of any,
but we don't -- this is not what the Attorney General is
doing. This is -- SORNA is a civil registration
requirement, and the Attorney General is deciding
whether someone has to register. In order for a
criminal indictment to be brought, a person would have
to travel and then fail to register. So, it's really
not actually deciding whether someone would be guilty of
a crime or convicted of a crime or exposed to a crime.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- maybe I just don't
grasp the core of the case then. I thought this was a
criminal conviction and that you were arguing that it's
a criminal conviction because the conduct that's
prohibited by the statute was conduct that covered this
class of people by order of the Attorney General under
the interim regs. I mean, is that wrong?
MS. CAIN: Your Honor, actually what we are
seeking is the ability to contest the Attorney General's
rule. We're saying --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm asking, isn't this is
criminal conviction that resulted from the fact that
your client was within the class of persons covered by
the statute? The Government says they're covered
anyway. You say they're covered only because the
Attorney General acted, but then you say it's a criminal
-- it's a civil provision? I -- I --
MS. CAIN: Well, Your Honor, it is --
failure to register and then travel -- I mean, travel
and then fail to register after you are obligated under
SORNA to register is a crime, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I -- you know, my
problem is that's very strange. I find it very strange
to leave it up to the Attorney General whether something
will be a crime or not. It will be a crime if the
Attorney General says so, and it won't be a crime if he
doesn't. I mean, especially leave it up to the Attorney
General, for Pete's sake; he's the prosecutor. You
know, it will be a crime if the prosecutor thinks it is,
and it won't be a crime if the prosecutor thinks it
isn't. I don't -- I don't know of any parallel, and --
and I -- I think it's sailing close to the edge of
unconstitutionality; whereas, what the other side claims
is simply it's a crime to begin with, but the Attorney
General can make it not a crime. That -- that's sort of
like prosecutorial discretion. In -- in his -- in his
judgment, if it shouldn't be a crime, you know -- I have
trouble with that, too. But it's a lot --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it's a lot closer to
prosecutorial discretion than -- than what you're asking
us to accept, that something is a crime only if the
Attorney General says it's a crime. That seems to me
very strange.
MS. CAIN: Well, Your Honor, that's really
what the text says, and our reading --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But are you -- now -- now
we do -- the Attorney General has spoken. The first
time, you say it was ineffective because there was no
notice and comment. But from -- what is it -- August of
08, we have a rule, a final rule, that did go through
notice and comment. So, are we talking about, is this
case simply about the period from February 1907 to
August 1908, and that's -- that's all that's involved in
this case, only those people? Or are you contesting
that after August 1908, you still have some kind of
claim?
MS. CAIN: Well, Your Honor, our -- our case
does not involve the time period after August of 2008.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, it's -- so, this
whole case is about what happens between February '07
and August '08, and that's the limit of it.
MS. CAIN: Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because there was no rule
at all before February '07, and there was a rule August
'08. So, it's just that period this case is about.
MS. CAIN: Yes. Our client traveled in '07.
And --
JUSTICE ALITO: It's the period from the
enactment of SORNA until the adoption of the SMART
guidelines, right? That's what we're talking about?
MS. CAIN: Well, Your Honor, if the SMART
guidelines are deemed valid, yes. But that was -- in
08. Our client traveled in 2007. And so, the
Attorney General's interim rule is the rule that would
subject him to criminal liability.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me. I'm -- let
me go back to that question, counselor -- to that
answer. Let's assume we accepted the Solicitor
General's understanding of the rule, that it was illegal
to travel -- that you had to be -- had to register from
the start of SORNA. What challenge do you have left
either to the interim rule in 2007 or to the final rules
in 2008? What -- what challenge could you conceivably
make?
MS. CAIN: Your Honor, if the -- if the
statute applies from day one, we would still contest the
interim rule for -- the Attorney General took action but
did not exclude our client. The Attorney General did
what he was authorized to do in subsection (d).
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What would be the basis
of that challenge?
MS. CAIN: Pardon me.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What would have
obligated him to take your client out of SORNA?
MS. CAIN: The exercise of his discretion to
not take him out --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you -- could you
tell me why?
MS. CAIN: Because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What would be an abuse
of his discretion if he didn't take your client out?
MS. CAIN: He had exercised his discretion
under subsection (d) and decided not to exclude our
client from the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That -- we're in a
circular argument.
MS. CAIN: -- statute.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What would have
commanded him to take your client out?
MS. CAIN: It would be his discretion.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You -- you would have to
bring some sort of suit that said he abused his
discretion. On what basis would he have -- what would
be your claim of abuse other than I really want my
client out?
MS. CAIN: Well, that he would have
standing. That's what we're trying to -- we're trying
to get standing to contest the interim rule.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But what impact would
the interim rules have had on you?
MS. CAIN: If the statute applies from day
one without the interim rule, we still would -- that is
what the standing issue is about. We're saying that the
interim rule is the only rule that gave -- gave the
government the ability to include Mr. Reynolds in the
prosecution.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have --
MS. CAIN: This is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You have a notice --
notice and comment claim, right?
MS. CAIN: Yes. Yes, Your Honor, we do.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what -- but what
you're challenging is interim rule, because there was no
notice and comment. So, you would have had no
challenge, not from the date of SORNA's enactment, but
from the date of the rule that you're challenging -- and
that rule was February '07. Your challenge is to the
invalidity of the interim rule, right?
MS. CAIN: That's right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Okay. So -- but before
there was an interim rule, you would have no such
challenge.
MS. CAIN: No, but the -- SORNA would not
apply to Mr. Reynolds before then.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You might have some other
case, but this case is about a challenge to a rule as
invalid. Is that -- that's as I understand it. So,
there had to be the rule for you to make the challenge.
MS. CAIN: I'm sorry. I missed the last
part.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You are challenging the
Attorney General's first rule as invalid, the
February '07 rule.
MS. CAIN: That's right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You say it's invalid
because there was no notice and comment. You have no
challenge -- your challenge doesn't reach before that,
because there was no rule before that so that you can --
the earliest point is when the rule was adopted, you're
saying, the rule was invalid. So, that's why I said the
brackets are from when there was an allegedly invalid
rule, which was in February '07, until when there's a
valid rule, which is in August of '08.
MS. CAIN: That's right, Your Honor. I
mean, that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, that's not --
no. Your argument, as I understand it, is there was no
notice and comment when he issued the interim rule.
MS. CAIN: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If there had been
notice and comment, you would have jumped in with
comments that would have convinced the Attorney General
not to apply the rule to your client.
MS. CAIN: That's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MS. CAIN: That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And your argument is
further that without the rule, SORNA doesn't exist,
right?
MS. CAIN: For our client. He is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MS. CAIN: He is unable to comply with the
initial registration provision under (b) because he was
released from prison a year before SORNA was enacted.
So, he could not meet either one of the descriptions of
initial registration.
JUSTICE BREYER: That doesn't mean -- that
doesn't mean SORNA doesn't apply; it means 2250 doesn't
apply.
MS. CAIN: That's right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is that right?
MS. CAIN: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, it might be a
metaphysical, but it may be that Congress intended the
statute to apply to people like your client, but the
question is when the initial registration has to take
place. And I took you as saying until the Attorney
General acts, we don't know. So, 2250 doesn't --
doesn't criminalize a failure until he can know when
he's supposed to register.
MS. CAIN: Register under SORNA. That's
right.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's right. Okay.
MS. CAIN: The problem is here that the
prosecution -- the Attorney General's office is
substituting a State registration for the initial
registration under SORNA, and that's just not what the
text says.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Cain, why do you think
Congress would have written the statute in this way?
mean, in your brief, you say it was all very complicated
and Congress was worried about certain problems, the way
different registrations overlapped on each other. But
exactly what was so complicated? Why couldn't Congress
just have applied the statute to people in
Mr. Reynolds's situation itself?
MS. CAIN: Well, even the Government agrees,
in their brief, that there are complications.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I was going to ask the
Government the same question. What are the
complications --
MS. CAIN: Well --
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- that Congress was so
worried about?
MS. CAIN: Some sex offenders, you know,
from the various States -- there were State laws that
were varied amongst each other. There was the Federal
Wetterling Act that had its own different periods of
registration and different requirements.
And I think that one of the permutations --
some of them are that some sex offenders never had to
register in some States; some had been convicted before
and had served out their time and no longer had to
register; and some were released from prison, you know,
before the enactment or implementation of -- of SORNA.
And an example of a permutation that
was going to take some thought and some consideration is
the one that sort of is an example in a different
context, in the Federal Register and in the Government's
brief, which is that certain people who had served their
time and were completely out of the system, if they got
re-arrested for a misdemeanor, the Attorney General
decided that those individuals did not have to register
for a State to be deemed substantially implemented with
respect to SORNA. And so, that's an example of a type
of decision, a complication that the Attorney General
was particularly well-suited to deciding and making that
determination.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Arrested for a
misdemeanor to do what?
MS. CAIN: Any arrest for a misdemeanor that
would bring a previous offender back in the system -- if
that person was just convicted of a misdemeanor, they
would not -- the State would not have to re-register
them in order to be deemed substantially compliant with
SORNA and get the Byrne grant money.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I thought Justice
Kagan's question was, what would have stopped Congress
from just saying you have to register on the day of
passage? There was nothing to stop Congress from doing
that, correct?
MS. CAIN: They could have done that, but
they were concerned about how you get the older
conviction, the older pre-enactment people into the new
system.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's your reason for
why they didn't do that. They didn't make it automatic,
correct? That's your argument?
MS. CAIN: Right. They wanted to have a new
registration, a new system that would start from a
certain point that would bring in new requirements. And
the problem is how to get the people with the older
convictions and the older registrations into the system.
And that would be done with initial registration. But
Mr. Reynolds --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, why is --
MS CAIN: -- can't register.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Why is it easier for the
Attorney General to do that by regulation than for
Congress simply to do it by the statute itself? What
did they expect to happen in the regulatory process that
would solve these problems for them?
MS. CAIN: Well, I think that it's more
flexible to have a regulation and takes perhaps less
time than legislation to think of all the different
permutations. They don't know every State's laws and
every State's capabilities. And so, it was more
flexible, and -- and they could respond more quickly to
changes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, take this case.
What would compliance entail other than simply telling
the Missouri authority -- I mean, he had to register,
was registered in Missouri -- telling the Missouri
authority that he was moving to another State? That's
all he had to do, right, to comply?
MS. CAIN: Comply with Missouri's law? The
State law?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: To comply with the -- the
SORNA requirement, that he'd have to tell the Missouri
authority that he was moving to another State. And then
Missouri would have an obligation to tell that other
State he's there.
MS. CAIN: Well, Your Honor, that -- your
question assumes that State registration would suffice
for SORNA. And, respectfully, the -- SORNA was not
enacted until --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But I'm talking about
SORNA has been enacted, and now he's moving after SORNA
is enacted, right?
MS. CAIN: Right. Well, that's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Okay. So -- so, SORNA is
on the books. He's registered in Missouri. He's
leaving the State. To comply with SORNA, what does he
have to do other than tell the original State, I'm
moving to another State?
MS. CAIN: Well, he would have to comply
with the requirements of initial registration under
SORNA. Those contain more requirements than under the
Missouri --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But he can't -- he can't
comply with the initial registration because he
committed this crime even before SORNA was enacted.
MS. CAIN: Under --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But now, what would he
have to do to be in compliance?
MS. CAIN: With Missouri law, with State
law, would be, to comply with Missouri law, tell
Missouri he is leaving and then go to Pennsylvania and
comply with Pennsylvania law, perhaps. And that's also
not a SORNA registration; that is a registration under
State law.
We know from Carr that SORNA is -- doesn't
create an obligation until the statute's effective date.
And the statute's effective date is after a valid
Attorney General regulation for purposes of people like
Mr. Reynolds.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Could you tell me, Ms.
Cain -- you may have said this, and I may just have
missed it. But under the new regulations, a man who's
in the position of your client and who cannot initially
register under (b) -- (b) just doesn't fit his
circumstances -- does he now have to initially register
again, or does his initial registration stick and he
just has to update it when he moves?
MS. CAIN: The initial registration under
SORNA could be updated. The State registration that he
may have already done in the past is not a SORNA
registration. He would have to register initially
again, and that is a new registration. And that would
be what Congress intended, because their goal was to not
have a patchwork of regulations and rules. So, it would
be a new registration, but an update of a SORNA
registration is certainly possible, yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Under the current
regulation, under the 19 -- I mean, the '08 regulations,
would it be enough to comply -- for somebody in his
situation, to comply simply by telling his parole
officer, I'm moving to the other State? Under the
regulation that says how this is implemented?
MS. CAIN: Actually, Your Honor, no. We
actually don't know the answer to that question, because
the Attorney General has not issued regulations
instructing offenders what to do. They have simply
issued guidelines telling the States what they can do to
substantially implement SORNA. So, we don't really know
the answer to that question.
The point is that the requirement to
initially register under SORNA was not effective until
the Attorney General -- could not be effective until the
Attorney General said so. And that's what the statute
says under (d). And that if you look at how the
Government is reading the statue, you apply it from day
one, but yet they have the ability to modify SORNA,
which in effect means to repeal SORNA's effect as to
some people in the future. That also would cause a lot
of complications, especially in the context I mentioned
where someone with a misdemeanor, you know, may be part
of the group that doesn't have to register in the
future, but they had to at some point, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, let's -- is
there anything -- if I understand the Solicitor
General's position, all your client had to do after
SORNA was passed was, after a reasonable amount of time
or upon his travel, to tell Missouri, which was his
State of conviction, that he was moving. Correct?
MS. CAIN: If you -- they say that he was
not part of the people that could register within a
normal -- I mean, a reasonable amount of time because of
the State registration.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Right.
MS. CAIN: But assuming that that wasn't the
case, assuming he was, you know, just --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, I'm not assuming
that.
MS. CAIN: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Would he have been in
compliance with SORNA under the final rules today, the
interim rules when they were passed, or on the date that
he left if he had when he traveled, or a reasonable time
thereafter, told his State of conviction that he had
moved? Would that have been enough?
MS. CAIN: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What does he have to do
in addition to that, under the interim or final rules?
MS. CAIN: We don't know. Because, again,
the Attorney General has not issued regulations or
guidelines telling offenders what to do. They have only
issued guidelines telling jurisdictions how they can
substantially implement SORNA. So, it's not as
though -- he cannot register under SORNA until the
Attorney General specifies that he --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That was the answer that
you gave to my question, which was the same thing: Why
isn't it sufficient now for him simply to tell his
parole officer he's moving?
MS. CAIN: Oh, I'm sorry. Yes. That was --
it would not be sufficient. I mean, it's -- he has to
initially register to register under SORNA. And he
can't do that until the Attorney General issued a valid
rule, which -- we are contesting that the 2007 rule is
not valid. We're saying that our client has standing to
make that challenge. We were denied the ability to do
that below.
And I would like to reserve my time if
there's no further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Sherry.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MELISSA ARBUS SHERRY
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
If I could start by answering your question,
Your Honor, about the Wetterling Act, it was not
retroactive. It didn't apply to pre-enactment conduct.
It defined a sex offender, unlike SORNA, as somebody who
is convicted of a sex offense, and in guidelines issued
after Wetterling and after several subsequent amendments
to the Wetterling Act, the Attorney General interpreted
it as only requiring States to register offenders that
are convicted not only post-enactment but
post-implementation by the States. And one such cite
is 61 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Post- what?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Post-implementation by
the States. And so, 61 Federal Register cite 15,112 is
just one example of that type of regulation. And so,
when Congress enacted SORNA, it switched from "is
convicted" to "was convicted" in order to include
pre-enactment offenders.
Justice Kagan, to get to your question about
why is it all so complicated, our answer is that it
really is not. There's no reason why it couldn't have
applied on day one to all pre-enactment and
pre-implementation offenders. And to start off, when
you look about all pre-enactment and pre-implementation,
this is an incredibly large class. This is all existing
sex offenders on day one and all existing sex offenders
from many months and years going forward while the
States proceed towards implementation.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, why --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But then, as I indicated,
why would Congress have given you the authority to
exempt people? It seems to me that the -- the burden is
on you in the exact same way it's on Ms. Cain.
MS. SHERRY: In our view, what subsection
(d) was, essentially, was a safety valve. It wasn't
something that Congress thought the Attorney General was
going to need to use, but it was something that was
there for the Attorney General, should problems arise in
the course of implementation.
JUSTICE ALITO: What would happen in -- in
this situation: Someone is convicted of a sex offense
before SORNA is enacted; then shortly after the statute
is enacted, the person moves to a new State, does not
register; then after that, the Attorney General,
exercising the authority that you say he has under --
exercising -- excuse me, exercising the authority under
subsection (d), determines that SORNA shouldn't apply to
people who were convicted of offenses before its
enactment? Would that person have committed a criminal
offense?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I think at the -- at the
time he acted, yes. I suppose the Attorney General
could decide whether or not he was going to apply his
regulation prospectively or retrospectively. But I
think the important point is the same result is reached
under Petitioner's view.
On Petitioner's view, the Attorney General
has full and complete control of the light switch.
Congress didn't do anything and simply left it for the
Attorney General to turn the lights on. We don't think
that's right for a number of different reasons, one of
which is the way that Congress delegated authority to
Attorney General in subsection (d). If --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if Congress wasn't
sure whether it wanted -- whether it was appropriate to
apply SORNA retroactively, then I just -- and,
therefore, was willing to leave that to the Attorney
General, then I don't understand why it would have made
the Act applicable immediately upon enactment --
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Our --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- pending a determination
by the Attorney General.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Our understanding is that
Congress did know that it wanted to include as a general
matter all pre-enactment -- and again, not just
pre-enactment but pre-implementation offenders as --
offenders as well. And I think we know that because
when you look to the provisions that actually speak to
what a sex offender was required to do under the Act --
and there are six such provisions -- they all start the
same way. They say that the sex offender shall do
something. And it defines the sex offender as somebody
who was convicted.
When you look at all six of those provisions
on their face, they apply to all sex offenders so
defined without any qualification. And Petitioner's
view is that despite that clear language, despite the
lack of any qualification within those provisions, by
virtue of subsection (d) what Congress is really saying
is that nobody has to register until the Attorney
General says otherwise.
JUSTICE BREYER: So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, how do they know
where to register? Do you agree with your adversary
that -- that they have to register under SORNA?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: No, I -- they don't have
to register under SORNA --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, how were they
supposed to know when or how they would register until
the Attorney General acted?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Sure. If I could break
it up into a few classes. Again, we are talking about
pretty much -- actually, we are talking about everybody
on day one. And so, for a number of pre-enactment and
pre-implementation offenders, they're still going to be
in prison on the day that SORNA was enacted.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm not talking about
those people.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Okay. So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Not the people who can
comply with (b).
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm talking about the --
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: So, people -- and then
the second group I was going to talk about are offenders
like Reynolds, who have already registered before SORNA
was enacted. They're already initially registered.
It's the very same State registry system that
pre-existed SORNA. There is no creation of any SORNA
registry, and the statute itself doesn't talk about a
SORNA-compliant registry. To the contrary, it defines a
sex offender registry in 16911, subsection (9). And
it's on page 10a of our brief. It defines a sex
offender registry as a registry of sex offenders
maintained by a jurisdiction.
So, these are the same registries that have
been in existence in all 50 States for the last decade.
So, offenders like Reynolds don't have to do anything
under (b); (b) simply doesn't apply to them. They do,
however, as pointed out, have to comply with the other
provisions. They do have to do what (c) requires, which
is when Reynolds moved from Missouri to Pennsylvania, he
had to tell somebody. That is what (c) requires; it's
what he was required to do even before SORNA was
enacted. And what Congress did with respect to the
subset of sex offenders that haven't already registered
before SORNA but that need to get on the registry rolls
afterwards because, for example, their sex offense
wasn't covered before SORNA --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, your -- your
argument is that "requirements" in the heading for 42
U.S.C. 16913, Registration requirements for sex
offenders, means something different than "requirements"
in subsection (d), which the Attorney General can issue
rules about, because you're saying, although there is
the requirement that they register and comply with (c)
and all those other things, when it says that the
Attorney General can issue regulations specifying the
applicability of the requirements of this subchapter,
that only meant the administration, you know,
provisions, not the general requirement that you
register and keep current and all that.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: No, I don't think that
that is what we are saying. What we view (d) as,
essentially, is a safety valve. It does give the
Attorney General that authority with respect to the
requirements, but going forward. Congress has set the
baseline; Congress has set the default rule.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's a safety valve
to release what?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: To release sex offenders
if needed to -- to perhaps suspend certain registration
requirements. And let me give a couple of examples.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you are
talking about sort of in the weeds, the little details,
not the underlying requirement of registration, right?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: No, I think it -- I think
arguably it could be both. Again, I don't think this is
something that Congress thought the Attorney General was
necessarily going to have to exercise. And, in fact,
the Attorney General has not done so.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But does that mean, Ms.
Sherry, that -- that the Attorney General could, if he
wanted to, for whatever reason, could exempt all
pre-enactment offenders from SORNA?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I think as a theoretical
matter, on its face, the delegation of authority in (d)
is -- is quite broad and plenary. But I think as --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And would allow that. So,
when you say it gave the Attorney General the ability to
confirm or modify the requirement in section (a), you
mean he could, if he wanted to, exempt all pre-enactment
offenders.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: And, again, I say in
theory because I think, like all delegations of
authority, the Attorney General is certainly limited to
acting in furtherance of the purpose of Congress, and
here we know what was its purpose.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, we had a case
involving the meaning of "modify," and it doesn't --
doesn't mean "repeal." So, he presumably couldn't
suspend the whole thing.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I -- I do know what case
you are talking about, and I have read it, and that's
certainly true.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But to confirm --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You want to share it
with the rest of us?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I'm not saying I
definitely remember the name. I think it was MCI, but
-- but I do know the case you are talking about. I
mean, here the word is "specify" as opposed to "modify."
And I guess there could be an argument --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It authorized the FCC to
modify the requirement to post rates, and the FCC simply
eliminated the requirement to post rates, and we said
that that was no good.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: And -- and I -- I suppose
a similar argument could be made with respect to
"specify." I don't think it necessarily has to be --
JUSTICE BREYER: Leaving the language aside,
I'd like to go back to what Justice Sotomayor was
asking. We are talking, it seems to me, about section
50. He was convicted of violating, criminally, that
section. So, I have no problem about the statute
applying to all these people; it's a question of how it
applies.
All right. Imagine with me that we have an
individual who was convicted a year ago and sentenced to
a 5-year term. Does the statute apply to him?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: He was convicted a year
ago --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, correct.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: -- of a sex offense?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, correct.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: In our view, the statute
does apply.
JUSTICE BREYER: Of course, it does. Of
course, it does.
Now, he hasn't registered yet. He's in jail
for 4 more years. So, has he violated 2250 so far?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: He has not.
JUSTICE BREYER: Not? Thank you.
So, a person who has recently -- recently --
committed the crime, is in prison, is under an
obligation to register, is yet not in violation because
the time for initially registration -- registering has
not yet expired. Now let's go back to a person who is
far less certain how it applies. He committed the crime
or 15 years ago. He has long since been released
from prison.
There are, as you point out, several
categories. One is a person who has to -- who should,
under Michigan State law, register, but he didn't.
Another is a person who did and moved. You know, there
are several categories.
Now, is he in violation of 2250? Your point
is he is immediately, even though it was much less clear
that it applied to him, much less clear. And much less
clear -- in fact, it doesn't say when he is supposed to
register, but still 2250 applies to him.
I just wonder how that could be,
particularly when we have three sentences, indeed, which
seem to me to tell the Attorney General, certainly,
please deal with that kind of a case.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: If I could start with
50 and then go back to subsection (d), that is not our
position. 2250 is the criminal provision. What we're
actually looking at here are the registration --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought he was convicted
of a crime.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: -- requirements.
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought he was convicted
of a crime under 2250. That's why I asked the question.
And his lawyer said, in response to my question, that
one of the things she wants to argue is that he cannot
be convicted under 2250 until he is under a legal
obligation to register, and that initial registration is
not a legal obligation until the Attorney General makes
his rules. I thought that was the argument.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Let me make an important
distinction. If we're actually talking about Reynolds
here, you are right, but Reynolds was not convicted and
was not prosecuted for failing to comply with the
initial registration requirements in subsection (b). He
was convicted and prosecuted for failing to comply with
the timing requirements in subsection (c), which are
quite clear as applied to offenders like Reynolds, who
have already registered or already in the system.
What he did was he traveled from Missouri --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, subsection (c) says he
has to, not later than 3 days --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is this? Do you want
to tell us where it is?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I'm sorry. This is on
(a) of the Government's brief.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's very helpful to know
what you're talking about.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Absolutely.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But you're suggesting, Ms.
Sherry, that (b) and (c) have nothing to do with each
other. And, in fact, one can read (a), (b), and (c) as
all integrally linked and referring only to
post-enactment offenders. So, (a) is the umbrella
provision. It says "a sex offender shall register, and
keep the registration current"; (b) says how you shall
register initially; and (c) says how you shall keep that
registration current.
So, all three of these refer only to
post-enactment offenders. And then (d) comes along and
says, by the way, the Attorney General can apply all of
this to pre-enactment offenders as well and can specify
how to do that.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Again, I don't think
that's right. And if it helps, I'd like to walk through
the different provisions. The one thing I would say on
the outset, however, is when you say that -- when you
read those sections, you can read them as only applying
to post-enactment offenders -- I don't think that's
right, especially because of subsection (b), because on
the day that SORNA was enacted, every single person in
prison at that time was by definition a pre-enactment
offender. And so, on its face when you read subsection
(b), it quite easily applies to quite a number of
pre-enactment offenders.
And the other point I would make along those
lines is the fact that subsection (d) just doesn't talk
about pre-enactment; it talks about pre-implementation
offenders. So, offenders that were convicted after
SORNA's enactment but before a State had implemented,
again, quite easily fit not only within subsection (b)
but within all the other subsections as well.
And with respect to the interrelationship
between them, I think subsection (a) really identifies
the jurisdictions in which an offender needs to
register. And so, the first sentence sets out three
jurisdictions and where an offender both needs to
register and to keep the information current.
Subsection (b) really serves a limited
purpose. It's an intake process. It's getting an
offender into the system. For offenders like Reynolds
who are already in the very same system, there's nothing
to be done under (b); (b) simply doesn't apply to them.
(B) is applied to people who are not already in that
system, and for those that can comply with the timing,
it gets them in before they're released to the
community.
But the inability to comply with subsection
(b) for the small set of offenders that cannot comply
with the timing requirements, it doesn't immunize them
from complying with all of the other registration
requirements.
JUSTICE BREYER: In other words, you're
reading (c) as saying, to go back to my example, the
person who was convicted last year and has 4 more years
to do his initial registration -- nonetheless, if he
changes his name, if he stops being a student while in
prison, he has to register tomorrow or the day after.
would say if that's your reading of those two sections,
it's -- it's going to confuse everybody who is in
prison, as it did confuse me.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: That is not my reading of
the statute.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. Then I take it
your reading is he does not have to fulfill (c) until
after he has to have initially registered. And so,
we're back to the question of why you treat somebody who
committed the crime long ago with less clarity, with
less time to initially register, with more confusion
from one jurisdiction than another, than you would treat
a person who was convicted last year, is still in jail,
and has 4 more years to register. That's why I read (d)
as trying to sort that kind of thing out.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Two points on that:
Number one, for offenders like Reynolds that are already
registered, there's nothing more to be done as far as
registration goes. All they need to do is to keep the
information current and to keep it updated.
The other point I would make, since we're
talking about 2250, Congress provided other protections
for offenders that were unable to comply with the timing
requirements. Number one, it -- it provided an
impossibility affirmative defense in 2250(b). And the
other thing that Congress did is it required that any
failure to register, in order to be subject to criminal
sanctions, that it be a knowing failure to register. In
other words, that the offender know he has a
registration requirement and know that he is not
complying with that requirement.
So, the idea that there are some
hypothetical, or maybe even not so hypothetical, sex
offenders out there who can't comply with the precise
timing in (b) and will -- have no idea what they're
required to do, they're not going to be -- they're not
going to be criminally liable under 2250 because there
is an impossibility defense. And to the extent they
don't know that they have a registration requirement,
they're also not going to be criminally liable under
50.
And so --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why -- why isn't
part of your answer to Justice Breyer's question that
the one person who doesn't have to register for 4 years
is in prison already; so, presumably, he doesn't present
the same type of threat that led to the enactment of
these registration laws in the first place?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: That's absolutely right.
I mean, the release from -- the reason the release from
prison is the -- is the trigger is because the concern
and the reason we have registration is for periods of
time where these offenders are released into the
community.
And that's why the timing requirement in (b)
is there. The notion is that, before offenders are
released into the community, we want to get them on the
registry rolls; we want to be able to track them from
the day that they're released.
JUSTICE BREYER: I see. Your view is that
they have to register initially when?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: If they have not?
JUSTICE BREYER: No, no, I'm just saying
take my example. The person is in Michigan. Michigan
does have a sex registration thing, but he never
actually did it. So, now this Federal Act comes in, and
now when is he supposed to register? When's his initial
registration?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: He is to register within
a reasonable time.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, reasonable time.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: He can only be --
JUSTICE BREYER: And what is a reasonable
time?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Given the other timing in
the rest of the requirements, something probably along
the lines of, give or take, 3 business days. The
important point, however --
JUSTICE BREYER: In 3 business days, he's
supposed to go out and do that, and if he doesn't do it,
he has committed a Federal crime which makes no mention
of it, no mention at all, and he's just supposed to
guess that that's 3 business days because he's a lawyer;
is that why?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: No, it's actually -- it's
not unique with respect to the statute. It's quite
common for status offenses, and let me try to give one
example. One of the statutes that this Court looked at
fairly recently, 922(g)(9), makes it unlawful to possess
a firearm after having a conviction for a misdemeanor
crime of domestic violence. That statute was passed in
96, and it applied to everybody who has been convicted
of a domestic violence offense.
And so, if an individual had a domestic
violence conviction in 1990, for example, and had had a
firearm in his house, in his possession, for the last
years, when the statute was passed in 1996 he was in
violation of the statute. Of course, he couldn't be
criminally prosecuted unless he was given some
reasonable period of time to get rid of the firearm.
But there's nothing unique with respect to that.
And, again, the criminal provision here,
50, provides additional protections. It has an
affirmative defense for impossibility, and it requires
that there be knowledge. So, for an offender that knows
he is required to register, he's given a reasonable
amount of time to come into compliance with that
registration requirement.
Reynolds, in particular, is a good example
here of what Congress was trying to get at. Reynolds
knew he was required to tell somebody when he moved from
Missouri to Pennsylvania. He knew that because he
signed registration forms in Missouri telling him as
much. And those are in the joint appendix at pages
--
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But those were under
Missouri law, not under the Federal statute.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: They were -- they were
under Missouri law, but the important point for SORNA
purposes is that he knew he had a registration
requirement. He doesn't have to know what law it arises
under. And, again, the sex offender registries that
pre-existed SORNA are the exact same sex offender
registries that SORNA is using.
SORNA was enacted in 2006. It wasn't
starting over; it wasn't starting from scratch. It
wanted to build on the previous regime. It wanted to
fix it and make it better and fill in gaps and fill in
loopholes and stitch all of the State systems --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And providing
criminal penalties that weren't always there.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Well, the criminal
penalties --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's a big change.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: The criminal penalties --
the Federal felony criminal penalties were not there
before. Wetterling did have a misdemeanor penalty, and
a number of States did have penalties. But, again, the
criminal penalty is distinct from the registration
requirement, which is what we actually are looking at
and what we're interpreting, the registration
requirement, violation of which can result in criminal
penalties in certain circumstances. But, again,
Congress provided additional protections for those
circumstances. The registration requirements themselves
not only apply to sex offenders and tell sex offenders
what they're required to do; it also tells States and
other jurisdictions what they're required to do if they
want to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your theory --
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: -- actually implement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Your theory of what
the Attorney General did here, as you put in your -- I
forget what, the regulations or the -- was confirm the
applicability of SORNA, right?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Our --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's the word you
used, I think, on page 12 of your brief.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: We did. One of the
things he did was confirm. In the interim rule, the
Attorney General, in the preamble section, read the
statute exactly as --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: -- as we read the
statute.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What is the other
example -- do you have any other example where an
Attorney General confirms the applicability of a
criminal law?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I don't know if I would
say "confirm." There certainly are other examples where
the Attorney General has had authority and exercised
authority to define certain aspects of criminal law.
Touby is one example of such a case. And I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, that's
different. I mean, if you're talking about defining
which drugs are qualified, you know, under provisions
that criminalize possession, things like that. That's
is clarification going forward. I'm talking about
straightforward confirming, which is what you say
happened here.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Oh, well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You know, the law
says this, and I -- I think it means -- I think it means
what -- what you say it means.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I mean, I think there are
a number of examples where, for example, agencies do
little more than restate what the statute says. I think
that this Court doesn't give deference in those
circumstances, but it's certainly within the scope of
the general authority of an agency or the Attorney
General in this case to reiterate the statute's
requirement.
The Attorney General went -- went a step
further in the interim rule in that what the Attorney
General said in the preamble is: I read the statute as
written. I think it applies facially to all sex
offenders regardless of the date of conviction, but I
understand the defendants are making an argument to the
contrary. And in an abundance of caution, to foreclose
that argument to the extent I need to do something under
subsection (d), I'm doing it now, and I'm saying that,
yes, it applies to all pre-enactment and
pre-implementation offenders. And I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, I get back to my
question, which -- what's your best example of an
Attorney General doing something like that?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Confirming? I don't know
if I have one in a criminal context exactly, but I think
the point maybe that Your Honor is getting at -- you can
certainly correct me if I'm wrong -- might be a point
that you made earlier. It certainly is somewhat unusual
delegation of authority to the Attorney General. If
Congress had wanted the Attorney General to decide
whether or not the registration requirements at the very
core of this statute had any operative effect going
forward, presumably it would have told the Attorney
General that he needed to do something.
That's something that Congress did in many
other provisions of SORNA where Congress said the
Attorney General shall do something. In fact, more than
a dozen provisions -- Congress used that language to
direct the Attorney General to take a certain action.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, here it says
"shall." It says, "The Attorney General shall have the
authority to specify the applicability of the
requirements of this subsection."
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: But it says "shall have
the authority." And I think there's a significant
difference between "shall specify" and "shall have the
authority to specify." The latter is a passive
delegation of authority; it's a permissive delegation.
It suggests that Congress did not think that the
Attorney General had to do something for the statute to
apply as written. It suggests that the statute applied
on day one to all pre-enactment and pre-implementation
offenders as all the other subsections that set forth
the registration requirements suggest, but if the
Attorney General in the future sees a need to specify
the applicability going forward, then he has the
authority to do that. Not that he --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But the question --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You're starting from a
proposition, counsel, it seems to me, that Congress
necessarily and under all circumstances thought that it
had to include pre-SORNA convictions. But I don't
know -- yes, it wanted a uniform system, but it had
State systems in place; it had an imperfect Wetterling
Act in place. It had lots of other mechanisms in place
to punish non-registrants.
So, you're starting from the proposition
that, by necessity, they wanted to include preconviction
felonies. But I guess for those of us who believe in
legislative history, and I know many of my colleagues
don't believe in it or pay attention to it, there were
two bills passed on SORNA, one a House bill that made it
very clear, explicitly clear, that it applied to
pre-SORNA conviction felons; and the Senate bill which
under the label Retroactivity had the terms that (d) now
has.
Doesn't that suggest to us that Congress
itself was unsure of whether it wanted to include the
pre-SORNA convictions or not?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: I don't think so, and for
two reasons. First, to address the bills themselves, I
don't think the Senate bill, just like I don't think
subsection (d) means that Congress meant to apply the
registration requirements to all pre-enactment offenders
in the registration provisions and then take away that
application in the specify the applicability provision.
In the Senate bill that you're talking
about, it defined a sex offender as anybody who has been
convicted of a sex offense. And as this Court said in
Carr, that's the language that Congress quite often uses
when it intends to include pre-enactment conduct.
So, I think the verb choice, both in the
Senate bill, in the House bill, and in the bill that was
actually enacted, indicates that it did intend to
include pre-enactment offenders.
The other point I'd want to make is, again,
another point that was made in Carr, which is that the
registration requirements stand at the very center of
Congress's efforts to find and to register the 100,000
missing sex offenders that had fallen off the registry
rolls under the previous regime.
So, I think it is quite clear with respect
to SORNA that Congress did want to include pre-enactment
offenders. It wanted to not only find those missing sex
offenders; it wanted to make sure that they got back on
the registry rolls. And as far as the hundreds of
thousand offenders that were already on the registry
rolls when SORNA was enacted, they wanted to make sure
that they stayed on the registry rolls, that they kept
the information current, they continued to update their
information going forward.
And, again, with respect to pre-enactment
offenders that were in prison at the time that SORNA was
enacted, it wanted to make sure to get them on the
registry rolls before they left prison, before they
entered the community.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I guess my problem is
that you make an assumption, you continue to make an
assumption that if the Attorney General hadn't acted --
that the Attorney General was incapable of acting
quickly.
I mean, if the Attorney General had, within
a few months, done what he ultimately did a year later
or whatever time period after, had come out and said it
applies; this is what you do; briefly, you register
wherever you were convicted or -- et cetera, if you move
or change your name -- then Congress would have
accomplished the goal it wanted.
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: If the -- if Congress had
wanted the Attorney General to act and to act quickly,
presumably Congress would have told the Attorney General
that he had to do something. Again, that's something
Congress did in many other provisions of SORNA.
Congress wasn't shy about --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, why did -- the
Attorney General did try to act very swiftly, and if the
Attorney General thought that SORNA applied from day
one, why did the Attorney General try to rush through
regulation that said nothing more than SORNA applies?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: Because when the Attorney
General issued the interim rule, what he said was that
reading it on the face, I do think it applies to
everybody, but I recognize the defendants are making an
alternative argument. And I think it's incredibly
important that it apply to everybody, and that it apply
to everyone quickly, because we're talking about
protecting our communities; we're talking about
protecting the public and protecting our children from
sex offenders. And having this uncertainty out there is
-- is not only not good for protecting the public, but
it's not good for sex offenders; it's not good for
jurisdictions that are trying to work towards
substantial implementation of SORNA.
And so, I think you could look at it one of
two ways. If the idea is, well, Congress left it to the
Attorney General, but the Attorney General could have
acted very quickly, I think that suggests that there
probably wasn't that much for the Attorney General to do
in the first place, and there's little reason that
Congress would not have made that decision on its own.
To the extent you think there was a whole
bunch of things for the Attorney General to do, which,
again, we disagree with, presumably that's something
that would take some time. And during the interim,
period those 100,000 sex offenders would remain missing;
additional sex offenders would be added to that number;
and the community and the public would continue to be at
risk going forward.
If there --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if -- what if
we think the reason Congress left it to the Attorney
General is because they just didn't want to decide? Or
some people were saying this is fine but not
retroactive, and others were saying it should be
retroactive. Do you see any constitutional issues with
Congress delegating that authority to the Attorney
General, the authority to make a criminal statute
applicable on a retroactive basis?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: We don't see any
constitutional difficulty with it. Of course, we don't
think that's what Congress did. But we do -- we do
think that the notion that Congress would delegate such
a fundamental issue to the Attorney General in such
subtle and opaque terms that the Attorney General didn't
think he needed to do anything is quite significant when
you look to see what -- what Congress was intending.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, it would
strengthen your case if you would at least acknowledge
that it would be constitutionally doubtful. You
wouldn't have to say it's bad, but if you said it's
doubtful --
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: That is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- it would strengthen your
case, wouldn't it?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: That -- that might
strengthen our case here --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But it would also work
against your own interpretation, because your own
interpretation allows you to exempt anybody that you
want from the statute; isn't that right?
MS. ARBUS SHERRY: It does, but we do think
there's a different starting point, and the difference
in starting point is a fundamental difference, as Your
Honor noted. Our argument looks like a lot like
prosecutorial discretion; whereas, the other starting
point is that Congress decided nothing and left it all
to the Attorney General.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Cain, you have 3 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF CANDACE CAIN
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. CAIN: I'd like to address one point the
Government made, that there's no need to re-register --
someone in Mr. Reynolds's position -- once they've been
registered under State law. They acknowledge the
opposite themselves in footnote 12, where they say
that -- that a government or a State will have been
deemed to substantially implement SORNA if it registers
pre-enactment and pre-implementation sex offenders who
remain in the system as registrants, as well as other
people. So, it's clear that the Government
believes that -- acknowledges that people who are
already registered must re-register under SORNA.
The most important thing is that this -- the
SORNA statute -- the obligation under SORNA begins with
initial registration and does not begin with a State
registration. And enactment -- Congress knew that
certain people would be unable to register under
subsection (b), and that is why they enacted subsection
(d).
We ask the Court to remand to the district
court and to allow Mr. Reynolds to pursue his claim.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the case in the
