IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
EVAN MILLER, :
Petitioner : No. 10-9646
v. :
ALABAMA. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, March 20, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:25 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
BRYAN A. STEVENSON, ESQ., Montgomery, Alabama; for
Petitioner.
JOHN C. NEIMAN, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Montgomery, Alabama; for Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
BRYAN A. STEVENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JOHN C. NEIMAN, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
BRYAN A. STEVENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 55
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:25 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 10-9646, Miller v. Alabama.
Mr. Stevenson.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN A. STEVENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. STEVENSON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
In Graham v. Florida, this Court recognized
that children are inherently characterized by internal
attributes and external circumstances that preclude a
finding of a degree of culpability that would make a
sentence of life imprisonment without the possibility of
parole constitutionally permissible under the Court's
Eighth Amendment excessiveness analysis.
While the issue in Graham involved juveniles
that were convicted of non-homicide offenses, these
deficits in maturity and judgment and decision-making are
not crime-specific. All children are encumbered with
the same barriers that this Court has found to be
constitutionally relevant before imposition of a
sentence of life imprisonment without parole or the
death penalty.
In fact, in Roper, this Court acknowledged
that these differences between children and adults exist
even in the cases involving the most aggravated murders.
These deficits, these differences, are even more
pronounced in young children.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Stevenson, but in
Roper, the Court also made the point -- when it ruled
out the death penalty, it said, "To the extent the
juvenile death penalty might have residual deterrent
effect, it is worth noting that the punishment of life
imprisonment without the possibility of parole is itself
a severe sanction."
So, the Court in Roper seemed to be
anticipating this case and suggesting that -- that it
was all right, it was constitutional.
MR. STEVENSON: There's no question, Justice
Ginsburg, that the -- the default sentence in Roper was
life imprisonment without parole, but we actually think
that, specifically with regard to that provision, there
is no greater deterrent effect, and these deficits, that
these problems that children experience, lend themselves
to an analysis that is subject when the punishment is
life imprisonment without parole. Like the death
penalty --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What about 50 years? Is
that -- is that too much?
MR. STEVENSON: What the Court held in -- in
Graham --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you know, once --
once you depart from the principle that we've enunciated
that death is different, why is life without parole
categorically different from 60 years or 70 years or --
you know, you'd be back here next term with a 60-year
sentence?
MR. STEVENSON: Justice Scalia, I think
you're absolutely right, that there is a point at which
a term-of-year sentence could constitute the same kind
of judgment --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. STEVENSON: -- as life imprisonment
without parole.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Good.
MR. STEVENSON: But there is a distinction
obviously between life imprisonment without parole and
any other term sentence. Those sentences in most
instances, if the sentence is not too extreme, do permit
the possibility of release. And what this Court held in
Graham is not that the State forfeits the ability to
incarcerate for life --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'll change my -- I'll
change my question to 50 years without possibility of
parole.
MR. STEVENSON: I – in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then you have no -- no
distinction, right?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think there, it
would be a tough case. I think imposed on a juvenile, a
-year sentence --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Without --
MR. STEVENSON: -- would not create the
meaningful possibility of release that this Court
ordered in the Graham context. It would be right on the
line, but I think 50 years would actually be on the
other side of a meaningful possibility of release. It
would be sort of a cynical reaction, if this Court were
to say we ban life without parole for these kinds of
offenders, it would be somewhat problematic to suggest
that we're going to get as close to death as possible
and then facilitate some kind of review. I think what
we're interested in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How about 15 years old?
, 60 years; or 14, 70 years?
MR. STEVENSON: I think all of the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what's the
distinction between 14 and 15?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think from a
sentencing perspective, all of those sentences would be
problematic. But the distinction between a 14-year-old
and a 15-year-old for constitutional purposes is that,
of course, the younger you are, the more compelling are
these deficits, these distinctions, that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I understand, but how are
we -- how are we to know where to draw those lines? We
can't do it on the basis of any historical tradition,
certainly.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The common law left it up
to the jury to take account of the youthfulness of the
offender.
MR. STEVENSON: Well -- well I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They're all entitled to
jury trial, right --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- before they're --
MR. STEVENSON: Well, that's true. But, of
course, in this case, Justice Scalia, and in the other
case, there was no discretion for the sentence. Neither
the judge nor the jury could give any effect to the age
of Evan Miller, who was 14. But I also think that we've
identified lots of laws that make these distinctions.
We do provide for greater responsibilities --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Would that satisfy you if
the -- if it were not a mandatory term and it was left
to the trier, and you could put in all the mitigating
circumstances?
MR. STEVENSON: That would not satisfy me,
Justice Ginsburg, for all the reasons that this Court
acknowledged in Graham, that -- that the problem with
many of these crimes is that the offense itself can
overwhelm all of these mitigating factors, all of these
aspects of juvenile decision-making that we think are
constitutionally permissible. The other problem is that
we still can't make good judgments about whether a
child -- whether these characteristics are transitory or
permanent.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, you're saying it would
be unprincipled for us to say -- or at least unsupported
for us to say -- that the sentence cannot be mandatory,
but that in some cases, it might still be imposed.
MR. STEVENSON: I think it would be
principled to -- to kind of strike down mandatory
sentences, but I think constitutionally what this Court
has recognized in Roper and in Graham, that it would be
a -- a mistake to equate kids with adults. And we don't
have the ability to make those judgments even if we
create a different kind of process.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You mean we --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If you take that off the
table, then you leave us with nothing but saying that
the sentence is never permitted or that it's always
permitted.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I -- I don't mean to
take it off the table; I just mean to argue, as we did
previously, that a categorical ban would be consistent
with the Court’s understanding about child status and
development.
JUSTICE ALITO: If you could write the
opinion for us, what would you hold?
MR. STEVENSON: I would hold that children
are categorically prohibited from being subjected to
sentences --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's -- what's the
definition of a child for that purpose?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, we presented data in
this case that would exclude a youth 14 and younger. No
State that has set a minimum age for life without parole
has set it beneath the age of 15, other than one. And
so, we -- we would make that holding. I do think it
would be --
JUSTICE ALITO: So, you -- you would hold
you can't -- there cannot be a sentence of life
imprisonment without parole for anyone under 15, but for
anybody over 15, it would be permissible.
MR. STEVENSON: No, I would also hold, Your
Honor, that a mandatory sentence for that cohort would
also be in violation of this Eighth Amendment principle.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Or you could say you
reserve that question for another day.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think that the
problem, Justice Ginsburg, is -- is that these cases
with the mandatory sentencing aspects to them create
kind of a data issue that this Court has usually relied
on to kind of generate an interest.
I think right now we know that excluding
considerations of age and character in a sentencing
determination of life imprisonment without parole is
problematic. The Court in --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, can you tell us where the
age line needs to be drawn for constitutional purposes?
MR. STEVENSON: I -- I would draw it at 18,
Justice Alito, because we've done that previously; we've
done that consistently.
JUSTICE ALITO: That's where you think the
logic of your argument leads.
MR. STEVENSON: That's exactly right.
JUSTICE ALITO: And you would say that a
-- a person of 17 years and 10 months, 11 months, who
commits the worst possible string of offenses still --
and demonstrates great maturity -- still cannot be
sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.
MR. STEVENSON: That's right, for the same
reasons that we made that determination in Graham and
that the Court made that determination in Roper. And I
understand that there are some tensions when we draw
those kinds of lines --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. I thought
you just said a second earlier that you had a bifurcated
rule: No life without parole whatsoever for 15 and
under, and no mandatory life for 16 -- 15 and over.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that would be -- I'd
have two rules, Justice Sotomayor. My preferred rule
would be a categorical ban on all juveniles under the
age of 18. And I don't want to retreat from that in any
way. All of these deficits, all of these
characteristics, that we're talking about have been
recognized to apply to all youth up until the age of 18.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How do you -- how do you
write the opinion to do the bifurcated rule? What
justifies an absolute ban at a certain age and a
modified ban above an age, and how do you deal with
Harmelin with respect to the second part of your rule?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Harmelin says we don't
look at individualized sentencing.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, how do we get rid of
the mandatory if that's what we're were going to do?
MR. STEVENSON: It's a challenge, and I --
and I concede that. But I -- and so, the first part of
my answer would be that I think the easier rule to write
would be that there is a categorical ban on all life
without parole sentences for all children up until the
age of 18, acknowledging --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How -- how do I come to
that decision? What do I -- just consult my own
preferences on this matter? Something like 39 States
allow it. I mean, the American people, you know, have
decided that that's the rule. They allow it. And the
Federal Government allows it.
So, I'm supposed to impose my -- my judgment
on -- on what seems to be a consensus of the American
people?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, at least in this case,
you'd look to your precedent in Roper and in Graham,
which drew that line.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's not going to
help me, you know.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I understand --
(Laughter.)
MR. STEVENSON: I understand,
Justice Scalia, but I don't think you can draw much
comfort in the fact that 39 jurisdictions make this
theoretically possible. That same number existed in the
Graham context. Most of those jurisdictions have not
addressed a minimum age for life without parole.
In fact --
JUSTICE ALITO: What do you mean when you
say that, that they have not addressed it? If a State
law allows it, have they not addressed it?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. That is, what the
State permits is that --
JUSTICE ALITO: So, legislators don't
understand that their law permits this?
MR. STEVENSON: I don't think we can read
into a transfer judgment, which is the only judgment
that they've made. They've said that some children of
some age can be treated like adults. They haven't
talked about what that -- what the punishment should be.
And the reason why I say that, Justice Alito, is that in
many of these States, there's no minimum age for trying
a child as an adult.
JUSTICE ALITO: But I don't really
understand this argument. You mean the legislatures
have enacted these laws, but they don't realize that,
under these laws, a -- a person under the age of 18 may
be sentenced to life imprisonment without parole for --
for murder. They don't understand that?
MR. STEVENSON: They -- they have not
considered that or adopted or endorsed it, would be more
accurate.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's difficult because
the statistics show there are 2300 prisoners now under
sentence of -- with life without parole for juvenile
murders and they're -- that were committed under 18;
00 nationwide.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's correct.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So, it's very difficult to
assess your answer to Justice Alito that, oh, the
legislatures don't know about this.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, in -- that answer --
that number, Your Honor, is partly rooted in the fact
that these sentences are mandatory. There is no one
capable, once the court makes a decision to try the
child as an adult, to do anything to consider the status
of children.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Stevenson --
JUSTICE ALITO: If you think these
legislators don't understand what their laws provide,
why don't you contact them? And when they -- when you
tell them, do you realize that in your State a -- a
-year-old or a 17-year-old may be sentenced to life
imprisonment without parole for murder, they'll say:
Oh, my gosh, I never realized that; let's change the
law.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I -- I mean, I don't
think there are any legislatures that are -- that are
quick to make their sentences less -- more
compassionate, more responsive to -- to juvenile crime
of any sort. But --
JUSTICE ALITO: So, they've made a decision
on this. Now, maybe it's a bad decision --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- but I really don't
understand how you can argue that they have not made a
decision on this --
MR. STEVENSON: I think --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- and they are not aware of
what their law provides.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. I think the strength
of my argument, Justice Alito, is that the States that
have actually considered, discussed, and passed laws
setting a minimum age for life without parole have all
set that minimum age above 15. That's my primary
argument. Thirteen States have done it; all of them
except for one have set it at 18 --
JUSTICE ALITO: And you think there's a
difference between the State that says expressly a
juvenile below a certain age may be sentenced to life
imprisonment without parole and a State that says that
if a person is convicted of capital murder, that
sentence may be imposed and, in another -- in another
provision, says that juveniles may be transferred for
prosecution as adults.
MR. STEVENSON: I --
JUSTICE ALITO: There's a difference between
those two?
MR. STEVENSON: There is. And that's
because the -- the transfer question, which is what
informs whether children can be subject to these
sentences or not, is a very different question. It's a
question about whether the juvenile system that may
mandate release at age 18 or age 21 is adequate for an
offender. It's not a judgment that that child should
therefore be subject to life imprisonment without
parole.
And so, you have this disconnect. You have
transfer judgments, which this Court recognized in
Thompson and in Graham were not proxies for sentencing
judgments. And because of that, it is a very different
calculation.
The second point is that if there is no
minimum age for trying children as adults or even
prosecuting children as adults, I think we'd have to
concede that there is an age at which a life without
parole sentence would be constitutionally impermissible
for any crime. And to the extent that the State hasn't
addressed that, which they clearly haven't -- you know,
in this cohort of 79 children with life without parole
for crimes at 14 and younger, more than half come from
States where there's no minimum age for trying children
as adults.
That means in that State, a 10-year-old
child would arguably have been contemplated by the
legislature to be an appropriate person for life without
parole, or an 8-year-old child and a 6-year-old child,
and I think that asks too much of these statutes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, there is no
question that you're dealing with a much smaller
universe of children sentenced to life without parole
who are 14 and under. There's an argument that that's
because so few of them commit the crimes. But putting
that aside, the universe is rather small.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right? There is a
much, much larger group, as Justice Kennedy pointed out,
for life without parole for juveniles at 15 and above.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Go back to my question.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I need an answer to it.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Which is, assuming --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- the bifurcated theory
that you proffered, tell me how we get around Harmelin.
How would you write that decision?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. Well, I think that,
first of all, what this Court has relied on when it has
looked at these numbers, what it has been trying to
figure out, are these objective indicia of society's
standards, its mores, its decency meter, if you will.
And we've looked at these numbers to inform us, are
these sentences that are -- that are consistent with
evolving standards of decency, or are they now beyond a
maturing society? And we've always found in these data
some measures.
In the death penalty context, we've looked
at that in the Roper area, in the Atkins area, and we've
been able to make some judgments. The reason why we
could do it in these death penalty cases is that, unlike
the cases here, the death penalty determination is
discretionary. The sentencer is required to consider
and evaluate a range of mitigating circumstances and
facts, including age, that help us assess whether the
determination that death is the appropriate punishment
means something in a society still trying to evolve.
Here that's not true. The majority of these
sentences are mandatory. So, the number tells us less
about what the Constitution requires if it --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Stevenson, do you have
statistics about how many of these sentences are imposed
on under 18-year-olds in non-mandatory States?
MR. STEVENSON: The -- the data on the
larger population is not as precise, Justice Kagan, as
it is with our younger population, but the majority of
States are mandatory States, and the estimates are about
that 85 percent of those sentences are mandatory
sentences. Certainly, the States that have the largest
populations -- Michigan, Pennsylvania -- these
States have mandatory regimes.
JUSTICE KAGAN: So, you think it would be
true, going up to age 18, that 80-plus percent are
imposed in States that have mandatory systems?
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's correct.
And, in fact, the overwhelming majority of those
sentences come from a handful of States where there is
very little discretion to impose a sentence other than
life imprisonment without parole.
And because of that feature, I don't think,
Justice Sotomayor, that the -- that the reliance on the
number is quite as powerful here as it has been in the
death penalty context, where that number represented a
very communal judgment with a lot of factors.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There wasn't a majority
in theory in Harmelin, and -- but at least three
Justices spoke about a gross disproportionality.
MR. STEVENSON: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is it your views that
life -- a mandatory life without parole for someone like
a juvenile is grossly disproportionate?
MR. STEVENSON: It is, for the very reasons
that the Court articulates in both Roper and Graham.
We're not arguing that life without parole is
disproportionate to the crime of aggravated murder.
We're arguing that the status of children, with all of
the deficits that childhood status creates, makes that
kind of judgment cruel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If we can focus on the
mandatory aspect of the case, I think -- I know you'd
prefer a more general rule -- it may be that we have to
have your general rule. I'm not sure. If I'm the trial
judge, and I have to determine whether or not I'm going
to give life without parole, and it's discretionary,
what -- what do I look at? Are -- can I get social
scientists to come in and tell me what the chances of
rehabilitation are? Are there -- are there statistics?
Now, we have some quite compelling stories
of rehabilitation in this case. I don't know if they're
isolated; I don't know where they are in the statistical
universe of how often rehabilitation is -- is
demonstrated and is real. What do I look at? What's a
judge supposed to do?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think one of the
problems, Your Honor, with -- with trying to make these
judgments is that -- that even psychologists say that we
can't make good long-term judgments about the
rehabilitation and transitory character of these young
people. That's the reason why in Graham this Court
didn't permit that kind of discretion. We know that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I thought that modern
penology has abandoned that rehabilitation thing, and
they -- they no longer call prisons reformatories or
whatever, and punishment is the -- is the criterion now.
Deserved punishment for crime.
MR. STEVENSON: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now, if that's the
criterion, is everything that you say irrelevant?
MR. STEVENSON: I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let's assume I don't
believe in rehabilitation, as I think sentencing
authorities nowadays do not. Both at the Federal and
the State levels, it's been made clear.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I -- I -- no. I think
it would still be relevant, Justice Scalia, but -- but I
also don't think that correctional facilities have
identified themselves as having no role to play in the
rehabilitative process. I mean, one of the problems
with this sentence of life imprisonment without parole
is that it actually bans and shields this population
from a whole range of services that are specifically
designed to rehabilitate: education services, treatment
services, anger management programs. All of these
programs exist within prisons, including the Federal
prisons, because we do care how people perform when they
are released. And so, corrections is still very much
the heart and soul of what we do.
But even if it wasn't, punishment
nonetheless has to be proportionate, and recognize that
it can be excessive. And what this Court has said is
that when you're looking at children, to equate the
failings of a child and an adult would be cruel. It
would be unfair to -- given our knowledge and
understanding of what developmental science has taught
us and what we know about kids.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, again, it seems
you're just forcing us into a -- a bipolar position.
We're either going to say that you can't prevail at all
or that everyone under 18 is -- cannot get life without
parole. I don't see this middle course --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- which you seem to have
abandoned, and you can't tell me how a judge would apply
it if we -- if we chose not to abandon it.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I -- I don't intend to
abandon it, Justice Kennedy. I mean, obviously, I'm
arguing for this categorical ban, but I think the Court
could obviously do something else.
We think that there is a basis for
concluding, unquestionably, that a child under the age
of 15 should not be exposed to life without parole based
on this Court's precedents and on the data that's
presented. The Court could set a categorical line there
and, at the same time, make a determination that
subjecting any child under the age of 18 to life without
parole where there is no ability to consider age is
fundamentally at odds with what this Court has now
constitutionally recognized in both Roper and Graham.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Stevenson, may I ask
you a case -- a question specifically about the Miller
case? There were two boys involved in this horrendous
crime. The older one took a plea and got life with
parole. Was the plea offered to Miller?
MR. STEVENSON: No plea was offered to
Miller. The -- what tends to happen, and there was some
evidence of this that was developed earlier, is that the
question was who was going to give a statement first,
who was the most cooperative, whose lawyer is most
effective at accomplishing that. There were some
complaints. There's a postconviction pending now that
makes some allegations about what the lawyer didn't do
to facilitate a plea. But, no, there was no offer of
life with parole made to Evan Miller.
And one of the difficulties, of course, in
these cases is that, you know, the younger you are, the
more vulnerable you are, the less experienced you are,
the less capable you are of managing these dynamics
in the criminal justice system that sometimes can be
very outcome-determinative.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Any idea how many
juveniles subject to a sentence of life without parole
do plead to a lesser sentence?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, no, it's very hard to
determine, mostly because States don't keep data --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
MR. STEVENSON: -- on the issue.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is there any reason,
just -- I realize it's speculation, but wouldn't you
think prosecutors would view that as a particularly
attractive offer to someone who's young in the sense
that they may regard the sentence as extraordinary
themselves, that it may be particularly attractive to
someone who's young in a way that it wouldn't be a
-year-old, a -- an offer of 25 years may not be as
attractive as it is to a 15-year-old?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, they might. And I
would concede, Your Honor, that this population is kind
of less equipped to make determinations about whether to
take a plea or whether to not take a plea than an adult.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It might be also a
basis for -- to question the statistics you put forward
about how often --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- this sentence is
actually imposed. In other words, the evolving
standards of decency you suggest -- the prosecutors in
the State may not be immune to that evolution, either.
MR. STEVENSON: They may not be, Your Honor,
but we haven't found sort of -- at least in this
population, any evidence that they are capable of
protecting children who, we believe at least, should be
protected.
And one of the interesting things, at least
looking at this cohort of 79, a great number of them
have older codefendants. Both of the kids in the cases
before the Court today have older codefendants who got
sentences that were less than life without parole. In
the Kuntrell Jackson case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but those
statistics aren't very helpful because we have no idea
in the particular cases as to whether or not perhaps the
older offender was less -- less guilty than the 16-,
-, 15-year-old.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's right.
Although in some of these cases actually, when you read
the opinions, you do see the evidence of the shooter not
getting the life without parole sentence and the
accomplice getting it. And I guess my point would be is
that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Did that happen in
Jackson?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, it did. Yes, it did.
And my point would be that it -- this younger population
is going to be disadvantaged in managing this aspect of
the process that I think is quite important when the
Court is trying to consider whether there should be a
categorical ban or something less than a categorical
ban.
And, Justice Kennedy, I don't mean to
suggest that the Court cannot, consistent with its
precedents, make a categorical ban under 17. But I also
don't mean to suggest that if the Court can't do that,
that there aren't ways of reconciling the precedents,
with drawing a line at 15 and striking down mandatory
life without parole. I would urge, for the reasons that
we've stated, that in these circumstances it's better to
have a sentence where you can make a judgment about
rehabilitation and public safety later in life.
We're not arguing that the State has to give
away the authority to incarcerate someone even for the
rest of their life -- life without parole, which is
available in this State, Alabama, would facilitate
that -- but create the meaningful possibility of release
that this Court has ordered to be constitutionally
necessary in Graham v. Florida.
I see my white light is on. I'll reserve
the rest of my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Stevenson.
Mr. Neiman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN C. NEIMAN, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. NEIMAN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Imposing life without parole sentences on
aggravated murder offenders like Evan Miller is in line
with the national consensus, is morally justified, and
is consistent with legitimate penological goals.
I'd like to touch on all three of those
points at some juncture today if I can, but I'd like to
start if I can with the conversation Mr. Stevenson was
having with a few of the Justices about the national
consensus issue in this case and more particularly what
we can infer about the judgment of legislatures and
ultimately the people, based on the statutes we have in
this case and the very different set of circumstances
we're looking at here than the circumstances the Court
was looking at in Graham.
Exhibit A on that front is the fact that out
of the 39 States or jurisdictions that allow this
sentence, as Mr. Stevens has indicated -- or Mr.
Stevenson has indicated, a good chunk of them, 27 in
all, make the sentence the minimum sentence under the
statute. That's an important fact both because it tells
us a little bit about the retributive goals that the
legislatures were trying to achieve through these
statutes, but it also --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Life without parole is the
minimum?
MR. NEIMAN: Life without parole is the
minimum sentence for anyone who commits an aggravated
murder or at least certain kinds of aggravated murders
in 27 of those jurisdictions.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's also -- that's also
the maximum because there could be no death penalty.
MR. NEIMAN: For a juvenile, yes, Justice
Kennedy, that's correct. And effectively the message
that the legislatures are sending is that with respect
to aggravated murders, the worst of the worst kinds of
murders, there are effectively two sentences. There is
either the death penalty or there is some sort of
mitigating circumstance. The person is at least going
to serve life without parole in order to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Of the numbers, the 79 to
-- I guess there's some disagreement whether it's 82
or 79. Regardless, in your opinion, or maybe it's in
the briefs -- I just can't remember it -- of those, say,
, how many are there for reasons of mandatory sentence
where they would not -- no one could consider the
individualized nature of the crime or the criminal?
MR. NEIMAN: We don't have precise
statistics, sir. I should say I --
JUSTICE BREYER: What's your estimate?
MR. NEIMAN: I can't vouch to the statistics
on that point.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's all right. What's
your estimate?
MR. NEIMAN: My answer is I don't know, in
terms of how many are mandatory and how many are not.
Mr. Stevenson --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, how many come from
the States that have this mandatory system? That
shouldn't be too hard to find out.
MR. NEIMAN: Well, overall, Mr. Stevenson
cited about 8 who were sentenced pursuant to
non-mandatory schemes, of the 79 to 82.
JUSTICE BREYER: Non-mandatory. So --
MR. NEIMAN: Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, you think it's
almost -- it's probably 90 percent.
MR. NEIMAN: According to Mr. Stevenson's
statistics, it's about 90 percent of the cohort that
comes from the mandatory jurisdiction.
JUSTICE BREYER: And that's -- all right.
Say it's about 70 or 71, and I remember reading a statistic
somewhere where they managed to count up the number of
possibilities, i.e., serious murders committed by those
under 15 over 50 years or some long number of years, and
it was somewhere in the 70,000s, was it? Or
20,000s? What was it?
MR. NEIMAN: Your Honor, the statistics I
have seen that Mr. Stevenson cited in his reply brief
had 7,500 --
JUSTICE BREYER: Seventy-five hundred?
MR. NEIMAN: -- as the number of arrests of
persons under the age of 15 for committing homicide or
non-negligent manslaughter.
JUSTICE BREYER: That sounds more – that sounds
about reasonable.
MR. NEIMAN: But that --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's about 1 percent.
MR. NEIMAN: It --
JUSTICE BREYER: One percent. If I carry
that number around in my mind, that 1 percent of those
who might have obtained this terrible penalty, 1 percent
are actually given it?
MR. NEIMAN: Your Honor, as Graham
indicated, that denominator is crucial. But the 7500
number cannot be the appropriate denominator for
determining whether actual sentencing practices indicate
a national consensus against this practice. The reason
why is because that 7500 number is not the number of
convictions; it's not the number of opportunities that
judges have had to impose this sentence. It is the
number of arrests, and it's the number of arrests over
the course of 40 years in every jurisdiction, including
those that don't impose life without parole at all.
JUSTICE BREYER: I see. All right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
JUSTICE ALITO: It's not even for homicide
offenses that would qualify for life imprisonment
without parole for an adult. It's for any non-negligent
homicide; isn't that right?
MR. NEIMAN: That's correct, Justice Alito.
And the real denominator here, the one the Court ought
to look at when it considers the role that actual
sentencing practices play in the analysis, ought to be
the number of aggravated murder convictions.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right, but what is --
MR. NEIMAN: That's a number we don't have.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- the justification? You are
going to get to this, I guess -- so, I'll -- but I want to be
sure you do at some point. And I'm not certain it's a
-- it's a cruel and unusual punishment argument. It may
be more of a due process argument. But I want to know
the justification -- giving all those statistics that
you've seen and that was in Roper and so forth --
procedurally speaking, what is the justification for not
giving the defendant any opportunity to point to
mitigating features in his lack of development, in his
age, in his upbringing, et cetera? That to me is a
difficult question, but before we get to that topic, I
don’t want to --.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Actually, I do want to
ask, and it dovetails with what Justice Breyer is
asking, the Enmund/Tison line for adults, which is we
can't execute someone who hasn't killed, intended to
kill, or was reckless in killing. This is a question
more in the Jackson case, because I think it's an issue
there. But although all murder is heinous and
regrettable, there are different kinds of murder.
That's why some people are subject to the death penalty
and others are not. And I do see a world of difference
between the Miller killing and the Jackson killing
vis-à-vis the individual defendants' personal liability.
So, assuming there are different kinds of --
of killings, of murder, should we be looking at the
Enmund/Tison line at all? Should we be talking about
its application to juveniles in a different way? Being
Enmund/Tison basically, okay, felony murder if you know
that there's a gun involved, but should that line be the
same for juveniles?
And, if so, then how do you go back to
justifying, as Justice Breyer spoke about, the mandatory
nature of life imprisonment without parole, given that
not every juvenile is equal and not every murder is
equal with respect to them?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Sotomayor, the clearest
line the Court could draw on this front would be the
line that the Court initially set out in Graham as
between homicide and non-homicide offenses. Perhaps
there would be some question about whether an
Enmund-type felony murder counts as a homicide offense
or not, but my suggestion is that it would, at least if
the Court is looking for a clear line that wouldn't
undermine too much of what the Court set out in Graham
in terms of clearly distinguishing between homicide and
non-homicide offenders.
Nonetheless, I certainly agree that there
are fundamental differences between certain kinds of
murders, and I think that judgment is reflected in the
legislation we have in at least 27 of these States,
where aggravated murder in the very -- in the very least
carries with it a life without parole sentence for any
defendant regardless of the mitigating circumstances or
the like.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's not an
individual legislative determination. That's -- that's
just a --
MR. NEIMAN: It is a legislative
determination that aggravated murder as a class of
offenses is so contrary to society's values and so
contrary to the dignity that we assume that every victim
ought to be afforded, that life without parole is the
appropriate sentence.
So, I think there is a -- there is an
inference to be made there about the legislative
judgment, particularly because the sentence is a minimum
one. The three-Justice concurrence you mentioned,
Justice Sotomayor, from Harmelin makes this point --
point quite vividly.
In Solem v. Helm, the Court had struck down
a sentence under the gross disproportionality analysis,
and the Harmelin concurrence indicated that the Court
was a little more comfortable doing that, because the
sentence in that case was above the minimum and, thus,
did not reflect the judgment of the legislature.
But when we're talking about the minimum
sentence, it's fair to infer that that's the sentence
that the legislature thought as a class, in terms of a
class of offenses, that would be the minimum appropriate
sentence for that particular crime. Now,
Justice Breyer --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, when you –
it's a little confusing to me, but when you refer to
"minimum," I assume that was because of the statutes prior
to Graham had death as one of the other options, that that
is no longer an option. So, it's -- it's a little
awkward to refer to it as minimum when it's also the
maximum.
MR. NEIMAN: That's correct,
Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: When you have --
when an individual is prosecuted for an aggravated
murder that carries this sentence, is it typical to also
charge lesser included offenses?
MR. NEIMAN: Yes, Mr. Chief Justice, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And -- and in
general, what is the distinction between exposure to
the -- the maximum crime and a lesser included crime?
In other words, what is the difference between
aggravated murder and manslaughter? It typically turns
on the state of mind, doesn't it?
MR. NEIMAN: That's correct,
Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, is there any
reason to think that juries in a case where they have
the option for lesser included offenses might be
concerned in light of the age of the defendant about
whether or not the requisite intent was formed?
It seems to me that some of the issues that
we've suggested justify a different treatment of
juveniles have to do with mental development, and those
same issues would be taken into account by a jury in
considering which of a list of offenses the juvenile
should be convicted of.
MR. NEIMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, it's
certainly within the realm of reason and possibility
for --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was it -- was it a factor
in Miller's case? Was there a lesser -- lesser offense
that was charged?
MR. NEIMAN: Yes, Justice Ginsburg, there
were lesser included charges of at least felony murder,
which has a very different intent type element to it.
But Miller, at least with respect to the charge on the
capital murder committed in the course of arson, which
is an intentional murder, was found guilty by the jury
on that charge.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: He was -- the -- there
was also a felony murder charge in the Miller case?
MR. NEIMAN: Yes, Justice Ginsburg, there
were two felony murder charges, one as to the robbery in
the case and one as to the arson in the case.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So -- so, it may not be
realistic to speak of mandatory life without parole.
It's only mandatory if the youth is convicted of the
highest charge brought, but it remains within the power
of the jury, in light of the youth, to convict him of a
-- of a lesser offense which would not produce mandatory
life imprisonment without parole.
MR. NEIMAN: I suppose that's so,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Neiman --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are juries instructed that
life without parole is a necessary consequence of their
decision? I suppose a defense attorney could argue it.
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kennedy, actually, I
think you are right to the extent you're suggesting that
juries probably don't -- aren't actually instructed on
that point. And, in fact, it would probably be
reversible error, I suppose --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I would think so.
MR. NEIMAN: -- for a jury to be instructed
on that point. Nonetheless, the judgment that
legislatures have reached in terms of setting life
without parole as the floor for any murderer
is one that was -- that's reasonable and justified
and --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Neiman, I am wondering if we
can go back to the issue that Justice Breyer left on the
table, and this doesn't have much to do with how many
States do what, but instead just to say that in the
death penalty context, we've insisted on individualized
sentencing. And in Graham, of course, we equated
juveniles who were sentenced to life without parole to
people who -- to adults who were sentenced to death and
said that those two should be treated equivalently.
And I'm wondering whether that doesn't
suggest that the rules we have in the death penalty
context about individualized sentencing ought to apply
to juveniles who are sentenced to life without parole?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kagan --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Regardless of, like, how
many States do what and how many times this happened,
but just, you know, two facts: We've insisted on this
in the death penalty context, and we've equated the
death penalty context to juveniles without life --
parole in Graham.
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kagan, the answer on
that front, I think, is that Harmelin effectively sets a
bright line here such that individualized sentencing is
only required in a -- in a death penalty case. And it
does so --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Yes, but of course Harmelin is
pre-Graham, and in Graham we equated these two things,
adults sentenced to death and juveniles sentenced to
life without parole.
MR. NEIMAN: Well, the reason why Harmelin
drew that line and, I guess more to the point, the
reason why Woodson v. North Carolina and Lockett v. Ohio
held that individualized sentencing was required in the
death penalty context was not because the sentence
happened to be the highest sentence that someone could
receive, but because the sentence was death. And there
were certain --
JUSTICE ALITO: In Graham, didn't the Court
reject the idea of individualized sentencing in which
youth would be taken into account on a case-by-case
basis?
MR. NEIMAN: That's correct, Justice Alito.
The States were here jumping up and down asking for that
precise result, and we did not get it. And the reason
why, the result the Court thought was appropriate was
rather than allowing the defendant to argue for
mitigating circumstances and for the State to respond
with aggravating circumstances in one of these cases,
the answer was for the juvenile to get a mitigation
trump card.
And in one of these sentencing proceedings,
the juvenile would be able to say: I'm a juvenile, and
that means that I don't get the highest sentence I
otherwise would get. I win the sentencing phase as --
as a matter of law.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But the fact that we've said
that individualized sentencing was not enough in one
context does not suggest that individualized sentencing
ought not to be the rule in a different context where
there is no categorical bar.
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kagan, the response on
that front, I think, is that the rule from Woodson and
Lockett requiring individualized sentencing was one
that's specifically tailored to the unique aspects of
the death penalty, aspects that remain unique,
notwithstanding Graham and the rule it imposed with
respect to juveniles.
But also Woodson and Lockett -- although I
realize that the premise of your question is that we
should not look at what other States are doing, the
premise of Woodson and Lockett was that States had
widely rejected mandatory death penalty sentencing, and
we know from the legislative record here that States
have done quite the contrary when it comes to mandatory
life without parole sentencing --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, is that -- I have -- I
understand their arguments, both sides. I think I've
pretty much got the arguments on the question of the
individualized sentencing. You can make an argument
that it should be individualized, life without parole,
up to age 18; say 7 through 17. And there's an argument
the other way which you're making. Okay.
What I want to know is your argument the
opposite way on this one. What's the minimum age, in
your opinion, or is there any constitutional minimum at
all in respect to which you could give for a murder a
child life without parole? I mean, you could have an
instance of a 10-year-old or an 8-year-old. I mean, is
it totally up to the States, or is there a minimum? And
if there is a minimum, what is it in your opinion?
MR. NEIMAN: Yes, Justice Breyer, I think
there is a minimum now.
JUSTICE BREYER: What is it?
MR. NEIMAN: It -- I would be hesitant to
commit to a minimum without --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, do your best.
MR. NEIMAN: -- without further factual
development.
JUSTICE BREYER: Do your best.
MR. NEIMAN: It would --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you want to say 12?
MR. NEIMAN: It would depend --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you want to say 10? Do
you want to say 9? Because as soon as whatever you say,
I'm going to say: And why not 14?
MR. NEIMAN: Okay. Well, I --
(Laughter.)
MR. NEIMAN: I will say -- I would argue if
I were the State up here trying to defend a
-year-old's sentence, I would argue that that was the
line. So, a 12 -- well, no -- well, yes. Someone who's
either --
JUSTICE BREYER: Do you see the difficulty?
All right. So, now put yourself in my position, because
my --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Gee-whiz. You know, I was
beginning to agree with you --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- about this case, because
I thought you were appealing to what the American people
think about the line or maybe to the common law. Now,
the common law had a rule of -- of the age of reason.
think below 12, you couldn't -- at least you couldn't
impose the death penalty. Maybe you couldn't even
convict for a felony. But you just pluck some number
out of the air.
MR. NEIMAN: No -- no --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why can't I pluck a number
out of the air if you pluck one out of the air?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Scalia, I was about to
give Justice Breyer the arguments that I would make if I
were the State in those circumstances about why that's
the line. Reason number one is national consensus.
JUSTICE ALITO: If we look to objective
indicia, as all of the cases in this line have, what is
the lowest age as to which you can say there is any
indication of a societal consensus that this is okay?
Wouldn't it be 14?
MR. NEIMAN: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: How many States allow it for
a 13-year-old or a 12-year-old?
MR. NEIMAN: The number of States that allow
it for a 12-year-old are somewhere around -- well, I
suppose that number is close to 10 or so.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is --
MR. NEIMAN: So, that's one reason why I
would draw the line around 12 or so. If you look at,
for example, the table --
JUSTICE ALITO: So that 10 States will allow
it for a 12-year-old. How many would allow it for a
13-year-old? Do you happen to know?
MR. NEIMAN: At that point, we're getting up
to much more substantial numbers. I guess when we get
up to 14, we're up to somewhere in the realm of 30 or more.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is it taken into account
when the -- the child is in the juvenile system
initially, has to be moved to the adult system. Is the
judgment -- is there any cutoff on the transfer? Or can
a child be transferred to the adult system at any age?
MR. NEIMAN: Well, that I think is the
appropriate line in terms of thinking about what the
minimum is here. The answer depends on the
jurisdiction. In Alabama, 14 is the minimum. But that
number is, compared to a lot of other jurisdictions, a
little high. There --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, if you're -- if
you're under 14, you can't be transferred out of the
juvenile system?
MR. NEIMAN: That's correct. In Alabama, if
you're under 14, you can't be transferred out. Now,
many other States, at age 13, you can be transferred
in -- or you can be transferred into the adult system,
which is why there are few 13-year-olds serving this
sentence. But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, if he were only 13,
he would get out when? When he was 21?
MR. NEIMAN: In Alabama, the juvenile
justice system's jurisdiction terminates at 21, yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's why he's arguing
that the legislatures don't focus on it. If you do a
public opinion poll, or just ask me, for example, or ask
anyone, you say the question is: Should -- at what age
should juveniles be able to be transferred out of the
juvenile system into the adult system?
You might get one answer. Maybe 14, maybe
, maybe 12.
But if you put the question, at what age
should they be receiving a mandatory life without
parole, the answer might be different. And his point is
they never ask that question. They ask the first
question, not the second. And that disturbs me enough
to think that I can't think the answer to this question
that I asked you just relies on public opinion polls or
even just the number of States. I'm not sure about it.
But that's why I want to hear your response,
because it sounds like we're arguing between whether it
should be 13, 12, or 14, in terms of an absolute cutoff.
So, how do I approach that? I'm asking you for help on
that one. I know you have a side in this. But I say,
well, we're talking about 14, and we have all this
scientific literature and so forth.
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Breyer, the reason why
it's fair to infer that legislatures would have
concluded that a 14-year-old, for example, in Alabama
would be subject to a mandatory life without parole
sentence is precisely because it's mandatory. Surely,
the legislatures understood that when they were
transferring persons who committed crimes like
aggravated murder that were well within the heartland of
the crimes for which the transfer statutes were
intended, those offenders would be subject to the
minimum sentences at least.
It's quite another thing to say, well, the
legislature might have enacted a statute providing for
transfer for a 14-year-old; and for a non-homicide
crime, they might have assumed that the person would get
less than the maximum in terms of life without parole.
But, surely, the legislators understood that those
offenders would at least get the minimum.
And the reason why the line is more safely
drawn at 13 or 12, it's because if you look at, for
example, the tables from the Department of Justice
reports that both sides and the amici have cited listing
the transfer ages, by and large, the number seems to cut
off at 12 or so. And 12 would be on the very bottom end
of the range; and if I were a defense attorney, I'd be
arguing much harder for a line at 13 than 12. I imagine
if I were a defense attorney, I'd be arguing for an even
higher line than that.
But the point is that if we're going to
judge this in terms of objective indicia of what society
has decided, that seems to be the line that society has
drawn. That line is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In the -- in the
Petitioner's briefs, the idea of deterrence kind of
drops by the way side. Have there been any studies that
show that there is a deterrence value? I remember in
Roper, there was actually discussion among the young
people before they committed the crime as to whether or
not they could get the penalty. It was actually right
there in the record. Does the State rely on the
deterrence component of the punishment here?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kennedy, we think that
deterrence is in the mix, but it's certainly not the
primary goal that these statutes serve when --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is it retribution?
MR. NEIMAN: Retribution, Justice Kennedy,
would be the primary goal, bringing society's
retributive force to bear on those who commit the worst
sort of crimes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Retribution, of course, is
related to personal culpability. We said that in Tison,
and that loops back into the minor problem.
MR. NEIMAN: That's exactly right,
Justice Kennedy, but I think one point on which Mr.
Miller and the State fundamentally disagree here is what
we can conclude about a juvenile's culpability when the
juvenile has committed aggravated murder. The reason
why Graham came out as it did, the reason why life
without parole was not permissible, was because Graham
himself had not committed murder. The Court there said
that meant that Graham's culpability was twice
diminished, once because he was a juvenile and once
because he had not committed murder.
Well, here we have the hypothetical from
Graham where the one level of diminishment is gone. And
Miller has -- Miller is entitled to a one-level
diminishment because of his juvenile status, but he's
not entitled to that second level of diminishment, which
he is what he's seeking here.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Are you aware of any
statistics that give us some quantitative sense as to
how many juveniles after years and years of prison show
significant rehabilitation? Do we know anything about
that?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kennedy, I know of no
statistics on that particular front. I imagine that
some vignettes could be told about success stories and
some vignettes could be told about stories that were not
success stories and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you have any reason to
think that juveniles are any better than anyone else as
far as learning from prison is concerned? I mean,
recidivism is a big problem, isn't it? People who've
been to prison go out and commit the same crimes again,
don't they?
MR. NEIMAN: That's exactly right,
Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is there any reason to
think that juveniles are any different?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Scalia, I haven't seen
any studies that would suggest that juveniles do better,
particularly when they're subjected to the sorts of
crimes that I think everyone would have -- or the sorts
of offenses, let me say, that I think everyone would
agree the Constitution would have to permit a sentence
of, say, 40 years minimum or the like.
So, I just don't think -- I think society --
society's primary goal here or the government's primary
goal here is expressing the retributive judgment about
the wrongfulness of murder and why it's different from,
not homicide, but I think governments are quite
legitimate and quite reasonable when they also say that
they don't want to roll the dice on convicted murderers.
Society acts with particular revulsion when a convicted
murderer commits a crime again.
And even if -- and even if that difference
in terms of recidivism is no different, or even if the
possibility for recidivism is no different, the fact
that the person committed a murder once and might commit
a murder again is reason enough for legislatures to be
hesitant to allow for parole in these circumstances.
With respect to the penological purposes,
there's also an important purpose here with respect to
the unique factors and the unique circumstances that
murder victims and their families face.
I think a lot of people hear about
life-without-parole sentences, and if they oppose them
on political grounds or policy-based grounds, one of
their sort of pragmatic responses is, well, what's the
cost to all this? Why not just let these guys get their
parole hearings, give them that hope, and likely they
won't get parole anyway?
And there's really no cost to society at
least in allowing that process to occur, but the cost is
to the victims and their families who have to endure
what are often very painful hearings and parole
hearings. And when those come up on a frequent basis,
that sort of re-traumatization process is something that
governments can legitimately take into account when they
decide that for aggravated murder -- and not for other
crimes but for aggravated murder -- a
life-without-parole sentence is an appropriate sentence.
On the moral culpability point, there would
be some anomalies created by the rule that Miller is
seeking here. Miller's asking the Court to effectively
hold him in the same place in terms of his moral
culpability as the defendant in Graham. In other words,
Graham can only get life with -- life with parole
because of his reduced moral culpability. And Miller is
saying he should only get life without parole because of
his reduced culpability.
So, that would mean one of two things:
Either the Eighth Amendment would put a murderer on the
same moral level as someone who committed a non-homicide
crime as in Graham, or Graham himself would be back in
this Court or a court of another jurisdiction arguing
that because Graham held that Graham himself had
categorically less culpability than someone like Miller,
then Graham himself is entitled to a lesser punishment
than the one that Miller, in fact, received.
JUSTICE KAGAN: When you look -- Mr. Neiman,
if you look at those two cases and you look at the
individuals, the child's actions in the two cases, they
really are remarkably similar. They're sort of a piece.
Don't you agree? I mean, how -- how is it that the
child's actions in this case were any different from
that in Graham?
MR. NEIMAN: Justice Kagan, I think that
Miller's actions were dramatically different from
Graham's actions, in part because Miller intended to
kill this victim and killed the victim in a rather
gruesome way. So, there's not an element of luck here
in terms of the fact that, oh, well, Graham was simply
lucky that he didn't commit --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's in -- in the
Jackson case. In the Jackson case, the crime was very
similar to --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I'm sorry. Justice Ginsburg
is, of course, right.
MR. NEIMAN: Well, I defer to my colleague
from Arkansas in terms of the distinctions between
Jackson and Graham, but certainly with respect to
Miller's crime, his moral culpability is greater, and
the law should recognize that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If the judge were to
determine under a rule that the sentence can't be
mandatory whether or not life should be imposed, what
would be the sorts of factors that he would look at, or
do you think those are just too ineffable, too imprecise
to be considered?
MR. NEIMAN: Well, Justice Kennedy, I think
it certainly would be possible to have a regime under
which a judge considered mitigating circumstances in a
case like this. Many jurisdictions have reasonably
opted for that route rather than the one that Alabama
and 26 other jurisdictions have, and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: They're the standard sorts
of mitigating circumstances that we see in capital
cases, you think?
MR. NEIMAN: Absolutely. I think that's
exactly what would happen. You would have arguments
about certain murders being worse than others. And Mr.
Miller would have an opportunity to argue about other
mitigating circumstances relating to his background and
the like, as he's argued in his reply brief here.
But at the same time, it's reasonable for
legislatures to conclude that they're going to draw a
line in the sand with respect to aggravated murder, such
that -- as a floor in terms of the appropriate
punishment, the defendant is going to get at the very
least life without parole, a punishment that's no doubt
severe but one that is less severe than the impact that
the crime has had on society.
And for those reasons, we'd ask the Court to
affirm.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Neiman.
Mr. Stevenson, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN A. STEVENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. STEVENSON: Thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice.
I just want to make clear that the rule we
seek would not require States to impose the same
sentence on juveniles convicted of homicides from
juveniles convicted of non-homicides. The States would
be free to do that if they chose to, but they could
certainly create a regime where it's life with parole
where there are different ages for eligibility. In
fact, the State of Nevada makes you eligible for parole
after 15 years if the crime is a non-homicide, 20 years
if it's a homicide.
The States would still have a great deal of
flexibility to create, consistent with this Court's
rule, a regime that makes these distinctions.
Justice Kennedy, I did want to point --
direct your attention to two amicus briefs that I think
respond to two of the questions you've raised. There is
an amicus brief submitted by criminologists in this
case, and it looks specifically at the question of
deterrence. And what they've found is life without
parole has not had any measurable deterrent effect. The
States that don't put juveniles -- don't subject
children to life without parole have actually
experienced the same level of decrease in violent crime
and homicide as the States that do. And, in fact, in
some of those jurisdictions, the decrease is even more
significant.
I also want to address your question,
Justice Scalia. There is -- there are some studies that
have established that juveniles are more likely or less
likely to recidivate after an intervention than adults.
Generally speaking, homicide offenders are categorically
less likely to recidivate than many non-homicide
offenders. Drug offenders and property crime offenders
are much more likely to recidivate than -- than homicide
offenders.
And so, there's a lot to support that a
judgment rooted in these penological concerns would be
well-supported here.
I also want to return, Justice Breyer, to
your question. Mr. Neiman has -- argued that we can
read into these statutes a commitment to imposing life
without parole at a particular age, and that age is the
age of transfer. I just want to highlight that the two
States with the largest populations of juveniles serving
life without parole by a huge margin are Pennsylvania
and Michigan, neither of which has a minimum age.
That means in those States, a child of any
age can be subject to a mandatory sentence of life
without parole. It's simply not true -- true that we
can read into those statutes in those jurisdictions any
kind of conscious commitment to thinking about age.
The other point I want to make --
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think the legislators
in Pennsylvania and Michigan don't understand what their
laws provide?
MR. STEVENSON: I -- I think that they
haven't thought about it. Yes, I do think that. I
mean, for example -- this goes to the next point I was
about to make -- my colleague keeps talking about
aggravated murder. In the State of Pennsylvania, it's
not just aggravated murder that subjects you to a
mandatory life without parole; if you're convicted of
second-degree murder -- no intent -- diminished -- it's
still mandatory life without parole.
We have 14-year-old children -- and, again,
that's the largest cohort in our group -- in the State
of Pennsylvania convicted of clearly unintentional
killings that have been subject to mandatory life
without parole.
South Dakota does the same thing. I think,
where there is no minimum age and where you have that
kind of regime, I cannot -- I don't think we can
conclude that they've thought about, yes, it's
appropriate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if they -- what
if they do? I mean, what if, after our decision or even
after the argument, States go back and say, look, the
decision is based on the fact that they don't think we
know our law, that we haven't thought about it; so,
let's have a hearing about it, and then we vote that,
yes, there should be or, no, there should not be a
minimum age; we think at 16 -- whatever age they do.
Then does the constitutional rule change?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Once we get 30
States saying, look, we've thought about it and this is
our answer, then whether the Eighth Amendment prohibits
it or not changes?
MR. STEVENSON: No, I -- I don't think it
changes, because there is an age at which this Court is
obligated under the Eighth Amendment to say a sentence
of this sort, a permanent judgment that life-long
incarceration is -- is required --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. But one of
the things we take into account is societal consensus,
and you say we should ignore the 30 -- whatever it is --
States that allow this because they didn't really think
about it.
MR. STEVENSON: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, I'm
postulating --
MR. STEVENSON: Sure.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- let's make --
let's see if they have thought about it.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
Well, in -- in that regard, Justice –
Mr. Chief Justice, I think that we do have 13
States that have thought about it, that have expressly
looked at this question of what the minimum age should
be. And in 12 of those 13 States that have set the age
above 14, most of those States have set the age at 18.
So, if that's the Court's lens, then I think that would
support the kind of rule that we're seeking here --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if, instead of
striking down the laws in these States, why don't we
just require the State legislatures to think about it?
All right? And -- and then see how many think about it,
and -- and come up with, you know, something that agrees
with you or doesn't agree with you.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I think that's in
part --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wouldn't that be more
democratic somehow?
MR. STEVENSON: It might be more democratic,
but I don't think it would be consistent with the
constitutional obligation that this Court has to protect
people who are vulnerable from excessive punishment.
And this is a cohort that we contend is the
most vulnerable and should be shielded from this
excessive punishment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Stevenson, Mr. Neiman.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:24 a.m., the case in the
