IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
KUNTRELL JACKSON, :
Petitioner : No. 10-9647
v. :
RAY HOBBS, DIRECTOR, ARKANSAS :
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, March 20, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:25 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
BRYAN A. STEVENSON, ESQ., Montgomery, Alabama; for
Petitioner.
KENT G. HOLT, ESQ., Assistant Attorney General,
Little Rock, Arkansas; for Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
BRYAN A. STEVENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
KENT G. HOLT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 23
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
BRYAN A. STEVENSON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 40
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:25 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 10-9647, Jackson v. Hobbs.
Welcome back.
(Laughter.)
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN A. STEVENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. STEVENSON: Thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court:
JUSTICE SCALIA: You haven't changed your
mind in the interim, have you?
(Laughter.)
MR. STEVENSON: No, Justice Scalia, I
haven't. I do want to emphasize -- yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you start -- I
know that Enmund and Tison has to do with death
eligibility with respect to adults, but it does draw a
line between death eligibility with respect to
intentionality or not, or recklessness.
Assuming for the sake of argument that some
of us might be interested in whether a line should be
created for juveniles who intended or didn't intend
death, with respect to their eligibility for life
without parole, whether it's mandatory or voluntary, how
would we write that? Would -- would we just import all
the Enmund and Tison jurisprudence? Or would we say
something different with respect to juveniles?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, I -- I think you --
you could do that. In fact, in Graham, the Court makes
these statements that they're trying to exempt and
shield juveniles who did not kill, quote, "or did not
intend to kill." And that language could be a basis for
organizing the Court's thinking on this issue.
And, obviously, in this case where there
wasn't a requirement of the specific intent to kill that
was required in the Alabama case, that -- that might
dictate a certain different outcome. I think the
challenge with that is that juvenile status, juvenile
intent, is a much more complicated issue, and that for
many of the same reasons that are problematic with how
kids function at the first stage of these trials, it
would be hard --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That has to do with your
general rule, which -- which we shouldn't impose it at
all.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's right.
But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But if we go even to
your second step rule --
MR. STEVENSON: I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- assuming we
bifurcate --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, I hear --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- then -- then we still
have the question of when do we permit a mandatory
imposition of --
MR. STEVENSON: I -- I think there's no
question, Justice Sotomayor, there would be more
justification for those crimes where there is an intent
to kill, because this Court in its jurisprudence had
recognized that kind of hierarchy which you've outlined
and is exhibited in Enmund and then in the Court's other
cases.
Now, it's true that in -- in Arkansas under
this provision, an adult would still be subject to the
death penalty, because they used this "recklessness"
language so that even the focus on "intent to kill" that
we addressed in Enmund might not categorically protect
these other juveniles, which I think the Court can
rightly acknowledge have diminished culpability.
It's also worth noting that in many of these
States where there are children being sentenced to life
without parole, there is no confusion about this. They
are being convicted of homicide offenses for which there
is no intent to kill. No dispute. Those jurisdictions,
those provisions would likely be addressed by the Enmund
analysis.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, in fact, Jackson
was convicted with a non-intent, just a felony --
MR. STEVENSON: Well, it would -- you're
absolutely right that it's felony murder, but it's a
little different. In Arkansas, if you cooperate or give
aid to someone who commits a crime, even if it's not
intentional, if it's a reckless indifference to life,
you can be found guilty of what is capital felony
murder. And the Arkansas court has interpreted that to
mean for an adult you'd be subject to the death penalty.
And here Kuntrell Jackson was subject to life without
parole.
The State argues that there was support for
that and even some kind of intent, because there was a
dispute about the words -- just quickly, you know, these
three --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It doesn't matter.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The jury didn't have
to -- all the jury found was that he didn't meet his
affirmative burden of proving.
MR. STEVENSON: That's correct. That's
exactly right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And he didn't counsel --
they didn't make a finding --
MR. STEVENSON: That's exactly right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- as to what words were
used and what the intent was.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's exactly
right. And the dissenters at the Arkansas Supreme Court
relied on that in making the determination that they did
not conclude that intent had been established here in a
way that would support the judgment that -- that we
seek.
But that goes back to one of the earlier
questions that was posed about what happens at the guilt
phase. Is it -- Justice Kennedy, it is true that in
Alabama and in most jurisdictions, you would not be
permitted to tell the jury what the sentencing outcome
would be. And in many of these cases, there -- there
isn't a lesser included. That's going to be up to
the -- to the prosecution in -- in some of these crimes.
And there are a range of offenses for which that would
not help a jury kind of deal with the -- the kind of --
the choice that --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that really -- is that
true under the law of Arkansas? In most jurisdictions,
I would think if -- if someone's charged with the
highest degree of homicide, the defense can request an
instruction on -- you don't have to have a separate
charge on a lesser included offense; the defense can
request an instruction on lesser included offenses if it
would be supported by the evidence.
MR. STEVENSON: It -- it would really
depend, Justice Alito, on the facts. For example, one
of our provisions in Alabama makes the -- the crime sort
of a -- a homicide, a capital crime, if the victim is
under the age of 14. You're not entitled to some
diminished culpability, some other kind of homicide
charge unless there's something else going on that would
support that. Our laws and this Court's law say there
has to be evidence in support of that lesser included
instruction before the court is constitutionally
obligated to provide it. And so, for that reason, it's
not a given that that would happen.
And I think the challenge with the mandatory
scheme that we've been talking about in both of these
cases is that it does put the sentencer in a very
difficult situation, where there is no ability to
consider the age; there is no ability to consider the
factual diminished culpability that might exist in one
case or the other; no ability in either of these cases
to consider the fact that an older codefendant got a
lesser sentence. That there is something else going on
here that -- that goes beyond just the particulars of
this crime and this particular offender's culpability.
JUSTICE BREYER: Before we leave it,
could -- what was the instruction the jury was given?
Was it you find him guilty if he was deliberately
indifferent, if he was recklessly -- what are the words
they used?
MR. STEVENSON: It's a reckless indifference
to life.
JUSTICE BREYER: If he was recklessly
indifferent to life.
MR. STEVENSON: And if he gave aid or
assistance to someone in that capacity, and the
question, Justice Breyer, turned on -- on this statement
made that the -- the codefendant who testified against
Kuntrell Jackson --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Yes.
MR. STEVENSON: -- initially told the police
he -- that he came in and said, "we ain't playin'," and
then he testified that he said, "I thought you all were
playing."
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm not sure reckless
indifference means that. Meaning, if he knew they were
carrying guns, doesn't that make him liable for the
reckless indifference --
MR. STEVENSON: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- whether he thought
they would use them or not?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, and that's what the
State argued here, is that the fact that he had
knowledge of this gun and that they went in there made
him guilty of reckless indifference even though it
didn't create the kind of intent to kill that -- that we
typically require for these kinds of showings.
That's again why there was a significance
around this language, that if you come in and you say
something declaratory that suggests that it's directed
at the victim, it might help kind of support that intent
finding if you don't --
JUSTICE BREYER: Reckless -- reckless
indifference to life suffices for the death penalty for
an adult.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. What -- what the Court
does --
JUSTICE BREYER: But -- so, you'd -- if
that's right, then we'd -- you would have to argue on,
if we took this tack --
MR. STEVENSON: That --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- which I don't know that
you could --
MR. STEVENSON: That's --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- but that you cannot
sentence a juvenile to life without parole for murder
unless he, e.g., specifically intends the death or
something equivalent, but something stronger than
reckless indifference to life.
MR. STEVENSON: That -- that's correct,
Justice Breyer. And, again, I think that this Court
knows its own precedents, but as you'll recall, Tison
followed Enmund, and in Tison v. Arizona is when the
Court allowed there to be this kind of room around this
intent standard in the way that you've just described.
JUSTICE ALITO: So, you would draw the line
at -- at a specific intent to kill?
MR. STEVENSON: Again, my -- I would -- I
would categorically prohibit no matter what the intent
is. I think particularly for children at this age.
What I think this case highlights, what's meant by "I
thought you all were playing" versus "we ain't playin'"
isn't a very good indicator of whether someone should be
subject to life without parole.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if it was a lot
clearer? What if they had said, okay, before we go in,
let's understand what's going on here; Shields has
got -- has got the sawed-off shotgun, and if we need to
use it, we'll use it; we'll do whatever it takes to --
to bring this off?
MR. STEVENSON: I -- I think the evidence --
JUSTICE ALITO: There might not be a
specific intent --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- to kill there.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. I think the evidence
that would support a finding of aggravated murder would
obviously be stronger, but even there -- and this is
what the Court points out in -- in Roper, the -- that
the decisionmaking of children, that the thinking of
children is categorically different. They're not
thinking three steps ahead; they're not thinking about
consequences; they're not actually experienced enough
with the world to understand how they deal with their
frustrations in the same way that an adult is. And so,
their judgments about what they intend to do, their
declarations, mean something very, very different.
And one of the factors that we haven't
talked about, but I just want to emphasize, is it's not
just their inherent internal attributes; it's also the
external circumstances that they find themselves in.
Kuntrell Jackson was born in a household where there was
nothing but violence and guns and people shooting each
other. His grandmother shot his uncle. His mother shot
a neighbor. His brother shot someone. They were all
put to jail.
But, unlike an adult, these children don't
have the ability to escape. A child of 14 cannot leave
his criminogenic or violent environment. They have no
control over that. And because --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. -- I'm sorry; go ahead.
MR. STEVENSON: And just because of that, I
think it does reinforce why even their judgments, their
so-called intentional judgments, reflect a very
different kind of understanding of their character,
their potential for rehabilitation, than it would with
an adult.
JUSTICE KAGAN: One of the arguments that
the State makes is that when you look at all these
numbers, the number that is most different between this
pair of cases and Graham is the denominator. And I'm
wondering whether you would address that. What kind of
denominator we should be using here and how it compares
to the denominators that we've used in past cases.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. I think, first of all,
it is true that homicide offenses are -- are less common
than non-homicidic offenses. In Graham, this Court
looked at a range of non-homicide crimes, and that was a
huge number, 300,000. That's largely because we were
talking about a multitude of offenses and here we are
talking about a single offense.
I think the fact that there have been 7,000
children arrested for -- for homicide and non-negligent
murder -- manslaughter over this 40-year time period and
only 79 children have been sentenced to life without
parole is a significant fact that reinforces our claim
that this is a very rare sentence. That is 1 percent.
And the fact that it's over 40 years, that's also true
for the 79. We got to that --
JUSTICE ALITO: It's arrests to start out
with; it's not -- it's not convictions.
MR. STEVENSON: That's right.
JUSTICE ALITO: And it's not for the type of
offense for which one could be sentenced to life
imprisonment without parole. It's a broader category of
homicide offenses.
MR. STEVENSON: Well, you're absolutely
right, Justice Alito, on the first point, that these are
arrest data. Of course, that's what we used in Graham,
because, again, in this cohort, conviction data simply
is very difficult to get. But it's not true that only
children arrested for aggravated murder are subject to
life without parole. As I've mentioned, in the States
that create the largest population of these kids, all
kinds of homicide can subject you to life without
parole. So, it is true --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is it true that in the
States that permit life without parole for a minor
homicide -- a minor murder, a person -- a minor
convicted of -- of murder, that that is permitted for
every non-negligent homicide?
MR. STEVENSON: In some States, yes.
That is, to the extent that you are -- you get convicted
of murder, some of these States -- South Dakota and
Pennsylvania come to mind -- whether it's first degree
or second degree, you're subject to life imprisonment
without parole and it is a mandatory sentence.
JUSTICE ALITO: Some States, but not in all
of the States.
MR. STEVENSON: Not in all States. That's
true.
JUSTICE ALITO: That's a really -- you've
got a very imprecise denominator. You have arrests --
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- for a broader category of
offenses.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. But I don't -- I don't
think --
JUSTICE ALITO: We don't know how much
smaller that number would be if we narrowed it down
appropriately, do we?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, we can't get beyond
what the data tell us. But I want to suggest it's no
less precise than what this Court had to deal with in
Graham. In Graham, we talked about 380,000 non-homicide
offenders. Half of that class were people convicted of
drug crimes, which no one has suggested would subject
you to life without parole. Another 60,000 were
convicted of assaults. And kids get into fights all the
time. But we used the aggregate of all of those numbers
when we made that comparison.
So, I'd actually argue that we're dealing
here with a category definition that is much more
precise than what we dealt with in Graham.
And, Justice Kagan, to return to your
question we do have some precedents that help us with
this. In Coker v. Georgia, this Court was trying to
make an assessment about the propriety of the death
penalty for the crime of rape. And what this Court
noted was that 9 out of 10 of the juries that made decisions
about life versus death chose life. And there we were
talking about kind of a death rate, if you will, of 10
percent. Here, with a larger universe, we're talking
about a rate of 1 percent.
JUSTICE BREYER: How do you -- think about
this, which is not your favorite position, but it's a
position you've taken. It's -- it's the same question I
asked before. If I say, well, doesn't there have to be
some line, 3 years old, you'll say "of course." Ten
years old? You say "of course," but nobody -- there's
no problem with sentencing 10-year-olds to life without
parole. Twelve years old? Well, hum. Now, maybe, your
opponents want to defend that one. Thirteen years old,
14 years old? And, of course, I'm walking right into
the buzz saw: Well, leave it up to the legislature.
But suppose that -- that there's something
to be said for not leaving it up to the legislature, at
least for the numbers that were in that range. But how
would you defend the cutoff at -- for no life without
parole at, say, 14, older than 14, rather than older
than 15, rather than older than 13?
What kind of argument is there that isn't
totally random for picking that number as the age below
which you cannot impose life without parole even for the
most horrendous murder?
MR. STEVENSON: Yes. I think two nonrandom
arguments can be made for two ages. I'll start with the
young age of 14.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. STEVENSON: When you consider the fact
that 13 jurisdictions have thought about this and have
all but one set the age above 14, I think we can then
rely on that to make a determination that if there's a
minimum age, it's above 14.
I think we can also, consistent with this
Court's precedents, look at the frequency of the
sentence for this population. Most States have never
sentenced a child to -- to life without parole for a
crime at 14. They've just never done it. Thirty-two
States, there are no children 14 and younger serving
life without parole. And so, I think that allows this
Court in a very nonrandom way to defend that judgment.
But I also think a nonrandom argument can be
made to draw the line at 18; that is, offenders under
the age of 18. That's exactly what this Court has done
in Roper. It's what this Court has done in Graham.
What we've relied on about juvenile status is applicable
to that pool. I concede that these other indicia are
not quite as compelling.
JUSTICE BREYER: Eighteen, you use for a lot
of purposes. Eighteen -- you could say, okay, 18. The
difficulty with 18 is you're running into 2300.
MR. STEVENSON: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Not 79.
MR. STEVENSON: That's right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the difficulty is that.
In Roper, it said, well, don't worry so much about --
about not having the death penalty -- the other one.
Don't worry so much about it because there's always life
without parole.
MR. STEVENSON: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the fact that
18-year-olds or 17-year-olds in many respects are quite
mature or at least can be.
MR. STEVENSON:
JUSTICE BREYER:
not quite right.
MR. STEVENSON:
JUSTICE BREYER:
Yes.
And so, that makes 18 seem
Well --
Or -- but there's a problem
with each of them. So, that's where I'm trying--
MR. STEVENSON: Yes, but I guess just on
that point, Justice Breyer, I think you're right that
the indicia are more complicated, but I want to just
stress that they're less meaningful here, because with
mandatory sentences, they don't tell you the same thing
they do in these other contexts.
But I also think it's true that we have
recognized that up until the age of 18, you are a
juvenile. Your status is coherent with what the Court
has recognized in these other cases. And so, I do think
it's defensible there. While it's true that you're more
developed than a child of 14 or a child of 10, it's also
true that you're not an adult. And we make that
distinction in lots of ways.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any other
distinction that you have been able to think of, growing
out of the literature or growing out of the law, where
the cutoff for some roughly comparable series of things
is between 14 and 15 or between 14 and 16, or something
like that?
MR. STEVENSON: Well, yes, this Court in
Thompson made a distinction between offenders that were
under the age of 15, 15 and younger, then older
offenders. And for 20 some years, the law in this
country was you could not subject younger offenders to
the death penalty in ways that you could older
offenders. And so, there's clearly precedent for that,
and we've appended also lots of statutes, I mean, that
also make those kinds of distinctions. I mean, we do
draw these lines frequently in a range of areas, not
just dealing with the constitutional questions that
we're dealing with here.
But just kind of to complete my analysis,
Justice Kagan, about these comparisons, the other point
that I'll -- I'll reference is that, in Thompson, this
Court was also struggling over this question about
frequency and rarity. And what the Court did there is
actually look at the number of juveniles that were
sentenced to death under the age of 16 that were on
death row and compared them to the number of people on
death row at the time, and they noted that it was
.36 percent of the population of people on death row.
If you did the same thing here, the
Sentencing Project reports that there are over 41,000
people in the United States serving sentences of life
imprisonment without parole. And if you compare our
number of 79 to that, that's actually, again, a lower
proportion of people serving life without parole than
the Court found to be constitutionally significant in
Thompson.
So, I think Thompson and Coker all reinforce
what we're saying here, that this is an exceedingly rare
sentence where the majority of States have never chose
to impose it. And that would provide a basis for this
Court to conclude that it is cruel and unusual.
JUSTICE ALITO: In Coker --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Stevenson, you're
making an argument now in Jackson's case, and Jackson
was the felony murder case. And I think at least in
your brief, you made the argument it was just
happenstance, bad luck, that in Jackson's case the shop
attendant was killed. And in Graham's case, the person
who was assaulted survived.
But your argument to us seems to make no
distinction between the two cases.
MR. STEVENSON: No -- no, I -- I don't
intend to do that Justice Ginsburg. I think -- I think
there is a distinction. There's no question that
there's a stronger argument that, by traditional
measures, there's lower culpability in Kuntrell
Jackson's case. He was not found to have specifically
intended to kill. In the State of Alabama, he could not
have been subject to life without parole, and there are
States where he would not be subject to that, based on
his degree of culpability.
I -- I guess my -- my point is, is that even
there, there is a challenge if the Court wants to engage
in that kind of thinking. What children intend, because
they are children, is a very complicated question. It's
a very different question.
I don't mean to concede that it's an
irrelevant question. I think the Court absolutely can
and should conclude that there is diminished culpability
in the Jackson case, and that's evident based on the
facts of the crime. Actually, it was the dissenter
in the Jackson case that made this observation about the
consequences of crime. And, of course, for many
non-homicide crimes, there are these kind of fortuities
that sometimes prevent death wonderfully, and we were
grateful for that.
My point is that the differences between
children and adults, these internal attributes, if you
will, these deficits in judgment, are not
crime-specific. The person who intends to kill doesn't
actually have any better judgment, any more character,
any more maturity, any more impulse control than the
person who doesn't. And a way of characterizing a rule
would be to recognize that and -- and to create a
categorical ban.
If there are no further questions, I'll --
I'll reserve the rest of my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Holt.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF KENT G. HOLT
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. HOLT: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
The decision below falls squarely within the
framework of Roper and Graham, and there are three
reasons to affirm this judgment: First, murder is the
worst of all crimes. Society has drawn that line.
Second, legislatures have the power to
authorize sentences that are commensurate with crimes
like murder.
Third, Jackson has not demonstrated any
consensus in this case against the practice, and, in
fact, there is a supermajority of States and of
governments that authorize this sentence.
The landscape of this case is -- is
different than Graham, because in Graham no one was --
no one was killed. Terrance Graham was lucky no one was
killed, because he acted with a reckless disregard for
human life as well, but it's an important thing in our
law that the law punishes the -- the result, the harm
that is inflicted.
And if I could, go to the Arkansas statute.
Jackson was charged with the highest crime you could be
charged with in Arkansas -- it was capital felony
murder -- in that the legislature has set out several
enumerated, several violent felonies that if you commit
this particular crime -- and aggravated robbery is one
of them -- if you commit that crime and in the course
and furtherance of that, you or an accomplice act with
extreme indifference to the value of human life during
the commission of it or in the flight from it, then you
are guilty of capital felony murder.
So, in this case the jury was called
upon -- because there were other accomplices with
Kuntrell Jackson, they were called on to determine
whether or not Kuntrell Jackson acted as an accomplice,
whether he aided and assisted and whether or not he or
an accomplice acted with extreme indifference to the
value of human life.
In that process, Kuntrell Jackson asserted
the affirmative defense that essentially is available
for capital murder. He said that, I did not have -- I
was not the triggerman, and I did not -- I did not
commit the homicide offense, and I did not aid or
procure counsel. All of those are listed -- the exact
words of the affirmative defense are listed in our brief
at page 4. And -- but he asserted that defense.
The Arkansas Supreme Court noted in its
opinion that in his challenge to the sufficiency of the
evidence, that there was sufficient evidence to convict
him of capital murder and that the jury was well within
its right to believe that he said that he -- that when
he walked in and took -- took the lead in this robbery
that he said, "We ain't playin'," and after that, the
clerk responded that she was going to call the police --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, I -- I know
that this seems like block building, but I think of law
as sort of logical. If you're involved in a felony and
you counsel the felony where someone dies, under
Arkansas law, you're guilty of felony murder, correct?
MR. HOLT: Of capital felony murder, yes,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Right. So, whether or
not that he intended to counsel the crime, he was guilty
of felony murder, unless he could prove the affirmative
defense, right?
MR. HOLT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, obviously, he didn't
prove the affirmative defense, but that doesn't mean
that the jury actually found that he used one set of
words or another. It just means that they didn't
believe he had proven by his burden of proof that he had
not counseled, correct?
MR. HOLT: That's correct. The Arkansas
Supreme Court said they could -- they could accept that
as -- they pointed to that as --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As a possibility for the
jury.
MR. HOLT: As a possibility, yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But not that it was an
actual finding by the jury.
MR. HOLT: No. No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right.
MR. HOLT: It was not an actual finding
because an actual -- in regard to sentences in terms of
years, we don't require that individualized
responsibility that we do, for instance, in a death
penalty case. So --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well -- so, in Arkansas, if
a 13-year-old or a 14-year-old is in a getaway car and
knowingly accepts the money that someone gets from a
robbery and intends to drive off with it, and that other
person shoots the teller and kills him, then that
individual who is 14 years old is guilty of felony
murder, capital felony murder?
MR. HOLT: Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: He aided. Is that right or
not?
MR. HOLT: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. If that's right,
do -- do you think that such a person is less culpable,
knowing only that, than a person who actually takes out
a gun and shoots the teller? Morally speaking.
MR. HOLT: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. HOLT: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, if the answer to that
question is "yes," what is the argument for not being
able to tell that to the jury or judge who's going to
impose the sentence? What is the argument for not
allowing a judge or a jury at least to think about that
question, before they have -- before imposing mandatory
life without parole?
MR. HOLT: Well, Your Honor, that -- that --
telling a jury about that doesn't go to their guilt.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, I know. I mean, my
obvious point is that -- that the Arkansas system, once
we have he was the getaway driver or assisted the
getaway driver, they must sentence him at that age, or
despite that age, to life without parole.
And so, the other side is saying, well, at
the very least -- he has three other positions -- but at
the very least, the Constitution -- maybe it's the Due
Process Clause -- requires the sentencer to take that
into account, the fact that he was just the
assistant/getaway driver and may not have thought about
the murder in reality and may not have expected it in
reality. Why not have to take that into account in
sentencing? That's the argument.
I want to hear directly your answer to that,
which is taking the fourth or possibly the weakest of
his positions or the least radical. What is your answer
to that one?
MR. HOLT: Your Honor, it's -- a legislative
judgment has been made with regard to drawing a baseline
for -- for all murderers, whether they're juvenile
murderers, whether they're getaway drivers. And when
you -- when you counsel or aid or do anything that gets
you liability for being a capital murderer, then that's
the -- that is the minimum sentence.
What he's gotten, on account of his youth,
is he's gotten -- this -- this Court decided in Roper in
that he could not -- he could not get the death penalty.
All of those individualized characteristics that would
get him the lesser penalty, he doesn't even have to put
on. It's swept off the table because he is not exposed.
And that -- those are all those factors in terms of what
he -- what he might -- that might mitigate.
So, he would actually sort of be
double-dipping to come back again and say, oh, and by
the way, I'm a youth, and so I should get even -- I
should get not the lesser punishment; I should get the
lesser, lesser punishment.
So, there's a certain symmetry that this
case has with -- with the Graham case, in that the
Graham case was very specific about the way it defined
itself. One commentator has made the note that the
majority opinion in Graham contained the word
non-homicide 47 times.
Graham essentially said what it wasn't. It
wasn't a homicide. It was that other line that society
draws between homicide and every other crime. And
crimes are -- the criminal statutes are scalar. There's
a certain amount of culpability that's built into each
one of those, whether it be capital murder or
first-degree murder or second-degree murder. And it
does go on what you know, the -- the knowledge that you
have. Maturity is taken into consideration, or
immaturity is taken into consideration in capital murder
in that you can't get the worst -- if you've been shown
to do these acts, you can't get the worst punishment.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What is the standard in
Arkansas for moving a child from the juvenile system?
We heard, I think, in Alabama it was -- was age 13?
MR. HOLT: Yes. Your Honor --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It was age 12.
MR. HOLT: Yes. Your Honor, Arkansas has
sort of a three-tier system. The age for moving into
the adult system is 14. And -- but the middle-tier
system in Arkansas is called extended juvenile
jurisdiction. And in that particular case -- in those
cases, the prosecutor can move to take a younger age and
put in -- and it's a blended sentence between the -- and
a youth is just found delinquent of a crime and not --
and not found guilty.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What -- what are the
factors the judges and prosecutors use in making that
determination?
MR. HOLT: Your Honor, at age 14 -- and it's
the specific -- there are specific crimes that a
prosecutor would move a case into an adult court. It is
the prosecutor's discretion weighing -- there are 10
different factors that include the severity of the
offense, the -- and -- but they also take into
consideration the maturity of the -- of the youth,
the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But -- but if you submit
that as a justification for your scheme, why couldn't
those same factors be applied to the judge -- by the
sentencing judge after the conviction? In other words,
all of the -- all of the discretion is up front before
the conviction.
MR. HOLT: Well, there is discretion up
front, and that is the only -- that is the only instance
when a defendant can actually challenge a transfer,
where a prosecutor decides to put it. But there are
also -- so, there is -- there's discretion at the front
end.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I guess my point is, if
the concern is that -- that we have too indefinite
standards, too few specifics to guide the judge in
determining whether there should be a life sentence, the
same criticism could apply to the determination to send
him -- put him in the adult system at the outset.
MR. HOLT: Well, Your Honor, the -- it is --
admittedly, it is at the discretion of the prosecutor on
those ages to move it into the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I assume discretion is
guided by certain standards, or it's no discretion at
all. So, there are standards.
MR. HOLT: Well, Your Honor, the -- the
prosecutor -- that -- that decision to move it in there
is challengeable. It is reviewable by a court. He
moves -- the juvenile moves it to transfer it to -- back
to juvenile. That is appealed. That was done in this
case, and then the Arkansas -- the Arkansas Court of
Appeals reviewed that decision and said that the
court -- the court's decision was not erroneous. So,
that -- that is the discretion that one would exercise
on the front end.
Again, on the latter end, this Court has
said in Harmelin that the individualized sentencing is
not required, and, in fact, the -- all of the -- all of
the -- the mitigating circumstances that would -- that
have been considered because it's -- he's -- the death
penalty has been taken off the table. That's a big --
that's a big deal, especially in a case like this one
where Kuntrell Jackson -- we believe the evidence showed
that he also acted with reckless indifference to the
value of human life, based -- based on the evidence in
this case. That he would be -- by way of analogy, that
he would be a Tison offender himself.
But irrespective of that, the legislature in
Arkansas -- it's -- the legislative judgment has been
that the minimum sentence that a person can receive for
committing a capital murder in Arkansas is life without
parole.
I would like to clarify one point that I
think -- earlier that was made. The two other
individuals in this particular case were -- one was a
cousin who testified against Mr. Jackson, and he was 15.
He had turned 15 the day before this robbery. And the
second, the second individual, the triggerman, was -- he
was also 14, and he received a -- a sentence of life
without parole as well.
It's our position that -- as is Alabama's,
that the main -- the principal justification in this
case lies with the -- the retributive principle that
society needs to convey the message that people like
Laurie -- that Laurie Troup's life, the victim in this
case, was more important than the money in that cash
register. The harm here was irrevocable. And this kind
-- the punishment for this -- it's qualitative -- death
-- the death penalty is qualitatively different.
But the punishment for -- for this crime
reinforces the sanctity of human life, and it expresses
the State's moral outrage that something like this could
happen. We think that the respect due life is -- is
what this message conveys, and it conveys it more as a
life-without-parole sentence than it does life-without.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You say the sanctity of
human life, but you're dealing with a 14-year-old being
sentenced to life in prison, so he will die in prison
without any hope. I mean, essentially, you're making a
-year-old a throwaway person.
MR. HOLT: Your Honor, I would -- I'd
respectfully disagree that he's a throwaway person. The
-- we want to -- we want him to come to an understanding
of his own humanity. We want him to realize the
enormity of his crime. I can only speak for Arkansas,
but in Arkansas, instances -- it's not in the record,
but this particular petitioner, Jackson has made efforts
to obtain his GED; he has taken anger management
classes. You can -- juvenile life without parole --
people serving this sentence --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry.
MR. HOLT: -- are enrolled in vo-tech
programs in the prison.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What hope does he have?
MR. HOLT: Excuse me?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What hope does he have?
MR. HOLT: Your Honor, he has -- the hope
that he may have is that he -- is an application for
commutation through the parole board. Other than that,
he will -- or perhaps retroactive legislation --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry.
MR. HOLT: -- if the legislature comes to
another view.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I thought he was life
without parole. I thought he was sentenced to life
without parole. How can the parole board --
MR. HOLT: Oh, what I'm saying is the parole
board is -- reviews applications for commutation in
Arkansas. So, he -- this particular -- this Petitioner
has not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: How many commutations of
life imprisonment sentences are ordered every year in
Arkansas?
MR. HOLT: Your Honor, I don't have figures
on that -- on how many per year, but there is a case
that -- that listed -- it's Rogers v. State. It is a
1979 case that actually listed -- 30 clemency requests
were granted in the last 5 years from that opinion.
They were life sentences.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: From life sentences? From
life without parole?
MR. HOLT: Well, life without -- life and
life without parole in Arkansas are the same type of
sentence, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do we know how old
Laurie Troup was when she was shot?
MR. HOLT: Yes, Your Honor. Laurie Troup
was 28 years old when she was shot. She was discovered
by her mother and her 11-year-old son.
JUSTICE BREYER: I understand the arguments,
which are very good ones, for the importance of Arkansas
emphasizing the importance of life and not killing
people. But a person who is an adult who is faced with
the death penalty, which is certainly a strong statement
along your lines, is permitted by the Constitution
nonetheless to make any mitigating argument he wants.
And Arkansas has to do that. They have to let him make
any mitigating argument he wants.
And so, the argument here is basically,
well, the same is true when a 14-year-old, because of
the lack of maturity, faces life without parole. And
that seems to me the hard issue in this case. Just
as -- just as the death penalty is unique for anyone
and, therefore, requires mitigating elements, isn't the
life without parole special enough for an adolescent
that you have to let him at least make any mitigating
arguments he wants?
Now, Arkansas hasn't really expressed a view
in its legislation on that question, or maybe it has and
just rejected it. But I don't know. That's -- if you
want to say something about that, I'd be interested.
MR. HOLT: That's -- that's not a view
that -- that I know that's been expressed.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. But I mean, that's
what their brief is filled with on the other side,
basically. And so is Roper.
MR. HOLT: Yes, Your Honor. But death is --
death is qualitatively different. And -- and that's
been taken off the table. I think that all of -- all of
those things that he would put to get the -- that he
would -- that he would put forward to get the lesser
sentence is -- initially is that he would just get a --
as I said, a lesser, lesser sentence.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did you say that Arkansas
has no life with parole?
MR. HOLT: Your Honor, the only provision --
and this does go to show that Arkansas has thought about
this in ways, has taken deliberate steps. In its
extended juvenile jurisdiction, there is the provision
that -- that a -- for instance, a 14-year-old in this
particular case, if -- if they had deemed that they
would go in extended juvenile jurisdiction, could
receive a life penalty, except it is life with parole,
yes. So, that is -- that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that's not available
to an adult. That's only in the --
MR. HOLT: That's not available to an adult.
No, Your Honor.
As I -- as I was saying, the -- there's a
certain constitutional symmetry to this case and to
Graham's case because -- because Graham committed a -- a
non-homicide offense and he was a youth, and so he had
twice-diminished punishment. But he only received one
diminishment in his -- in his punishment, because he
had -- he was -- he had twice-diminished culpability.
In this particular case, Jackson does not have
twice-diminished culpability. He has -- he is a youth.
Even if he were to -- even if we were to say
that, well, he didn't pull the trigger, or we can't show
that he didn't -- that he acted -- didn't act with
reckless indifference, even if we were to say that that
was twice-diminished, he is still criminally
responsible. There's not a -- there's not a special
class of not guilty by reason of youth. He is still
criminally responsible for what he did.
And -- and a -- teenagers must know that if
you commit the worst crime, you will get the worst
punishment that's available under the Constitution. And
so, the symmetry here is that -- that Terrance Graham
was the lucky one. It's not that Kuntrell Jackson was
the unlucky one. This is a -- when you go into a place
with a sawed-off shotgun, it's a dangerous activity;
it's inherently dangerous. And what was left out of the
calculus a minute -- a few minutes ago was the fact that
he could -- it's not just kill or intend to kill, but
foresee what could happen.
And, certainly, the evidence in this case
demonstrated that Kuntrell Jackson could foresee that at
an armed robbery, someone could get hurt. And that's
what the law punishes, is the result.
If there are no further questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Stevenson, you have 8 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF BRYAN A. STEVENSON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. STEVENSON: Just -- just a few points.
Justice Kennedy, I just want to kind of
remark, there is some literature out there about
commutation in Arkansas. And it was actually quite
common up until 1980, and this case that my colleague
referenced was prior to that date. But since then, it's
been very uncommon. There's only been one commutation
since 2007 with the -- with the current governor, and
that was for a non-homicide offense.
I -- I also want to say, just kind of
consistent with my earlier argument, that this Court did
strike down mandatory death sentences in
Woodson v. North Carolina and Roberts v. Louisiana for
many of the reasons that the Court has highlighted here
that made that sentence unconstitutional and
inappropriate. And we think that in the same way, the
Court could certainly do that here.
But my final point is really to just say we
are not suggesting that States should not be able to
impose very harsh punishments and very severe sentences
on even children who commit these kinds of violent
crimes. That's not our position.
The State of Arkansas and the State of
Alabama have parole boards in place. They can even
impose sentences that give them the authority to
maintain control of the lives of these children for the
rest of their natural lives.
What we are arguing is that they cannot do
so with no hope of release, that that would be
incompatible with child status. And that's the rule of
Roper. That's the logic of Roper and Graham. It could
be argued that every person is more than the worst thing
they've ever done. And a policymaker and a
decisionmaker might consider that in constructing what
kind of sentences to impose and what kind of regime to
create, and that's totally up to the legislatures.
But what this Court has said is that
children are uniquely more than their worst act. They
are quintessentially children in a way that the
Constitution requires that we respect their child
status.
And our argument is simple. Our argument is
that it would be unusual to recognize that in virtually
every area of the law, but when a crime is committed, to
simply abandon it, to simply ignore it. Roper and
Graham teach us that we can't do that consistently with
our Eighth Amendment prohibitions.
And so, for that reason, it is unusual, and
it's our judgment that it would be cruel to declare
these children fit only to die in prison given what we
now know about their status, about their development,
and about their potential.
And for those reasons, we would ask this
Court to reverse the lower court judgments and grant
relief in this case, Jackson v. Arkansas.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr.
Stevenson, Mr. Holt.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the case in the
