IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
CAROLYN M. KLOECKNER, :
Petitioner : No. 11-184
v. :
HILDA L. SOLIS, SECRETARY OF LABOR:
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, October 2, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ERIC SCHNAPPER, ESQ., Seattle, Washington; on behalf of
Petitioner.
SARAH E. HARRINGTON, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
on behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ERIC SCHNAPPER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
SARAH E. HARRINGTON, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 25
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ERIC SCHNAPPER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 11-184, Kloeckner v. Solis.
Mr. Schnapper.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ERIC SCHNAPPER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SCHNAPPER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
The first sentence of Section 7703(b)(2)
provides that district courts have jurisdiction over all
mixed cases, and that provision is largely dispositive
here.
The second sentence of 7703(b)(2) on which
the Government relies is a statute of limitations, and
it doesn't limit the jurisdiction of Federal courts.
That subsection is set out at pages 16a to
a of the Government's brief. The first sentence
provides that for a described category of cases, they
are to be, quote, "filed under one of the listed Federal
antidiscrimination statutes."
As this Court pointed out in Elgin, all of
those are statutes which authorize jurisdiction
and claims in district courts. Indeed, in Title VII and
the ADEA, that is the only Federal court which is
authorized to hear the cases.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Schnapper, could you
clarify what the district court, as you see it, does?
Does it deal only with the discrimination claim, or does
it deal with the MSPB's procedural ruling?
MR. SCHNAPPER: With regard to the -- when
the case gets to district court, there may be two
substantive claims, a discrimination claim and a CSRA
claim. Your question, I take it, is about the former.
Our view is that the claim is filed and
pled, as indeed it was pled in this case, as a
discrimination case; in this case, under several
different statutes. And the complaint here reads very
much like an ordinary discrimination complaint.
The Government may raise the -- that sort of
procedural issue as an affirmative defense, and it would
be free to do so here. And that -- that happens on a
number of occasions.
For example, if there were a case in which
the Plaintiff had not, as required by the regulations,
appealed to the MSPB within 30 days of the -- of receipt
of the agency decision, the Government could move to
dismiss that claim on what the lower courts call
exhaustion grounds. And the lower courts have
repeatedly sustained those motions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Schnapper --
MR. SCHNAPPER: -- but that's a
determinative defense.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But the critical
point, I gather, is what standard of review the district
court will apply to that exhaustion question, or the
bar question, right?
I assume you think that the standard review
in the district court is going to be more favorable to
your client than the standard -- the arbitrary and
capricious standard that would be applicable in the
Federal circuit?
I guess --
MR. SCHNAPPER: When it's come up,
Your Honor, it has generally been a question of law,
like whether the 30-day rule had applied. If you had
something that was -- if it were a factual issue, our
contention is then those Section 7703(c) factual issues
have to be decided de novo.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why don't we take this --
this very case, where the MSPB said that -- that the
claim was time barred, so the Government would raise it
as an affirmative defense.
MR. SCHNAPPER: And the first question would
be whether it's an affirmative defense at all, and our
position would be that it is not. Not everything that
could go awry in the internal procedure is an
affirmative defense.
One of the central principles of the
72 amendments to Title VII was to create an exhaustion
regime which is precise, simple and short. And if --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counselor, can I back
you up a minute to join the two questions that my
colleague posed to you?
Let's assume there's a merits-based decision
on the CSRA and one on the discrimination. In the
normal course, assuming you are not barred by being
untimely, you could go to the district court, and the
district court presumably would have jurisdiction, if
one is a discrimination-based decision, to decide both
questions.
What's the standard of review that a court
would apply to each of those claims independently or
together? I mean --
MR. SCHNAPPER: They're there --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that that's --
MR. SCHNAPPER: -- it's -- yeah, I totally
understand the question.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We can then fight about
whether the factual issue regarding the timeliness and
exhaustion should be subject to one or the other
standard of review, but what are the standards of
review?
MR. SCHNAPPER: They -- they are
different.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right.
MR. SCHNAPPER: The -- the discrimination
claim is dealt with de novo. The intent of Congress
was that it would generally be treated like a private
discrimination claim.
However, the CSRA claim is dealt with under
the same standard that would apply in the Federal
circuit. And that's --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, could you tell me
what --
MR. SCHNAPPER: -- well established.
JUSTICE ALITO: I'm sorry. I didn't mean to
interrupt you.
MR. SCHNAPPER: That's what the lower courts
have been doing. And we don't -- we think that's
correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could you finish your prior
answer? You -- you started to say --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you started to say that
the Civil Service Reform Act made some fundamental
change?
MR. SCHNAPPER: No, Your Honor. I was
talking about the amendments to the 19 -- to Title VII
in 1972.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Prior to that, courts were
applying the -- judicially fashioned exhaustion
requirements. And the -- Congress made a decision to
replace that.
As this Court noted in Chandler and in Brown
v. GSA, Congress concluded, I think correctly, and the
Court's opinion suggests that, that the steps necessary
to exhaust were not clear.
So the regime established by Section 717 of
Title VII, which was adopted in 1972, sets up an
exhaustion requirement which is clear, simple and
limited in time. It requires the plaintiff to file a
complaint, wait at that point 180 days, and at that
point, the plaintiff was done and could go to district
court.
Plaintiff also had the option at that point
of going to the Civil Service Commission, waiting
0 days. But as long as a timely complaint was filed,
that was all that was required of the plaintiff. And
that was a fundamental change in the way this had been
dealt with.
The ADEA regime, which was adopted in 1974,
was actually even simpler, although it's been changed a
little bit since. The plaintiff to exhaust had to do
only one of two things, either file a complaint with the
EEOC, period, or give the EEOC notice that the plaintiff
was going to sue and wait 30 days.
As the Government pointed out in its brief
in Stevens, the exhaustion regime under the ADEA hadn't
-- didn't in any way address what happened after the
complaint was filed. It simply said, file the
complaint.
That is the fundamental principle that's
animated the Title VII exhaustion requirement in Title
VII and the ADEA, and we don't think the CSRA was
written to change that.
Indeed, to the contrary, the CSRA has -- it
doesn't do so expressly -- it incorporates by reference
those statutes; it expressly reiterates the de novo
exhaustion requirement. It actually shortened the
period of time that plaintiff has to wait for these
cases.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's -- you're talking
about the discrimination claim. In your view, could the
plaintiff now in the district court say, I'll forget
the CSRA remedy; district court, you have authority to
hear the Title VII case, the ADEA case, and that's all I
need? And so I'm not -- I'm abandoning my CSRA.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Yes, Your Honor. The Plaintiff
can do that. The --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then that would take
care of the whole thing you discussed before about the
affirmative defense and the Government. It would be the
plaintiff's choice, I want my Title VII case and that's
MR. SCHNAPPER: No, Your Honor. The
affirmative defenses could still be raised. It's just
that the CSRA claim under Section 7703(c) would -- would
be abandoned. And that's --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, what provision --
MR. SCHNAPPER: -- that's what happened
here. It's not uncommon.
The CSRA claim involves a right that is much
more valuable to the plaintiff in the administrative
process.
JUSTICE ALITO: What provision authorizes
the filing of anything other than a discrimination claim
in district court? I don't see it.
MR. SCHNAPPER: The statute says "Cases of
discrimination subject to" --
JUSTICE ALITO: "Cases of discrimination" --
MR. SCHNAPPER: "Cases of discrimination
subject to 7702." And 7702 --
JUSTICE ALITO: Yes. It says, "shall be
filed under Title VII."
So you are saying that a nondiscrimination
claim can be filed under Title VII?
MR. SCHNAPPER: No. The way the courts have
read this, and I think correctly, is this: If -- so
this is just one case. It's a little bit like
supplemental jurisdiction. So long as the plaintiff is
asserting a discrimination claim, the CSRA claim comes
along with it.
If the plaintiff were to abandon the
discrimination claim, then the case would have to go to
the Federal Circuit. That's the way the courts have
interpreted that.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, I understand that a
lot of courts have read it that way. I find it
difficult to see how it fits in the statutory language.
And in particular, since the second sentence of
subsection (2) there has its own filing deadline, it
seems strange to have a district court review the
timeliness of the filing before the MSPB.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Well, the second point you
make is really separate from the first, because even if
only a discrimination claim is filed, the Government can
insert an affirmative defense, and one possible
affirmative defense which the Government has repeatedly
asserted successfully is that the appeal to the MSPB was
untimely. So that happens either way.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Even if you give up
your CSRA claim, they can assert that defense?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Yes. Yes. It's because --
because the discrimination statutes themselves have two
requirements. You have to have filed the complaint or
an appeal, depending on where you are in the process.
You have to wait a certain amount of time if you don't
have a decision.
The statutes themselves don't --
JUSTICE ALITO: I don't understand why
you're giving this up, and I don't see -- I also don't
see any provision that says that -- that specifies what
the standard of review in the district court is for a
nondiscrimination claim.
(C) sets out the standard of review in the
Federal Circuit for a nondiscrimination claim, but it
pointedly says nothing about the district court.
Doesn't that suggest that that claim doesn't go to the
district court?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Your Honor, that question,
of course, isn't here because we haven't asserted a CSRA
claim. And if you have doubts about it, I think I would
reserve that for another case. But, we think the -- the
courts have treated this as -- the statute doesn't say
claims of discrimination subject to 7702. It says
"cases of discrimination."
And if you look at section 7702, which is
set out at page 8(a) of the Government's brief, it
describes the cases involved as cases which contain
these two elements. They are treated as one case in the
administrative process. And it would be highly peculiar
for the Government -- for the statute to take one
administrative proceeding and then split it in half.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Suppose -- suppose the
Civil Service Reform Act had said nothing at all about
-- about suits under the Civil Rights Act, under the Age
Discrimination and Employment Act and so forth. What
would the situation be? Wouldn't you have a right to go
to district court?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Yes. Title VII and all the
statutes authorize that.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, to prevent you from
going to district court under those statutes, you have
to find a repealer contained somewhere --
MR. SCHNAPPER: In that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- in the Civil Service
Reform Act, correct?
MR. SCHNAPPER: That's exactly right. And
we think this is a classic example of -- for application
of the rule that implied repeals are disfavored. This
-- this statute is quite precise when -- when it's
changing something, it's very specific. The second
section, section 7703(b)(2), begins with the words
"notwithstanding," because it is changing the statute of
limitations that would otherwise apply. It's changing
it from 90 days in Title VII to 30 days.
So when Congress wanted to change something,
it was very specific. But the whole thrust of this
statute is to leave in place, except where very
specifically it does otherwise, the regime that existed
under Title VII in the ADEA.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Could I make sure I
understand something that you said, Mr. Schnapper. When
you talk about the affirmative defenses that the
Government can raise, that is -- those are exhaustion
defenses under the applicable anti-discrimination
statute, right? It's whatever exhaustion requirements
Title VII sets out or whatever exhaustion requirements
the ADEA sets out; is that correct?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Not -- that's not entirely
correct, Your Honor. There are -- there are exhaustion
premises in the statute, but these statutes do not
contain a time period within which a charge or a
complaint must be filed with the agency, and they don't
contain a time period within which an appeal must be
taken. Those time periods are in the regulations.
The lower courts have taken the position
that those time periods also have to be complied with,
and we think that's correct.
In the case of --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Those time periods relevant
to the MSPB?
MR. SCHNAPPER: And there are also time
periods relevant to filing a -- complaint at the agency
level. It's an -- in the case of a private
discrimination claim, that time period is specified by
Title VII.
But Section 717 about Federal employees is
simply silent. Congress didn't deal with it. But it
did authorize the EEOC and the MSPB to write
regulations. They have both written regulations that --
with regard to the agency, it is the EEOC regulations
which set up the time period within which a complaint
must be filed. With regard to appeals to the MSPB, both
the EEOC and the MSPB have regulations which are the
same.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why isn't that a
repealer of what would otherwise be the law under all
these civil rights statutes? Why isn't that a repealer
of what would otherwise be their right to go to district
court?
You are saying, no, you can't go to district
court because of these time limits, not even established
by statute, but, for Pete's sake, established by
regulation. You think that that's -- that's an
effective repealer of the right to go to district court?
MR. SCHNAPPER: We don't -- we think not,
Your Honor.
Again, this doesn't go to subject matter
jurisdiction, which is specified in the statute. The
statute creates a regime. It doesn't set up time
periods.
We think Congress -- the statute should be
read to -- to mean that the authority of the Government,
of the agencies to write regulations, includes
regulations setting up time periods. It's just
inconceivable that --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And would that --
MR. SCHNAPPER: -- Congress contemplated you
would have forever to do these things.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And would that put the
employee who has a mixed case in the same position as an
employee who has a straight anti-discrimination case?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Non-mixed case. Yes. Yes.
There are regulations governing both.
The non-mixed case claim would only be
governed by the EEOC regulation. The mixed case claim
is governed as well by the time limit in the MSPB
regulation, but that is the same as the time limit in
the EEOC regulation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I've probably led a
charmed life, but I've never heard of mixed case until
this matter came before us. And I was -- I suppose you
have to adopt the phrase, but the statute 7703 just say
"cases," "cases of discrimination," which is what this
We don't usually think of cases that we call
a discrimination case based on whether or not it
contains other issues. It's a case.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Well, Your Honor, the -- you
have led a charmed life.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I mean, I think that helps
you.
MR. SCHNAPPER: I'm not sure how that
affects it. The phrase mixed case is in the
regulations, both of the EEOC. It also was in currency
prior to 1978. When Congress was working on this
problem, it was already calling these kinds of cases
mixed cases.
And, of course, we haven't touched on this.
A mixed case is a case which involves -- has two
elements. First, it involves what's called, under the
Civil Service Reform Act, an appealable issue. That is
an issue which can be appealed to the MSPB, not --
JUSTICE ALITO: Can't an employee take a
mixed case appeal to the Federal circuit?
MR. SCHNAPPER: You could not take that case
to the Federal circuit without waiving your
antidiscrimination claim. That is what the -- that's
the way we read the law and that is the way the MSPB
reads the law. The MSPB regulation expressly provides
that if you want to go to the Federal circuit you must
waive that right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Schnapper, can you
explain something about the MSPB's role? That is, once
you have a final decision from the agency, you could go
right to court. You don't -- on the discrimination
claim, right? You don't need to go to the MSPB. You
don't have to exhaust anything before the MSPB to get
your discrimination claim. So, how does the M -- the
possibility of going to the MSPB make the discrimination
claim any less ripe for judicial review than it would be
if you stopped at the agency level?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Well, it's our view that
once you appeal to the MSPB, and putting aside the
unusual situation of people who withdraw the appeal, you
then must wait, under the statute, 120 days or until you
have a decision. So you are ready, all set, and you
could go to court after the district court decision, but
if you appeal to the MSPB, you then have to wait until
0 days have passed or you have a decision.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What are -- what are your
advantages? You are deciding -- you have the final
agency decision, you could go right to court on the
discrimination claim. What do you gain by invoking the
MSPB's authority?
MR. SCHNAPPER: What you gain are the rights
in Section 7701(c), which are set out on page 3(a) of
the Government's brief. In the appeal to the MSPB with
regard to the Civil -- the CSRA claim, the burden is on
the Government to establish by a preponderance of the
evidence that its decision was correct. If you bypass
the MSPB and go to district court, then your claim is
only a claim under section 7703(c), which requires the
plaintiff to establish that there wasn't even
substantial evidence to support the decision. So,
plaintiff --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Suppose -- I'm
sorry.
MR. SCHNAPPER: The CSRA claim is much more
valuable at the MSPB. In terms of discrimination claim,
in the real world that's probably not why people go to
the MSPB. The MSPB, according to the only study I've
been able to find, out of 2,000 mixed cases the MSPB
actually only found discrimination in four. But a much
higher percentage of CSRA claims are successful there.
So that's why people go there.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So I suppose if you
say, I was fired on the basis of race, and the agency
says, no, you were fired because you were incompetent,
you could take the incompetence claim to the MSPB, and
if you win, saying, no, you were perfectly competent,
they shouldn't have fired you, you get that relief and
you don't need to proceed with the discrimination --
MR. SCHNAPPER: Sure. And that's why people
go there. That's why people go there.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You argued that you were
exceeding the dismissals on the basis of jurisdiction
should go to the Federal circuit, but that you were only
invoking the exception that procedural dismissals should
be permitted to go to the district court or authorized
to go. Are you still standing by that distinction?
MR. SCHNAPPER: No, no, that was not our
distinction. That was the distinction that I think in
the Tenth Circuit in Harms--
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes, but when you argued
it below you argued the exception, you didn't argue the
jurisdictional rule. Are you abandoning that
distinction?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Yes. Our view is that all
mixed cases go to the district court. That is the view
of the MSPB and of the EEOC and the regulations --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But it's not the view of
the circuit courts, even the courts --
MR. SCHNAPPER: It's not the view of the
circuit courts.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Even the courts whose
exception you --
MR. SCHNAPPER: That is not their view and
we think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Every circuit court
unanimously holds that jurisdictional dismissals
should go only to the Federal circuit.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Right. We think that that's
wrong and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And you --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I'm sorry -- go ahead. I'm
sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Should you be arguing
this before us?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Well, you don't --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is this a distinction
you should abandon here?
MR. SCHNAPPER: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or at least ask us not
to address?
MR. SCHNAPPER: You don't need to address
it, but we think those decisions are wrong. The
statutory arguments that we're making treat -- draw no
distinction between procedural and jurisdictional --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Actually the 7512
argument has more legs, I think. The point is that
you're only permitted to go to district court on issues
of discrimination that are within the Board's
jurisdiction. So if --
MR. SCHNAPPER: It's somewhat stronger, but
there are a couple of reasons why we think this
distinction doesn't make sense. The first one is if
jurisdictional issues went to the Federal circuit you
would have an -- a really bizarre problem of -- of
splitting the claim, and here's why: If, under the EEOC
regulations which the Government has referred to, if the
MSPB holds that it didn't have jurisdiction in a mixed
case, the discrimination claim doesn't die. Under the
regulations it goes back to the agency, which then
processes it as a non-mixed case. But the plaintiff is
still free to challenge the decision of the MSPB that it
had no jurisdiction. In the Government's view, that
would go to the Federal circuit. So the case would then
be pending in two different places. And if the
plaintiff came to the end of the line in the -- at the
agency level and lost, the plaintiff clearly would go to
district court. So the case would then be pending in
two different places. On our view, everything goes to
the district court.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Schnapper, if I disagree
with everything that you just said, I can still rule for
you in this case, right?
MR. SCHNAPPER: You can, and you don't need
to address what I just said.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Because there does seem to
be a good deal of difference between the question, what
happens to something that is clearly a mixed case, and
alternatively, the question of whether something is a
mixed case; that is, whether it includes a claim about
an action which the employee may appeal to the MSPB.
And one could think that questions about what can be
appealed to the MSPB ought to go to the Federal circuit
under this statutory language in a way that questions
that are involved in this case do not.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Your Honor, you don't need
to rule for that -- me on that, but if I could identify
another problem before my time runs out. There is --
and it comes up in two ways. Sometimes whether a case
is appealable depends on whether there was
discrimination. There is a district court decision in
Barrow v. Louisiana in which that problem arose. I will
spare you --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, that just makes the
next case very complicated but it has nothing to do with
this case; is that correct?
MR. SCHNAPPER: Right. But that's why I
think if you have doubts about it, you should stay away
from it because that's very bad. In addition, in a
constructive discharge case based on sexual harassment,
whether there's jurisdiction, the MSPB in deciding
whether there is jurisdiction has to decide whether
there was sexual harassment. It seems to me you would
not want that going to the Federal circuit.
I would like to reserve the balance of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
Ms. Harrington.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SARAH E. HARRINGTON
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. HARRINGTON: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
I would like to start if I could with
Justice Scalia's -- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you abandoning the
jurisdictional procedural distinction as you did in your
brief? Are you telling us to rule either completely for
you or against you?
MS. HARRINGTON: That's always been our
position, Justice Sotomayor. Our position has
consistently been that the only decisions of the MSPB
that can get review in a district court are decisions on
the issue of discrimination.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So you are prepared on
behalf of the Government to say that if we rule that
procedural dismissals can go to the district court, then
you -- then the Government will concede that
jurisdictional dismissal should as well?
MS. HARRINGTON: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Under 7512.
MS. HARRINGTON: Again, we don't think any
of them should and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We don't have to reach
that question in this case, but your brief seemed to
make the argument that there was no basis for the
distinction between procedural and jurisdictional.
MS. HARRINGTON: I agree that there is no
basis for the distinction and part of that is because,
as my friend Mr. Schnapper pointed out, there is an EEOC
regulation providing that when the board dismisses a
case on jurisdictional grounds the case can go back to
the agency, the agency can essentially reissue its final
decision, and then the plaintiff goes in to district
court. So if the whole point is to find a way for an
employee to get into district court on her
discrimination claim, we've already had that taken care
of in jurisdictional dismissal cases. So the action
really here is with procedural dismissals.
And if -- I would like to start with
Justice Scalia's line of questions about whether there
has been a repeal of the right to go to district court
on discrimination claims. And I think our starting
point is in the Federal Courts Improvement Act which is
USC 1295(a)(9), which provides that review of MSPB
decisions is exclusively in the Federal circuit. This
court is recently -- most recently in Elgin, but in
various cases over of the last 25 years has seen that
that is an exclusive grant of judicial review of
jurisdiction in the Federal circuit over MSPB final
decisions, and as the Court pointed out in Elgin the
only exception to that is for the subset of final board
decisions that are covered in 7703(b)(2). And if you
look at 7703(b)(2) the only reference to a final board
decision is at the top of page 17(a) of the Government's
brief is to judicially reviewable actions under section
02. Now we put a lot of emphasis on the phrase
judicially reviewable action and the reason we do that
is because throughout the entire U.S. Code that phrase
is only ever used either in or in reference to section
02.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, does that mean
that it is not a judicially reviewable action if it is
thrown out on a procedural ground.
MS. HARRINGTON: It means that it's not a
judicially reviewable action under 7702.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Why is that? I
mean, we think of a -- we review cases on procedural
objections all the time and we think of those as
judicially reviewable. It's -- it's a real stretch to
say simply because it says "judicially reviewable" it
means judicially reviewable on the merits.
MS. HARRINGTON: Well, in our view, again,
because it uses the phrase "judicially reviewable
action" under 7702 and that phrase "judicially
reviewable action" in the whole U.S. Code is only ever
used when you are talking about 7702, that -- in our
view that's the signal that that's a term of art in this
context.
So although dismissal on procedural grounds
is a board action subject to judicial review, in our
view it's not a judicially reviewable action under 7702.
And so you need to look at 7702 to see how --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could you say that
again?
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: A little more
slowly.
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes. A procedural
dismissal by the board is a final board action that's
subject to judicial review in the Federal Circuit.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay. It's subject
to judicial review.
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, the next --
MS. HARRINGTON: But it does not fall within
the term of art "judicially reviewable action" under
02.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay. So I thought
that your argument in the brief reduced to the question
that an action subject to judicial review in one section
is not judicially reviewable in another. That's right?
MS. HARRINGTON: Say it again? I'm sorry?
(Laughter.)
MS. HARRINGTON: This is going to happen a
lot.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: More slowly.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought -- I
thought I heard you to say, and this is what I
understood your brief to say, that an action that is
subject to judicial review is not judicially reviewable
under 7703(b)(2).
MS. HARRINGTON: That's right. It does not
fall within --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MS. HARRINGTON: -- the exception to
exclusive --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's a tough
argument.
MS. HARRINGTON: -- review.
It's a tough statute. In our view, our
argument is the best reading of the overall statute.
And again, because we think "judicially reviewable
action" under 7702 is sort of the linchpin phrase in
03(b)(2), we want to look to 7702 to how the phrase
"judicially reviewable action" is used by Congress in
that statute, and the relevant pages here are page 8a
and 9a in the statutory appendix to the Government's
brief.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can I ask you a couple
questions?
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: When the Federal Circuit
was created, this language preexisted its creation,
correct?
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So could you tell me how
when Congress was writing 7702 it was creating the
system that you are advocating when it had no idea that
it would ever create the Federal Circuit?
MS. HARRINGTON: Well, I have two answers.
The first is that in the last 25 years in all the cases
where this Court has looked as section 7703, in Lindahl
and Fausto and most recently in Elgin, the Court has
interpreted the statute as it exists today, which as it
exists today directs review of board decisions to the
Federal Circuit.
But the second answer is, even for that
brief window after the CSRA was enacted before the
Federal Circuit was created, Congress still had taken
away jurisdiction from district courts over board
decisions and had directed them to the courts of
appeals. And this Court recognized in Fausto that that
-- Congress specifically had that intent when it enacted
the CSRA. It was tired of this concurrent jurisdiction
in all the district courts throughout the country over
Federal employment actions and it wanted to reduce a
layer of review and direct them to fewer courts. Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That still doesn't
answer my question, which is: Assuming there is no
Federal Circuit, I have to read the language that exists
in 7702 and 7703, and I see judicial review, appealable
judicial review, used not in the manner that you're
describing.
MS. HARRINGTON: I disagree, Your Honor.
mean -- and there is nothing in 7702 or 7703 that would
indicate that Congress wanted, even in 1978 to have MSPB
final decisions reviewed in district court. And again,
we don't need to assume that the Federal Circuit doesn't
exist today because it does, and that's how this Court
has construed the statute for the last 25 years, ever
since the --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Ms. Harrington, go back
to the question that the Chief Justice asked you,
because the question was: Should we read "judicially
reviewable action" as something different from action
subject to judicial review, which is how you would
normally read that language, as something different from
just final agency action that you can take to a court.
Not saying which court, that you can just take to a
court.
And you're asking us -- you said it's a term
of art. So I guess the next question is: How do you
get the definition of the term of art that you say
exists in this statute?
MS. HARRINGTON: Well, you look at 7702, and
let me just say, even if you disagree with us that it's
a term of art, it's hard to disagree with the fact that
it has to be a judicially reviewable action under 7702.
That's in the text of 7703(b)(2).
JUSTICE KAGAN: Yes, it has to be an action
that -- you know, the MSPB is done and now you have a
certain number of days to take it to a court. So that's
the normal way you would read that language.
MS. HARRINGTON: But --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But you say no, it really,
you know, it includes some kinds of decisions and not
other kinds of decisions and the effect of that is that
it's really a switch as to which court you get to take
the action to, which is a very counterintuitive way to
read this language.
So I guess I'm asking you: Where do you
find the definition of the term of art? And I think
what your answer is going to be is this notion the board
shall decide the issue of discrimination and the
applicable action; is that correct.
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes. Can I just take you
back one sentence to say, the point is not just that
the board is done, the point is that the board is done
under 7702; that it has issued a decision under 7702,
and so then, as you suggest, we look at 7702 and in that
provision Congress specifies various points at which a
final board decision under 7702 becomes a judicially
reviewable action.
The one that's relevant in this case is in
subsection (a)(3), which is on page 9a in the middle of
the page there. It says: "Any decision of the board
under paragraph (1)" -- so that's 7702(a)(1) -- "of this
subsection shall be a judicially reviewable action,
either when it's issued if the employee doesn't seek
EEOC review or when the EEOC declines to hear the case."
So in our view there are two indications in
(a)(3) that tell you that it has to be a decision on the
issue of discrimination in order to be a judicially
reviewable action -- action under section 7702.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why doesn't the language
that Justice Kagan referred to, the requirement that the
board within 120 days decide both the issue of
discrimination and the appealable action, mean that the
board has to dispose of both the issue of discrimination
and the appealable action, not that it must actually
adjudicate those two issues?
What if you have a threshold, you have a
threshold timeliness issue that is completely
dispositive? You're saying that this language means the
board nevertheless has to decide the merits of the
discrimination issue?
MS. HARRINGTON: No. I'm glad you asked
that question. The directive in section -- that you're
referring to is at the bottom of page 8a. The directive
is that the board shall decide both the issue of
discrimination and the appealable action in accordance
with the board's appellate procedures.
In this case the board complied with that
directive by not deciding the issue of discrimination
because the appeal was untimely. And I know that sounds
a little strange when I first say it, so let me give you
an analogous example. Imagine a State law that directed
the DMV to issue a driver's license to any applicant in
accordance -- in accordance with the procedures
governing such applications. If the DMV required that
driver's license applicants either pay a fee or submit
to an eye exam, you wouldn't expect that they would have
to issue a license to someone who refused to comply with
those requirements. In that case the DMV would comply
with the directive that it issue a license in accordance
with its procedures by not issuing a license at all.
And it's the same thing here. Here the
board complied with the directive that it decide the
issue of discrimination in accordance with its appellate
procedures by not deciding the issue of discrimination
and therefore not issuing a decision under 7703.
JUSTICE BREYER: You don't have to read it
that way, do you? I mean, look, it says in (a), it
says, let's take an employee who is affected adversely,
and then it says "alleges that the basis for the action
was discrimination," okay. In that case the board shall
within 120 days decide both the issue of discrimination
and the appealable action. So they decided it. They
decided it was out of time. They decided it was barred.
They decided da, da, da.
I mean, there are a lot of decisions on an
issue that a person raises in court and we don't
normally say they didn't decide the issue, the court.
It decided it. It decided it was untimely.
MS. HARRINGTON: But I think normally when a
court dismisses a case based on timeliness you don't
think of it as deciding the issue.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, well, I see. The
issue. They shall decide the issue of discrimination.
I mean, you can read it as saying they have to decide
the merits or you could read it as saying, there could
be several claims that went on below. Heard them,
decide the discrimination one. Now, you decide the
discrimination one. And I agree they used the word
"issue" instead of saying decide the discrimination
claim, that it says here, he alleges. They could have
said, decide the allegation. They could have said,
decide that part of the case.
But, I mean, why do we want to jump over 14
hurdles to give this narrow interpretation to that word
issue when all that's going to happen is we'll have a
new jurisprudence arising.
Is the dismissal on the ground that it was an
allegation of discrimination, that it wasn't enough to
really make out discrimination? It was partial summary
judgment. It was a dismissal on the basis of the
statement in the complaint. It was -- I mean, we can
think of 40 different things, perhaps, that are going to
be hard to distinguish as to whether they're procedural,
jurisdictional or on the merits.
And why do we want to get courts into that, when
the simplest thing is the person says, I allege
discrimination. There it is right in paragraph 1(b) of
his paper. The MSPB says, you lose for any reason on
that particular one, and now we go to the district
court. That's just so simple.
MS. HARRINGTON: That would certainly be
simpler. And if it were up to us to make up the rules,
maybe that's what we would decide.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, no, no. All we're
doing is interpreting what you've said is the word
issue, not to be quite so technical as to mean decide on
the merits, which it doesn't mean normally, but we're
interpreting it to mean decide the allegation that he
has raised that he was discriminated against.
MS. HARRINGTON: But what we're trying to do
is figure out how much of an exception Congress wanted
to create to the exclusive -- to the Federal circuit's
exclusive jurisdiction to review MSPB decisions.
In our view, its choice of the word issue is
important, because it's not just deciding the case that
alleges discrimination. It's the issue of
discrimination.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I'm sorry.
MS. HARRINGTON: I'm sorry. Go ahead.
There's another hint in paragraph (a)(3),
and let me know if you want to jump in, but not just the
direction to look at (a)(1), but paragraph (a)(3),
another hint that Congress was really talking about
cases where the board decides the issue of
discrimination.
In paragraph (a)(3), again, on (9)(a),
Congress provides that a judicially reviewable action
becomes -- becomes a judicially reviewable action when
the employee decides not to seek review from the EEOC or
when the EEOC decides not to take the case.
Now, the only types of decisions from the
board that the EEOC can review are decisions that reach
an issue of discrimination. And so it would be strange
to be talking about decisions under (a)(1) that the EEOC
could review if you're talking about decisions that
don't involve the issue of discrimination.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Ms. Harrington, may I
just clarify that if -- if the case goes to the MSPB,
and the MS -- the Federal circuit, the Federal circuit
agrees with the MSPB that this was untimely filed,
that's the end of the case, the discrimination claim
would never be heard then.
MS. HARRINGTON: I mean, the plaintiffs
could then file a suit in district court and seek
equitable tolling for having missed the deadline to file
from the date of the final agency decision.
And, in fact, that was one of the
alternative bases for jurisdiction that was asserted in
the district court below in this case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if the Plaintiff then
goes to the district court, then what position does the
Government take?
MS. HARRINGTON: It depends on the case. In
this case, we argued against equitable tolling because,
in our view, she had missed the deadlines through her
own fault. But if there was some reason to think that
it wasn't really her fault for missing the deadlines for
appealing and -- so that even though her appeal to the
MSPB was, in fact, untimely, it wasn't really her fault,
then we might not resist equitable tolling.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Schnapper told us in
his brief, and he repeated it this morning, that the
MSPB and the EEOC disagree with your reading of the
statute, that they think that the so-called mixed case
goes to the district court.
MS. HARRINGTON: I don't think that's
correct. I didn't hear him say that; but, if he said
that, I don't think -- I mean, I know it's not correct
that the EEOC and MSPB disagree with --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, didn't -- in the
Ballentine case, didn't the MSPB take the position that
it didn't go to the Federal circuit?
MS. HARRINGTON: That was our position, you
know, I think it was 30 years ago now. And since the
Ballentine decision, the Government has had the other --
has had the position that we're asserting today, which
is that the only --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And so you -- are you --
are you telling us that the position you're representing
on behalf of the Government is the position that the
MSPB would take today, is the position that the EEOC
would take today?
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes. Yes. Our brief is
filed on behalf of all the agencies in the United States
that are affected by this.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, getting
back to judicially reviewable --
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes. Excellent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- even if I accept
your argument that that's not the same as subject to
judicial review, isn't it an odd backhanded way to get
to your position?
This is not something about -- a provision
about what's judicially reviewable and what's not. It's
a notice provision. It says these actions have to be
filed within 30 days after notice of judicial review.
MS. HARRINGTON: Well, but some --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And then you say
that judicial reviewability is the key linchpin that
bases your argument, when it's really just in a sentence
about notice.
MS. HARRINGTON: But it's in a provision
that's describing the exception to the general rule
that's set out in 7703.
So the general rule in 7703 is that when
you're talking about final board decisions, judicial
review of those decisions is in the Federal circuit.
And this is at 16(a) and 17(a) in the Government's
brief. It says, except as provided in paragraph (b)(2).
So when you're looking to (b)(2), you're
wondering -- you're asking what subset of final board
actions -- that's -- final order or decision -- that's
their language used in (a)(1) -- what subset of final
orders or decisions of the Merit Systems Protection
Board fall within (b)(2).
Now, in (b)(2), the only types of final
orders that are described there is at the end of the
section, judicially reviewable action under section
7702.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, yes, that's
where the phrase comes in, but it does seem an odd way
to establish that that is the critical element that
tells you which provisions you can take forward when it
just says your time is 30 days after you get notice of
judicial review.
MS. HARRINGTON: Under --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And here the
Government says, aha, judicial review, we think that
does not mean subject to judicial review. Judicially
reviewable doesn't mean subject to judicial review.
MS. HARRINGTON: So even if you throw out
the term of art --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MS. HARRINGTON: -- part of our argument, and all
you look at is the last two words of that sentence,
which is Section 7702, you still have to look at 7702
and figure out when Congress told you that a final board
decision could be subject to judicial review.
And the relevant place for this case where
it did that is in section (a)(3), which is on page 9a.
And there again, it points at (a)(1), which directs that
the Board decide the issue of discrimination. So it
says a decision under (a)(1) is -- is judicially
reviewable. If a decision does not reach the issue of
discrimination, it is not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: As of. See, it
shall be reviewable action as of. Again, it's just
going to the timeliness.
MS. HARRINGTON: Right. But again -- but
the two time triggers would only come into play if a
decision reached an issue of discrimination, because the
EEOC can't review issues -- can't review dismissals on
jurisdictional or procedural grounds. It can only --
the EEOC's review of the board's -- of a board decision
is limited to its review of the board's interpretation
of an anti-discrimination law or its application of
those laws to a particular case.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Harrington, would you
agree that this is a remarkably strange way of Congress
trying to accomplish this objective? I mean, if
Congress were really saying we don't want procedural
determinations to go to the district court, that's a
very easy thing to say. Congress does not need to send
you -- you know, involve six different cross-references
and unnatural reading of statutory language.
And, you know, in the end, your argument
just is based on this notion that Congress used the word
decide rather than dispose of in this single provision.
The argument would completely collapse if that were not
the case. It just seems like if Congress wanted what
you say it wanted, Congress would not have done it in
this extremely complicated and backhanded way.
MS. HARRINGTON: I mean, I'm not going to
resist the idea that the CSRA is very complicated. I
mean, every case this Court has had about the CSRA, they
have remarked about how it is a complex statutory
scheme.
But I think Congress did accomplish in a
pretty simple way what you suggest, which is directing
that procedural rules should be reviewed in the Federal
circuit, and it did that by making that the background
rule.
In 7703(a) and (b)(1), it says, final
decisions of the board are reviewed in the Federal
circuit, full stop only, except as provided in (b)(2).
And then the question is, well, which of those decisions
fall within (b)(2).
In our view, you should not read that
exception more broadly than necessary to accommodate
employees' rights to have their discrimination claims
determined de novo in district court.
Here, the board decision, it decided two
things. First, was Petitioner's appeal to the board
timely; and, second, was there good cause to excuse her
untimeliness. There is no reason to think that Congress
would have wanted that Board decision to be reviewed
anywhere other than the Federal circuit. The whole
point of having the Federal circuit is to have a unified
body of law governing certain things in the country that
Congress really thought should be directed to one place,
and that included board decisions.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But you're not -- the
Federal circuit didn't exist at the time that these
statutes were written, so what -- you know, really, it
would have been taken to the various courts of appeals,
and you wouldn't have gotten that uniformity anyway.
MS. HARRINGTON: Right, but you would have
had more uniformity than you would have had if the cases
had continued to go to the district court, which is
what -- which is what was happening before the CSRA, and
Congress specifically wanted to stop that process.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You don't have a quarrel
with your opposing counsel's position that once the
Board decides the CSRA claim and the discrimination
claim, the district court reviews both?
MS. HARRINGTON: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Justice Alito was
questioning that, but you don't quarrel with that.
MS. HARRINGTON: We don't quarrel with it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So the lack of
uniformity is inherent in this structure. You just want
to carve out one piece of it that --
MS. HARRINGTON: No --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that you say deserves
more uniformity.
MS. HARRINGTON: It is -- it is true that a
small range of procedural issues governing the board's
procedures might be heard in district court, but it is
truly a very small universe of issues bordering on
non-existent, and let me explain why. As suggested
here, the only reason -- the only way it would come up
is as part of an affirmative defense by the agency, a
defense of exhaustion. But then generally speaking it
would have to be a procedural issue that the Government,
that the agency raised before the board and the board
rejected.
Now, the board's own regulations allow the
board to waive any of its -- any of its regulatory
requirements, including timeliness, for good cause. And
so the Government would have to argue in the district
court that essentially the board abused its discretion
by not waiving a procedural objection, and that's a very
high hurdle and I think it's really hard to imagine very
many cases in which that's going to come up, where the
Government's going to make that kind of argument. So
although there's -- there's potential, there's a
potential for a tiny bit of erosion of uniformity under
our view, it is really a small universe of issues that
could go to district court.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there anything you want
to say on the question of which is worse? That is to
say, I get your point on the word "issue," and I think
you can read the word "issue" to say there is a
contested point as to whether there was discrimination
or to say there is a contested point between the parties
as to whether the MSPB -- whether the plaintiff has a --
has a legal right before the MSPB to get the lower --
the agency reversed on the issue of discrimination.
The latter way favors your opponent, the
former favors you; okay. So we could do either, I
guess.
The one way, if you win, there will be a
body of law about what counts as procedural and what
doesn't. That sounds confusing to me. If you lose, I
quite agree with you that there will then be different
courts deciding different procedural matters, where
you'd get more uniformity out of the Federal Circuit.
Okay. Do you have anything to say about which of those
two evils is worse? Is there any reason --
MS. HARRINGTON: Absolutely.
JUSTICE BREYER: Have we any way of knowing?
MS. HARRINGTON: I mean, I think Congress
made the determination.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- going back to the
language, and so far, in my hypothetical anyway, I think
the language at best might be read, that word "issue,"
the way you say, but need not be.
MS. HARRINGTON: But I think you can resolve
the ambiguity in the use of the word "issue" by looking
at the rest of (a)(3), which again ties the decision
under (a)(1) to reviewability by the EEOC. I don't
think there is any dispute that the EEOC can only review
board decisions that involve an issue of discrimination,
either an interpretation of an antidiscrimination law or
an application of such a law to the facts of the case.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I have a problem,
because to accept your reading is to say that judicially
reviewable action differs between 7702 and the escape
hatch, because the only way the escape hatch can work,
it, too, cross-references 7702 in the same way that the
provisions you are relying on do. Under your reading
both should be given identical meaning, because they
both cross-reference 7702; and yet your brief says, no,
we shouldn't have that absurd result.
MS. HARRINGTON: But not because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It seems to me that if
you concede that there is an absurd result in applying
your interpretation to the escape hatch, by definition,
your meaning can't be ascribable to that phrase.
MS. HARRINGTON: Well, so just to be clear,
we think the phrase "judicially reviewable action"
should be given the same meaning in section (e) that it
is given elsewhere in 7702.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So if the board --
MS. HARRINGTON: Our view is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So when does the time
frames of the escape hatch commence --
MS. HARRINGTON: So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- if the board hasn't
rendered any decision on anything?
MS. HARRINGTON: Exactly. If the -- if the
appeal is still pending before the board, that's when
the escape hatch of (e) comes in, because it's just
intended to prevent employees from being held hostage by
board inaction.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Right, but Justice Sotomayor
is right, that when you define "judicially reviewable
action" in your way, then 7702(e)(1)(B) becomes
nonsensical and you have to save it by inserting
additional language, by saying, you know, "and other" --
"and other kinds of action."
MS. HARRINGTON: No, it only becomes
nonsensical if you think it should apply to cases that
are no longer pending before the board under section
02. In our view, once the board issued a decision --
the decision in this case, it issued a decision under
section 7701 which is the general provision governing
board decisions, and then the case was no longer pending
under section 7702. And so it wouldn't make sense to
apply the escape hatch to cases in that situation.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, it wouldn't make
sense, but it's what the language would command if
"judicially reviewable action" means what you say
"judicially reviewable action" means.
MS. HARRINGTON: It is true that our
commonsense gloss on the statute is not found in the
text of the statute. But I think once the -- once the
case has been decided under section 7701 on procedural
grounds, it's no longer a 7702 case before the board.
And so there is just no reason to think that subsection
(e) would apply in the -- in that situation.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You still have an
exhaustion argument to raise if we were to send this to
the district court?
MS. HARRINGTON: Well, we raised that
exhaustion argument as an alternative ground before the
district court. The district court construed this case
as seeking review of the board's decision, not seeking
review of the agency's decision. Petitioner did not
challenge that district court holding before the eighth
circuit in her opening brief. She didn't flag that as
issue in the cert petition papers, and so I think, although
now she's suggested in the merits briefing that this case --
this Court maybe should really just decide whether she's
seeking review of the agency decision instead of the
board decision, in our view that's not really a question
that is presented in -- in the case any longer. In our
view she is seeking review over the board decision, the
board decision decided that her appeal was untimely,
that there wasn't good cause to excuse the untimeliness.
There is no indication anywhere in the statute that
Congress would have wanted that kind of board decision
to be reviewed anywhere other than the Federal Circuit.
And so in our view it does not fall within -- in the
exception to exclusive Federal Circuit jurisdiction
provided in (b)(2) because it does not decide the issue
of discrimination.
If there are no further questions?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Ms.
Harrington.
Mr. Schnapper you have 4 minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ERIC SCHNAPPER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SCHNAPPER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
I would like to answer the question that the
Chief Justice asked yesterday morning in Lozman. You --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You better remind
(Laughter).
MR. SCHNAPPER: I -- I am happy to do so,
Your Honor. You pointed out that -- that where subject
matter jurisdiction is concerned, is it important that
rules be clear? And you asked counsel for Respondent,
why was Respondent's rule clearer than the Petitioner's
rule?
In this case our rule is demonstrably
clearer. The question is which mixed-cases go to the
district court? Our answer is all. The Government's
answer, the rule that is derived from Ballentine, has
confounded the lower courts since Ballentine and those
problems are reflected in the divergent accounts of the
rule in the Government's brief. There are more than
half a dozen of these problems.
First, the courts are divided below, as is
the Government's brief, about whether the Government's
rule applies to all procedural issues or only to
procedural issues that arise before the court reaches
the merits. For example, in -- in Hopkins v. MSPB,
after the court had resolved the merits, there was a
dispute about counsel fees and an argument that the
counsel fee application was untimely. The Government
took the position that that timeliness issue belonged in
the district court.
Secondly, the lower courts are divided as is
the Government's brief about whether a procedural issue
that is related to or intertwined with the merits goes
to the district court or the court of appeals. There is
a line of cases holding that a -- a -- when the MSPB
holds there is no jurisdiction because the
discrimination claim is frivolous, that's a procedural
jurisdiction issue, it's not a merits issue. And if you
look at the opinion in Hill v. Department of the Air
Force, you see a lengthy description of Title VII law,
in McDonnell Douglas v. Green, in the course of a
decision by the Federal Circuit holding there is no
jurisdiction.
Third, it is unclear what constitutes the
line between a merits decision and a procedural decision
issue. Some things are really neither. For example,
there are recurring disputes about whether a settlement
was voluntary. Well, it's not the merits of the
discrimination case, but it's not procedural in any
normal sense of the word.
Fourth, there are cases which involve
several claims resolved on several different bases. We
noted some of them in our reply brief. One -- one claim
was rejected on jurisdictional grounds; one claim was
rejected on res judicata and one claim was decided by
the board on the merits. It's unclear how that would
There are also situations in which two cases
get filed, one of which -- and they are related cases,
and they go to the same judge, and one -- one involved
an MSPB decision on procedural grounds, one on the
merits. The court in that case just thought it ought to
just keep them both. It's not clear how that comes out.
--
Fourth -- some, sorry, fifth.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Fifth.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Sometimes within the MSPB --
you have the point. I don't mean to belabor. Thank
you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. I -- I just
MR. SCHNAPPER: Oh, that was -- I didn't
mean --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He was just keeping score.
(Laughter.)
MR. SCHNAPPER: Oh, okay. I'm sorry. I
think -- I think we are at six.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Checking them off.
MR. SCHNAPPER: The MS -- the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You are on number
five.
MR. SCHNAPPER: Okay. The -- the -- an
MSPB, ALJ, or the board itself could resolve a claim on
alternative grounds, as judges do all the time, and say,
well, we think this is time barred, but we also find
that it lacks the merits. I know where that goes.
There is also a problem, which the briefs
address, about factual disputes that arise with regard
to jurisdiction or procedure. The -- 7703(c) says,
"Questions of fact get decided de novo." What does that
mean?
If there -- let's take, for example, a case
in which the claim is that a charge wasn't filed on time
with the agency. That's a question of fact. The agency
might find that it was timely -- there could be a
dispute of fact about when the violation occurred which
triggers the limitation period. The agency would make a
finding of fact. The MSPB might affirm that finding.
The Government tells us they would affirm whatever the
agency did. The statute seems to say that's got to be
decided de novo, the Federal circuit can't do that.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:00 a.m., the case in the
