IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JEFFREY LEE CHAFIN, :
Petitioner : No. 11-1347
v. :
LYNNE HALES CHAFIN, :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, December 5, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:01 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MICHAEL E. MANELY, ESQ., Marietta, Georgia; on behalf of
Petitioner.
NICOLE A. SAHARSKY, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
for United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Petitioner.
STEPHEN J. CULLEN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
MICHAEL E. MANELY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
NICOLE A. SAHARSKY, ESQ.
For United States, as amicus curiae, 18
supporting Petitioner
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
STEPHEN J. CULLEN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 30
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL E. MANELY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 57
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:01 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
this morning in Case 11-1347, Chafin v. Chafin.
Mr. Manely.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL E. MANELY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. MANELY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
United States courts have the power to
effectuate relief in the Hague Convention cases under
circumstances presented here in this international
treaty.
Sergeant First Class -- First Class Chafin's
appeal from the district court's decision is not moot
because reversal of the district court's judgment could
grant Sergeant Chafin relief in three ways, each
sufficient to preclude mootness.
First, a reversal would mean that the United
States is the child's habitual residence. Second, the
district court or court of appeals should order
Ms. Chafin to bring the child back to the United States
and overturn the monetary award. And, third, it would
effectuate relief in the ongoing Alabama case and the
Scottish case by, one, letting Alabama courts proceed to
determine custody and, two, cause the Scottish court to
stay or dismiss its proceeding.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why would it make any
difference? Once -- once the decision -- the district
court decision is vacated, then the State court can go
forward. There is nothing that inhibits it from doing
so. There is no Federal court order. So your third
point, I think, is --
MR. MANELY: Yes, Your Honor. Under the
UCCJEA, which is what the State of Alabama would use,
there is a home State requirement that the child must be
presently -- six months before the action is commenced.
Not so much from the district court order,
but coming down from the Alabama Supreme Court, but
premised upon the original district court order, it was
determined that Alabama was not the home State of the
child. So it's sort of like the traffic light that we
talk about in our brief. It would allow the Alabama
courts to say --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Now, I don't understand
that. The child is now in Scotland.
MR. MANELY: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So how would these six
months be satisfied?
MR. MANELY: It would toll because the
child, we would argue, is wrongfully in Scotland based
upon an errant district court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you can argue that on
the basis of the vacation of the district court's Hague
Convention order. You -- you're not inhibited by
anything, as far as I can see, that the Federal court
has done. Since it's been vacated, it's as though it
never happened.
MR. MANELY: Except for the fact that there
is an error in the determination of habitual residence.
And I understand what you're saying, but
the -- the res of the controversy needs to be brought
back here. That -- that would be the appropriate remedy
here, so that we have not only the habitual court -- or
habitual residence determination in the district court
because of reversal, but that we have the child brought
back here. And then that six --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But you don't have -- you
don't have that individual -- the residence -- habitual
residence determination because it's been wiped out.
MR. MANELY: Yes, Your Honor. I understand.
What our argument is, is that there is an
ability to grant a remedy here, and that is the reversal
of that determination, so that we go back to habitual
residence in the United States. That's what avoids
mootness in this case. There is a remedy that can be
provided here. It is not impossible.
JUSTICE ALITO: Wouldn't the Alabama --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: What you're saying is
the return of the child, essentially, back to Alabama?
MR. MANELY: Bring the child back. Yes,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And so once the child is
back in Alabama, that's the remedy, then the State court
would be seized of jurisdiction sufficient then to
determine the habitual residence.
MR. MANELY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Whatever the State --
well, presumably, the child only comes back if you win.
MR. MANELY: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So presuming you win,
the child would come back, and the Alabama courts could
then seize the custody determination.
MR. MANELY: Right. Proceed under --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the Alabama court would
not have jurisdiction if the child had been wrongfully
removed?
MR. MANELY: The Alabama --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that what you're saying?
MR. MANELY: No, the Alabama court would
have jurisdiction under the UCCJEA presently, unless
this Court should determine that it is moot when a child
is removed from the boundaries of our -- of our nation.
The Alabama --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait, wait, wait. The
opinion below has been vacated.
MR. MANELY: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So there's -- there's
nothing which says that this child -- this child's
habitual residence was -- was in the U.K.
MR. MANELY: Yes, sir. Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That being the case, the
only question is will the Alabama court proceed, even --
assuming that it finds the child's habitual residence
was in Alabama, would it proceed, even if the child had
been taken out of the jurisdiction? And I understand
that it would.
MR. MANELY: If there never had been a
district court determination in the first place,
certainly --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There hasn't been. There
hasn't been. It's been vacated. It's as though it
never happened.
MR. MANELY: The posture below is that the
Eleventh Circuit vacated the opinion in February; but,
as recently as July of this year, the Alabama Supreme
Court said, well, since the matter was determined moot,
then only the divorce can proceed.
What we hope to do is, by going back down to
the Eleventh Circuit, obtaining a reversal --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's bad law. I
mean -- you mean the Alabama court is bound by a vacated
decision of a Federal court? My goodness, I never heard
of anything like that.
MR. MANELY: Yes, sir. It goes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Was their reasoning that
the child was initially removed properly because there
had been an order permitting the mother to go?
MR. MANELY: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it was a lawful
removal at that moment.
MR. MANELY: At that moment, yes. And by --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And what they're saying
is, since the case is moot, nothing has vacated the
order, but it didn't make her action illegal?
MR. MANELY: Correct. And by reversing,
then we're going back to what was argued to make the
case moot in the first place. We can bring the child
back, and we'll reverse --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: When you say, "bring the
child back," there's an impediment to that because now
this court in Scotland has told her don't -- the child
stays here. There's an order that the child not be
removed from Scotland, and there is also -- doesn't the
mother have -- wasn't this mother deported?
MR. MANELY: The mother --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So if she -- she -- if
she -- the mother comes back into the United States,
she's committing a criminal offense.
MR. MANELY: Yes, Your Honor. Absent -- and
she was present at the trial in the district court. So
there are provisions that would allow her to return for
that particular reason. And, of course, she can
reapply, I think, after something like five years. She
was deported because she had overstayed her visa.
But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But what about the order
of the court in Scotland?
MR. MANELY: The order of the court in
Scotland, we would refer to on a State level, as being a
standing order. And what it does is tell Sergeant First
Class Chafin that he can't remove the child. There is
no prohibition to the mother. There is no sense that
Scotland has assumed authority over this child -- should
become a ward of the country.
It's more that, since the mother has filed a
custody action there, it's a -- Dad, you can't remove
the child from Scotland.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's a stand-still order
there.
MR. MANELY: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How long has the child
been -- now since -- since the return, pursuant to the
Federal court's order, how long has the child been
residing in Scotland?
MR. MANELY: October 13th of last year, I
believe, so approximately 14 months now.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if the Alabama courts
were to conduct a custody proceeding? Since the child
has now been in Scotland for over a year, would they
consider the child's habitual residence to be Scotland?
MR. MANELY: The Alabama courts --
JUSTICE ALITO: And if they did that,
wouldn't they defer to the Scottish courts for custody
determination?
MR. MANELY: No, Your Honor, I don't think
so. Again, applying UCCJEA, which all of the States
have, but for one, they are to look at Hague orders in
the same way that they would apply UCCJEA, and there is
a tolling provision. If a child has been wrongfully
removed from that jurisdiction, then the child is still
presumed to have retained a home State status with
Alabama.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, there is a
judgment against your client, isn't there, for $94,000
or so?
MR. MANELY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you break down
that figure?
MR. MANELY: The lion's share of it is
attorneys' fees, but, also, within the Hague, there is a
mandatory provision for costs; not just costs of court,
but the costs of mother's flying over here from
Scotland, staying here for approximately a week and a
rental car. So while that isn't the predominant share
of the $94,000, it was a substantial portion of that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So have the State
proceedings been dismissed? Or are they in suspense?
MR. MANELY: Neither, Your Honor. Where
they are is the trial level court is waiting to grant a
divorce, but that is kind of effectively held up by the
parties, in hoping that we can use Alabama Rule of Civil
Procedure 60(b)(5); that, if we get a reversal from the
Eleventh Circuit saying habitual residence is the United
States, we can reopen the custody matter.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So it would be your
position that the Alabama courts still have jurisdiction
over the child and the mother?
MR. MANELY: Certainly, if the Eleventh
Circuit reverses, yes, sir. Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, that cost that
you have to pay for the mother, even though the case was
mooted, that judgment is still outstanding for the
monies you have to pay?
MR. MANELY: It still is, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: If you win on this
appeal, is that wiped out?
MR. MANELY: We believe that it is. The
energy of our case is thrust into having habitual
residence determination reversed and bringing the child
back; but we think that when -- the provision of ICARA
that allows for the costs, the travel costs and the
attorneys' fees to be awarded, is also obliterated. So
that is also --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that done in a
separate judgment? The --
MR. MANELY: It's a separate order, same
case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And is there any problem
about the time to appeal from that having run?
MR. MANELY: We don't think so, but, again,
that's not the thrust of our case. I understand the
government's argument, and we certainly agree with that.
Our energy, all along, has been spent exclusively on
reversing habitual residence determination.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But, as far as mootness
is concerned, if you have not appealed from that order
and the time has run from your appeal, you can't rely on
that to avoid mootness.
MR. MANELY: Your Honor, I believe I
understand your question, and I -- and I think you're
correct. If we're talking about a determination that
the United States loses power over children when they're
removed from our borders, then the rest kind of falls in
line.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, what's -- what
happens --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand your
answer.
MR. MANELY: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is your -- I don't
understand that answer. Are you -- are you saying
that -- that your failure to appeal that in a timely
fashion makes it impossible for the Court of Appeals to
obliterate that award?
MR. MANELY: No, sir. And it may be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's -- that's what
I thought the question was.
MR. MANELY: I apologize. And it may be
just the -- the tunnel vision that we have in this case.
We're solely focused on reversing the district court
order on habitual residence and returning the child.
The rest is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, then -- then retain
your tunnel vision. And don't say that the case remains
non-moot simply because of this other issue. The other
issue is either in the case or out of the case. Now, is
it part of your case?
MR. MANELY: We agree with the government's
position that it keeps this case alive, and it is not
moot. But I certainly understand the -- the issue,
particularly since our focus on the case is otherwise.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if you -- if you could
take an appeal and got a reversal of the decision -- of
the order removing the child to -- allowing the child to
be removed to Scotland, wouldn't that undermine the --
the judgment for costs? I don't understand why that
would be a separate order -- why that would be something
that has to be appealed separately. Why wouldn't that
be included with the final order in the case?
MR. MANELY: Yes, Your Honor. I agree. And
the -- allowing the child to leave was the linchpin that
allowed the costs. Removing that impediment also
removes the costs.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I mean, that's
lovely, but -- so you are saying that you don't have to
appeal that separately; is that what you're saying?
MR. MANELY: I'm saying I trust that that is
the resolution of this; but, again, our focus is on the
child, not costs.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you've got to answer my
question.
MR. MANELY: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Do you have to appeal that
separately or not? If -- if the way you answered
Justice Alito's question was -- was the way you did, you
are saying that it's unnecessary to appeal that monetary
aspect of the judgment separately, that it goes -- it
goes with the rest of it. Is that -- is that your
position?
MR. MANELY: Your Honor, I think that it is
correct that if the -- the basis for the award is
removed, then the award is removed; but, if the basis
for the award remains, then it would be difficult to
assert that there is some reason to appeal that award.
I don't think there is any great answer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think you're saying it
doesn't have to be appealed separately.
MR. MANELY: Yes, sir. Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Can you tell me what's
happening -- what is the status? Given the vacated
return custody order -- return order, will the Scottish
court ever determine habitual residence?
MR. MANELY: The Scottish court has no need
to determine habitual residence because that was
determined by the -- by the district court.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that order has been
vacated, so can they revisit that question is really
the -- the issue.
MR. MANELY: I don't -- they wouldn't
revisit within the context of a Hague proceeding, unless
a Hague proceeding were brought there. Within the
context of their own custodial determination, like the
Alabama court would in the divorce, there is a
determination of -- of jurisdiction over the child.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you could bring a Hague
proceeding there, right?
MR. MANELY: We could bring a Hague
proceeding there.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You could say -- you know,
there having been no decision in the United States, we
want you to decide what habitual residence is, and we
think it's the United States. You could do that.
MR. MANELY: We could do that. The problem
with that is that we're talking about different points
in time.
For our Hague -- actually, the mother's
Hague proceeding, she's the one that filed it -- for the
mother's Hague proceeding, the time period that we're
looking at was February of 2010 until the child left in
October of 2011, that is the time frame we'd really like
to stay with. That's an important time frame.
If we go to Scotland, we're talking about a
different time frame. It's a different animal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought you said
that that time period was tolled -- the period that she
was in Scotland would be tolled.
MR. MANELY: From a United States
perspective, more specifically an Alabama perspective,
yes. Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But in Scotland, it's --
it would be a custody proceeding. Forget about the
Hague. The child is there. The mother is bringing a
custody proceeding. And the question for that court is
where is the child's habitual residence now?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And at the Hague, it's
what was it then.
MR. MANELY: Yes. Yes. And -- and the
Scottish court -- our -- our briefs are filled with the
citations of authority, but the Scottish court -- there
is no reason to believe that the Scottish court wouldn't
honor what the United States court has said about
habitual residence, the case brought by the mother in
the Federal district court in Alabama.
So that if that was the linchpin to allow --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that was only for
determining the Hague Convention; and, if the Hague
Convention is out of it, then there is a custody
proceeding. The idea of the Hague Convention is just to
get the case to a forum that's an appropriate forum to
decide the custody question, right?
MR. MANELY: Yes. Custody is the second and
crucial element of the Hague Convention as well.
If -- if there are no further questions, I'd
like to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Saharsky.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF NICOLE A. SAHARSKY,
FOR UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING PETITIONER
MS. SAHARSKY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Put simply, this case is not moot because an
appellate decision on the merits would matter. What the
Court has been discussing today is there are various
ways in which the appellate decision might matter.
There are ways that there would be a judgment that the
father either did or did not wrongfully retain the
child.
Part of the wrongful retention determination
is the 900 -- or the $94,000 in money damages. There is
a question of whether the child might remain in the U.K.
or be brought back to the U.S. And then there's the
question of which courts are going to decide custody,
Alabama or Scottish courts.
And we don't need to know precisely -- and
this Court doesn't need to figure out all of the
different details of Alabama State law or of custody law
under the Scottish proceedings. All the Court needs to
decide is that the appellate court's decision would make
a difference here. And it's -- it's just not the case
that you could say it's moot because it doesn't make a
difference.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we don't know it'll
make a difference without answering those questions.
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, I'm glad --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, you want us to --
to say it might make a difference, and that's enough,
right?
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, this Court has said
that, as long as there's any possibility of effectual
relief, that the case is not moot. So --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, you should put it
that way, then. It doesn't -- you don't know that it
makes a difference, but you don't have to know, right?
MS. SAHARSKY: That's what I would say is
that you don't have to know.
But just, if there is nothing else but a
declaratory judgment that the father either did or did
not wrongfully retain the child in the U.S., that is a
piece of paper in the world that has consequences to
these parties. It has consequences in terms of the
money judgment that's been entered, and it has
consequences in terms of where custody will be
determined.
The whole point of bringing a Hague
Convention case is to get the child in the place of
habitual residence, so that those courts, under their
own law, can decide custody.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Ms. Saharsky, not to -- I
mean, the whole object of the Hague Convention is to
stop this shuttling the child back and forth. But,
because of this unfortunate situation we have, where the
district judge wouldn't give a stay, you're -- what
you're -- what you're urging is exactly what this
Convention was meant to stop.
This child has been in Scotland for 14
months. Now, you say bring it back to the United
States, and we -- we start over. The whole object of
the return procedure is so that you get the child to a
place that's a proper place to determine custody; isn't
that right?
MS. SAHARSKY: Yes. We share your concerns
about not wanting the child to be shuttled back and
forth. And we think that the way to accommodate those
concerns are by stays in appropriate cases, where the
four factor test that -- with respect to a likelihood of
success on the merits and a balancing of the equities is
met; and that, when stays are put in place pending
appellate proceedings, that those proceedings be
expedited, the decisions made quickly.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And would you go further
and say that, if a stay is not in place, that that still
does not deprive the Court of Appeals of jurisdiction to
resolve the case on the merits?
MS. SAHARSKY: Yes. That's what we would
say, that the case is not moot. The court of appeals
should be able to go forward with the case.
But if the case for a stay has not been made
by the losing party, then the child should be returned
to the country of habitual residence because a
determination has been made that that's the country
where the child should be, and there's not a good
argument that the other side has put forth for a stay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You agree that the
ideal -- the ideal procedure would be, and I quite
agree, that you have a very fast track stay pending
appeal and an expedited appeal. But there is no rule
that -- that requires that, so how -- how could that
sensible procedure be put in place?
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, we think that just,
under the normal court appellate rules, that that
effectively is what happens using the American stay
standard for a four factor test, not that there would be
a stay in every case, but, when the showing -- the
appropriate four factor showing is made for a stay, that
then a stay would be appropriate, and an expedited
appeal would be appropriate.
But you can't ---
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's lovely, but
there wasn't a stay here. So what do you do when that
procedure hasn't been followed? That's the issue that
we're presented with.
MS. SAHARSKY: That's exactly right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And do we even know that a
stay would have been appropriate here?
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, the district court
denied a stay, and Petitioner did not go to the court of
appeals, so we don't know --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So presumably, a stay would
not have been appropriate.
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, then, if that's the
case, but -- but it -- but this decision actually went
to the court of appeals, and the court of appeals
reversed on the merits. It would be up to the district
court on remand to determine how to fix its prior
erroneous decision. And it would use the equitable
authority that it has in every case to fix a wrong
decision and determine what the right thing is --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But we wouldn't go back
to what should have happened, that is, the district
judge applying the four factor test -- or did the
district -- there was an application for a stay. It was
denied, right?
MS. SAHARSKY: Yes. And the district court
entered a brief order; so the district court did not go
through the various factors, but, presumably, that is
the standard the district court would have used.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I ask a question?
Does it matter? Meaning, whether a stay is granted or
not, you are, I don't think, taking the position that
only if the stay is granted is the court of appeals
seized of jurisdiction. You're saying the case is not
moot, correct?
MS. SAHARSKY: That's exactly right. The
mootness question and the stay questions are two
separate questions. And you don't want to have to say
the person has to get a stay in every single case;
otherwise, their case becomes moot. They lose their
appeal.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. Now, under
the Convention, if the child -- if it goes back to the
district court now to fashion a remedy, it could order
return, it could decide under the Convention that
bringing the child back after 14 months presents a great
risk to the child under the Convention and not order the
return, correct?
MS. SAHARSKY: We don't think the Convention
addresses that; but the district court could make that
determination using its equitable discretion.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So we just don't know
what the court's going to do, but some form of relief is
possible. That's why you used the word "possible."
MS. SAHARSKY: That is exactly -- that is
exactly our position. We don't know what the courts
would do. We're glad to discuss the possibilities with
the Court; but the standard is the possibility of
relief, it doesn't need to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But they have the power,
if they choose it, but they don't have to choose it;
that's the bottom line, correct?
MS. SAHARSKY: That's exactly right. The
position of the other side is that there is absolutely
nothing that the courts can do in these circumstances
once the child leaves. And we just think that the
Convention doesn't say that. It doesn't mandate that.
It's a question of U.S. mootness law. And this Court
has said, as long as there's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you aware of -- I
happen to be because I know this area very well -- the
English courts have an amici filed with us yesterday,
and they are sort of sensibly keeping track of what
we're doing and trying to adjust their proceedings
accordingly and in the manner they think is most helpful
to us. Whether it is or not, I can't comment on.
Is this common in the custody area? Is
there discussions between courts about what they're
doing and the why of it?
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, in the Convention,
there is kind of two aspects of this. One is in child
custody proceedings, under the UCCJEA, and one is in the
context of the Convention.
The UCCJEA, which deals with competing
States and potentially competing countries' custody
determinations, has specific provisions that address
cooperation and communication. They are, like, Section
110, 111, and 112 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And it's required.
There is a whole system set up now, right?
MS. SAHARSKY: There is a whole system for
that.
In the Convention, that type of comity and
cooperation typically occurs through the Central
Authorities. Each country has a Central Authority that
communicates with each other. So, for example, if the
U.K.'s Central Authority would like something to be
brought to the U.S. courts' attention, it might enlist
the help of the U.S. Central Authority in, for example,
getting the parties to --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Counsel, that's very
nice. What does that have to do with this case? I
don't understand that.
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, the question is just
what -- what might happen in this case, in terms of if
there would be competing court orders or whether the
courts would -- what the courts would do in response to
each other.
And I think the point, at least, that I was
getting from Justice Sotomayor's question is that there
is a measure of cooperation here, so that the Court need
not be particularly concerned about parallel proceedings
or competing proceedings in other countries.
The way that, for example, this case has
played out is that, while the Hague Convention dispute
has been litigated in Federal court, the Alabama custody
court has appropriately stayed its hand, as it's
required to do under Article 16 of --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, do you
agree with your -- with the Petitioner, just reading a
sentence from its brief, that "mootness requires that
relief be impossible"? Do you think that's the right
standard?
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, we -- we think that the
Court essentially said that in Knox, that it said --
that asked whether there is a possibility of relief, if
the question is one of literal impossibility, we don't
think that the Court needs to ask --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What this Court --
Court has always said, if it's an Article 3 inquiry
under standing, and it said that it's not supported by
injury that is speculative or conjectural. It seems to
me, when you start talking about, well, the Scottish
court might do this or the Alabama courts might do this,
that -- that sounds pretty speculative and conjectural.
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, I think the Court has
made those comments more in the context of the standing
inquiry at the beginning of a case, as opposed to the
mootness inquiry after a case has gone on for a while,
and the burdens there are different.
At the standing -- at the beginning of a
case in the standing inquiry, the party coming into
court really has a burden of showing that this case --
that there's something to be adjudicated in court. As
the case continues, it's the party who doesn't want the
case to be in court anymore to show that there's nothing
the court can do; that even though the court has put
those resources --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, the burden is
different, but I don't agree that the standard changes.
It's just who has to prove it, one side or the other.
But I --
MS. SAHARSKY: Right. And our position with
respect to the standard is simply from language taken
from this Court's decision, going back to Mills, but
also repeated in Church of Scientology and Knox, is
there any effectual relief, whatever; is it possible to
grant relief? Relief can be partial, it doesn't need to
be complete. That's things that the Court has said.
You know, we don't interpret that to be a --
you know, literal impossibility standard. We just
understand that to be asking the question, is there
something the courts can do, even if it's not
complete --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So do you think
it's -- I mean, I know you've got a laundry list of
things, but, as I understand it, you think it's enough
that, if the Court issues an opinion, the Scottish court
might do something as a result of that?
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, I think that the Court
issuing an opinion has effects in America, regardless of
what happens in Scotland, because you have a declaratory
judgment that sets out the rights of the parties.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I thought one of the
arguments, maybe it was the Petitioner's and not yours,
was that one reason it wasn't moot is because the
Scottish courts might look at the case differently.
MS. SAHARSKY: Well, that's -- I think it's
a set of interrelated reasons.  I mean, they're really
all connected because -- can I finish the sentence? --
you have a judgment in the United States about the
rights of the parties. It affects the money judgment.
It affects what might happen with custody. I mean, it's
all part and parcel of the same dispute.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Cullen.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STEPHEN J. CULLEN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. CULLEN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Mr. Chief Justice, the effect that any
appeal court could give would be zero in the Scottish
court, nothing. There is nothing a court can -- can do
in this judicial process --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why can't they order the
mother to come back with the child? Because the
Scottish court stops her? There is competing orders all
the time.
MR. CULLEN: Which -- well, they can't,
first. The answer to that is, no, they cannot.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why not? She was here.
She submitted to the court's jurisdiction. Doesn't
her -- jurisdiction over her now continue until the end
of the case?
MR. CULLEN: Well, the case did end because
there is one remedy, and one remedy only, in this
treaty, and that is return.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That doesn't matter.
The question is, isn't she seized -- doesn't the court
have jurisdiction over her until the case ends? The
case doesn't end until there has been an appeal and a
judgment and the judgment affirmed or reversed. That
hasn't happened.
MR. CULLEN: No, that's not correct. I
can't agree with that because then we're ignoring
Article 3 and the constitutional doctrine of mootness
because that's where the constitutional doctrine comes
into central --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You are suggesting that
the Convention deprives a party, after the remedy's been
ordered and effected, of the right to appeal; not
because of mootness, but because the Convention takes
away a fundamental right to appeal?
MR. CULLEN: No, the Convention says you
must exercise the most expeditious remedies available
because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You're not going to
suggest all those countries that permit appeals
explicitly and stop removals until appeals are finished,
that those -- that those those treaty -- contracting
treaty parties are breaching the Convention, are you?
MR. CULLEN: No, they're not. There are 88
countries, and this is a very, very good convention. It
works. It works for the countries, Justice Sotomayor,
that do immediate enforcement, and it works for the
countries that don't do immediate enforcement, pending
an appeal.
But the -- the question presented here is
what a court could do in this country once the sheriff
court in the Hamlet of Airdrie is seized with
jurisdiction because what this treaty has done is -- has
taken jurisdiction from the United States and said,
Scotland, you now have jurisdiction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: One thing -- one
thing the Court can do is give him back $94,000.
MR. CULLEN: No, it cannot. It cannot. I
was very --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He has no -- his
ability to challenge the propriety of the order that he
pay $94,000 is gone?
MR. CULLEN: It's gone in this case,
Mr. Chief Justice, because, in the Joint Appendix, pages
16 and 17, you'll see -- I believe it's docket entry 52,
on page 16, an appeal was taken off those fees.
If you go on -- I believe it's page 17 of
the Joint Appendix, docket entry 57, you'll see that the
Petitioner voluntarily dismissed his appeal of the fees.
So having taken an appeal of the fees and having
dismissed, there is nothing left for any appeal court
now to do with respect to fees.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, except he might have
assumed that the issue of fees would still be alive if
the Eleventh Circuit ruled on the merits.
MR. CULLEN: Right. So --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And he -- he was just
trying to have a single appeal.
MR. CULLEN: Right. But the test that the
Court would apply in -- in that hypothetical fees
determination is totally different from the test the
appeal court would apply in looking at habitual
residence. All it would look at is, is it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, appellate courts all
the time have issues where they apply different
standards to multiple issues in the case.
MR. CULLEN: Right. So if we assume that
the fees survives -- they can pursue the fees issue.
The problem, Justice Kennedy, is that there -- there is
no habitual residence to be determined back in time.
What this treaty does is it exercises a one-way return.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that, of course --
on your premise, that's right. On their premise, it's
wrong, that -- the issue of custody is still alive under
their perspective. That's what we are arguing about, so
you're just assuming your own premise.
MR. CULLEN: Well, the premise, though, is
based in the purpose of this treaty because, back in the
'70s, before this treaty, Justice Kennedy, there was
chaos. And, in fact, the government is suggesting we
should go back to possibly competing custody orders
between Scotland and Alabama, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't think that's --
you've won a judgment in lower court that says that the
habitual residence of the child is Scotland. So if they
appeal, they might win one that says that was wrong, the
habitual residence was the United States, but the child
is in Scotland.
You understand Scottish law better than I,
but they are also bound by this treaty. So I would
imagine a Scottish court, just as we would do, when they
are trying to decide what's the habitual presumptive
then, and now, what's the habitual residence, they would
look at what the United States courts decided.
They are not absolutely bound by it. But
just as we, in the last case we had, were very
interested in what the Chilean courts said. Of course,
it was relevant to us what the Chilean courts had held
was the proper law of Chile in respect to that child.
Wouldn't the Scottish courts do the same?
Wouldn't it matter to a Scottish court, after all,
that an American court had decided that the residence
was not bound? I'd certainly give it – won’t they
give it consideration?
MR. CULLEN: With -- Justice Breyer, with
respect to the lower court's opinion, there is, as
Justice Ginsburg said, there is no opinion. There is
nothing. There's --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm assuming they win. The
reason that they want to appeal is they want to win. If
I were looking at the case as you present it, I would
say, of course, you'll win, don't worry. What are you
worried about?
But -- but they have a different view. So
they think they are going to win. Now, it means nothing
if they lose. But if they win on appeal, they then have
their order that says that this child's habitual
residence was the United States. And my question is
where we started, armed with that piece of paper, they
walk into the Scottish court and they say, oh, Scottish
judge, please read this paper.
Of course, he will read it, and I would
think that that judge would take it into account in his
decision. That's what we do with the foreign -- similar
foreign orders of other foreign courts, and I think we
should do that, and I think the Scottish courts should
and will. Now, you tell me where I'm wrong in that.
MR. CULLEN: Justice Breyer, the sheriff in
Airdrie would say, why are you handing me a finding
about what habitual residence was 2 years ago? The
child's habitual residence 2 years later is clearly
Scotland, and we -- we don't look back in time with
respect to that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Or -- then argument as to
why they shouldn't give in to this hypothetical American
judgment. That isn't my question. My question is won't
they consider it and give it -- and the Scottish courts,
to my knowledge, are not so narrow-minded. I think they
would pay attention to what other courts have said.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You're -- I think
you're -- you're --
JUSTICE BREYER: Am I right or wrong? I
want to know if I'm right or wrong.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: We -- we have a brief
in -- in the case telling us that the question Justice
Breyer is posing, would they look at it; they would say
it's irrelevant.
JUSTICE BREYER: They would?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Because what her habitual
residence was then doesn't matter one whit to us. We
want to know where she is residing now, and that's the
reason why the Scottish court would say it's not
relevant to the question before us. Their question is
not a treaty question. Their question is custody of
this child.
MR. CULLEN: Justice Ginsburg, that's
correct.
Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, thank you for Justice
Ginsburg's answer. She is quite helpful.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought he had said the
same thing, that the reason --
JUSTICE BREYER: I was there, but I didn't
understand it as fully, and now, I do.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, good.
(Laughter.)
MR. CULLEN: Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I am -- I am quite
surprised that you would say that prior residence can
never bear on present residence. In custody disputes,
this happens all the time. The child spent 5 years in
this country, 4 years in that country; now, for the last
2 years, the child has been in this country -- the
previous experience of the child has a tremendous
bearing on custody.
To say that it's only now, prospective only,
after the child has been removed, I just think is wrong,
as a matter of custody law.
MR. CULLEN: Well, with respect to custody
law versus Hague law, Justice Kennedy, there -- there is
a difference. The relevance of the Hague determination
2 years in the past is not, Justice Breyer, helpful, but
I agree.
JUSTICE BREYER: Unless there is some
accommodation here, what worries me is this: If you win
this case, it's not going to be better. Maybe for your
client, it will be, but for others in your position,
it's not going to be better.
And what's worrying me, to put it on the
table, so you can respond, is that, in similar
situations, district judges will think this child
belongs in England; this child belongs in France; this
child belongs in China, wherever they belong. But in
the back of their mind will be the possibility that they
are wrong, and they know there is a right to appeal.
And so instead of being able in these
border cases -- borderline cases, instead of being able
to send the child back home, they will think, I've got
to keep the child here, so that the other party has the
right to appeal. Now, it seems to me, in general, that
would be bad for the child. It would be -- and it's bad
for our system.
And it would be better to work out a system
that you can send the child back, and then if you're
reversed on appeal, it does matter to the other
country's courts.
MR. CULLEN: But, Justice Breyer, if -- we
say, as you know, you can't have conditional returns,
but you can have, with respect to stays, there is a
panoply of different types of stays. Now, what's
happened in the district court in this instance --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, that -- that
actually is not accurate. The Convention is full of
conditions for the return, the safety of the child, the
support of the parent who is returning -- there is a
whole set of conditions that have to be met before the
child is returned.
MR. CULLEN: Justice --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I happen to think
that -- that one could argue that returning back to the
court that had -- was making the decision after an
appeal is raised, that that's an inherent condition of a
return order. But that -- you're arguing against that.
But there are plenty of conditions that could be
imposed.
MR. CULLEN: We don't -- we don't agree with
that, Justice Sotomayor. There are affirmative
exceptions that can be asserted by a respondent, but
there are no conditions. In fact, Article 19 of the
treaty, as you know, says you cannot, as a Hague court,
step into any sort of custody determinations at all.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No. You can't -- the
Court can't order custody issues, but it can set
conditions for the nature of the return. It could say
the father pays the cost, the father has to pay for
certain expenses in the country the child is being sent
to. Those kinds of conditions can be imposed.
MR. CULLEN: Those would be limited
undertakings. As you know, Justice Sotomayor, those
limited types of undertakings came about because of the
13B exception and the 13B exception only, where a judge
felt there was some risk in the return, but the risk did
not rise to the great risk.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Cullen -- Mr. Cullen,
it's often true, in international litigation, that
enforcement is very difficult. I mean, take a
commercial litigation case where somebody is going after
assets and the assets are not in the United States, and
somebody looks and says, well -- you know, a court can
do whatever it wants, but nothing is going to happen
afterwards.
So why is this case any different from --
you know, a very frequent problem in international
litigation, which is, sometimes, judgments are difficult
to enforce? And if you look at it practically, it
may -- may never be enforced, but we don't put courts to
the job of saying, oh, well, let's check out the various
enforcement options and make predictions about who's
going to do what.
MR. CULLEN: Justice Kagan, not to state the
obvious, but this is different because it's a child.
It's a child in question, and that has to be a
consideration in this treaty.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, it's different -- that
might be -- it's certainly different in terms of the
interests at stake, and that might be a very good reason
for Congress to step in and try to fix this system, so
that you don't have children shuttling back and forth.
But -- you know, at the risk of sounding hard-hearted,
in terms of the law, what is different?
MR. CULLEN: Well, what is different is --
and I need to answer the question -- two Justices have
asked me about these stays, and I need to answer that,
so I can answer your question.
The -- the district court was presented with
a single request for a stay in this case. The request
was we may or may not file an appeal. We haven't filed
a notice of appeal, so give us a stay, so we can decide
what we want to do.
What should have happened and what usually
happens is you say, give us a stay, but if you're not
going to give us a stay, give us a temporary stay. Give
us 48 hours, to see if we can get a stay from the
appellate court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's not
quite fair to say we -- we haven't decided whether we're
going to appeal. I mean, the -- the stay motion was
made immediately upon the determination of the merits by
the district court, and the district court said no. So,
I mean, didn't they do everything they could have done
to -- to get a stay?
MR. CULLEN: No. It was a peculiar
halfhearted request for a stay. The stay was we don't
even know if we're going to appeal this.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's out of
respect to the district judge, who's just issued a
ruling on the merits. I mean, saying -- you know, we
have to consider your -- your ruling, not -- you know,
we're taking you up right away.
MR. CULLEN: Right. And this was a
Wednesday. And what should have happened is, at a
minimum, a 24-hour or 48-hour request for a temporary
stay. And, Mr. Chief Justice, this happens all the time
in Hague cases. Hague practitioners ask for stays and,
if a stay is not going to be granted, ask for a
temporary stay.
The notion presented to -- to this Court
that there was some rush to justice here is not what
happened on the ground in Alabama. That is not what
happened.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me --
and I may be taking the opposite position from one of my
colleagues, but the -- the best thing is to hold things
up briefly, so that the child doesn't go overseas and
then have to be brought back, particularly if you have
situations where there can be an expeditious appeal.
And I think most appellate courts would appreciate
the -- the benefit of that.
It seems to me, if you -- if you're correct
that the decision is moot, it's not going to be a --
there is going to be a rush to judgment by the
individual that wants to take the child away.
MR. CULLEN: No, we don't agree with that,
Mr. Chief Justice, because that doesn't take account of
the four factors any district court judge is supposed to
exercise in her discretion, in determining whether a
stay should be granted or not.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, again, you're just
assuming that the district judge is right, but that's
the whole issue. And as the Chief Justice indicates,
under your position, we give a premium to the very sort
of precipitant action that the Hague Convention is
designed to avoid.
MR. CULLEN: Justice Kennedy, no, what we're
doing is we are following the letter and the text of the
convention and the implementing legislation in this
country.
Time and again, this peculiar word
"forthwith" is used. It means right now. Time and
again, the treaty tells us you must act expeditiously
because the idea, Justice Kennedy, is we avoid competing
litigation in countries. We must have one country that
is deciding this. And it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So are you arguing that the
effect of the statute implementing the treaty, which
uses "forthwith" and all of this, is to, in effect,
require that, unless there is a motion for a stay
pending, the decision of the trial court be carried out?
MR. CULLEN: Yes, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you think the -- the
mere word "forthwith" in the statute is enough to alter
our normal process of appeal?
MR. CULLEN: It's the -- as a treaty, it's
the supreme law of the land. It says, if you decide to
issue a return, the child is to be returned forthwith.
And the plain meaning of those words is you must act
immediately.
JUSTICE BREYER: But I can't -- I don't
understand why you want a treaty where the best
interest of the child is what's at issue, and you
interpret it in a way that the court of one nation with
the child, where you have parents from both nations,
pays no attention at all to what courts in other nations
are saying.
I mean, my experience out of that is Chile,
where, of course, we wanted to know what the law of
Chile was and how the Chilean domestic relations judge
understood the relations between the parents. That was
important.
And similarly, I think the Scottish judge
should want to know the same thing about the courts
deciding in the United States. And the same thing is
true of the United States judge wanting to know about
Scotland and so forth.
I don't see how we're going to get harmony,
in other words, unless you let appellate processes go
forward, too. And -- and I don't know what the treaty
drafters would have had in mind if they wanted some
other regime.
MR. CULLEN: Justice Breyer, it's not that
we enter into these communications and agreements with
any country.
By ratifying this particular treaty and by
the United States saying, we are going to ratify it with
the United Kingdom or Scotland or Brazil, we are saying
much more than there's no comity here. We are saying we
trust this other country to do the right thing.
And that's, Justice Breyer, why we lodged
the Scottish papers because the Scottish papers should
satisfy you that Scotland was very satisfied there was a
valid return.
JUSTICE BREYER: I trust Scotland to do the
right thing. And I think, to help Scotland do the right
thing, it would be nice for Scotland to know what
American judges have decided. That's all. And the
reverse is equally true.
MR. CULLEN: But the -- but it doesn't
matter, Justice Breyer, because there's been a vacatur.
There is no underlying decision. The child is back in
Scotland, and now, one court can proceed.
And in fact, by continuing -- Justice
Breyer, by continuing the litigation, the effect of that
is to undermine the treaty because the idea behind the
treaty, particularly for military families, was to
enable mobility.
And by having ongoing litigation in the
United States, the only thing we can guarantee this
Court is this child is not coming to America until the
litigation is over. So now, we're talking two, three,
four years.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me, can I just --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Cullen, may I ask -- I'm
trying to figure out what exactly your argument is. So
let me give you two options, and you tell me what your
argument is, all right?
One -- you can tell me it's neither, I
suppose. But one is this case is moot because there's
no practical way to enforce any relief that's ordered by
the Eleventh Circuit, all right? That's what I came in
thinking your argument was.
The second is -- is just no, it's just
improper for the Eleventh Circuit to enter any order
granting relief.
So which is it? Is it that it's improper to
enter any order at this point? Or is it -- you know,
you can enter an order, but it's just not going to be
enforced, and, therefore, this case is moot?
MR. CULLEN: Justice Kagan, I'm going to
take your third non-offered offer.
(Laughter.)
MR. CULLEN: And the answer is because the
Constitution tells us there is no case. We cannot -- we
cannot -- and I see Justice Alito --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I don't understand the third
option.
MR. CULLEN: Because -- because Article 3
says we have to be able to grant some effectual relief
in the judicial process. And since the Mills case in
95, right up to the Knox case this year, this Court
has always said it's effectual relief in this judicial
process.
So I have to pose the question, Justice --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, then you seem to be
saying that if the -- if the law does not permit the
issuance of a particular kind of order, and that's what
the -- THE plaintiff is seeking -- or that's what the
appellant is seeking, then the case is moot. Is that
your argument? I thought that's a merits question, not a
mootness question.
MR. CULLEN: It is a mootness question
because it goes -- it's not -- it goes to the heart of
Constitutional mootness. It goes to the issue of this
may be uncomfortable, and this may be inconvenient, but
once we've effected a remedy -- the only remedy, Justice
Alito, under this treaty -- and once it's been carried
out and once that child is home in Scotland, no matter
what another court does in this judicial process, it can
have no effect on the Scottish custody proceeding --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Cullen, are you
saying that the -- under the treaty, there can be no
rereturn order? Is that what you're saying? Whether
the -- whether the return order was wrong or right,
there can be no rereturn?
MR. CULLEN: There can be no rereturn.
There was a lawful order returning the child to the
jurisdiction of Scotland.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And there could be no
rereturn by the terms of the treaty. So this is an
argument that hangs on what the treaty's terms say; is
that correct?
MR. CULLEN: Well, it is -- it is very
textual, which is, of course, what surprised us so much
in the government's position in this case because, as
you know, Justice Kagan, the last time the government
presented this position, they said exactly the opposite
in Janakakis. Now, they tried to deal with this,
Justice Kagan, in this footnote in their brief saying,
well, we touched briefly on this point before. They
didn't touch briefly on it.
They said, in absolute terms, that nothing
in the Convention -- so this is our government talking
about the text, and we may give some compelling
deference to -- to the government on text, but we don't
give any deference to them we say or what the founding
fathers meant.
But with respect to this Janakakis case, the
government said nothing in the Convention requires
courts or other authorities -- and this was in Greece --
to give binding effect to any judgment --
JUSTICE BREYER: It does equate, but now,
you've got me -- I think I'm on the same wavelength.
MR. CULLEN: Good.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: And I think it was back
just as well, let me see, because Justice Ginsburg -- I
see the point of her answer now.
It's really fact-specific to this case that
you're talking about. So it just happens that the child
has now been in Britain or in Scotland for 18 months.
And so the question of current habitual residence where
they have been there for 18 months is a question of
what's been happening over these 18 months, and what
happened before the 18 months has absolutely nothing to
do with it.
And the most that the court of appeals could
say is that it was resident in America 18 months ago,
and that's no more relevant than saying that the cow
jumped over the moon or some other thing. Is has -- is
that the point? Is that the point? Is that the point?
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought -- I thought
that's what you were saying.
JUSTICE BREYER: If that's the point -- yes,
that is the point. Okay. If that's the point --
MR. CULLEN: I would say it is the point
because the Convention says it's the point.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, the Convention
doesn't know whether it's 18 months or 6 months or what
counts as habitual residence, does it?
MR. CULLEN: The Convention says you look to
the place where the child was located immediately prior
to the --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's true, but you have
to decide whether that's the habitual residence. And it
seems to me that you're adding a factual thing, that
what happened in 18 months earlier has nothing to do
with whether the child is now a habitual resident of
Scotland.
And what I want to know -- and I'm not going
to find this in the treaty, I don't think, because it's
not going to say whether it's 11 months or 12 -- but I
want to know what source I look to, to show that you're
right and that what happened 18 months previously has
nothing to do with the child's habitual residence as of
the place where he has lived for 18 months.
MR. CULLEN: Well, habitual residence being
fact and law --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes. Fact.
MR. CULLEN: Right?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yours is fact. I want to
know what I look to, to find out that fact.
MR. CULLEN: You look to 1895, you look to
the Mills decision, and the Mills decision that tells
you, under Article 3, a case is moot when the issues
presented are no longer live and the parties lack a
legally cognizable interest in their -- the live issue
of habitual residence 18 months ago is dead.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So everything turns,
under your view, on whether or not the district court
gives the losing party the 48-hour stay or whether the
mother in this case decides to stay in the United States
until the U.S. proceedings are done.
The incentives if you prevail are for the
custodial or the parent with control over the child to
leave immediately. Even after a motion has been
filed -- if a motion for a stay has been filed, that's
not a stay. Get on the first plane out, and then you're
home free. That seems, to me, to be a very unfortunate
result.
MR. CULLEN: Mr. Chief Justice, we don't
agree, and here's why: We don't agree because,
initially, the district court judge did not order the
instantaneous departure of this child. She only did
that after considering the motion to stay. It was
not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no. I know, but
the point is that the other side says that the decision
was wrong.
MR. CULLEN: And it's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And -- you know,
most -- not most, but many district judges don't like to
immediately say, after they have issued a decision,
well, there is a good likelihood that I'm wrong, and
therefore, I'll issue a stay.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So there has to be
at least a period before somebody can go up to the court
of appeals and get a stay, and if you're right, what's
happening during that 48 hours or 24 hours is that the
parent with control of the child is trying to find the
first flight out, and once she does, it's all over.
MR. CULLEN: It is all over once -- once the
doors close on that plane and that child arrives back in
Scotland, unless the plane turns around and comes back
again, it is all over. And it --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if I understand your
answer to Justice Kagan, your argument is dependent on
the proposition that, under the Convention, that once
the child has left this country, a U.S. court no longer
has any power to order the child to come back; is that
right?
MR. CULLEN: Yes, Justice Alito.
JUSTICE ALITO: And I don't see where that
was decided, either by the court in this case or in the
Beckier case that the Eleventh Circuit panel here cited.
There is no discussion in either of those opinions of
the -- how the Convention -- what the Convention says on
this question.
MR. CULLEN: Well, the Beckier case goes
back to Mills and relies on Church of Scientology and
Mills --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, no. This is not a --
this is not a question about our general standard of
mootness. This is a question of the meaning of the
Convention. As I understood your argument to Justice
Kagan, your position is dependent on a particular
interpretation of the Convention. And I don't see any
discussion of that interpretive issue in either of those
opinions.
MR. CULLEN: Well, this is the -- this is
what makes constitutional mootness uncomfortable because
it's an answer that Justices and judges typically don't
want to hear, but it is the answer. The answer is there
is nothing left to be done. The one remedy has been
effected, Justice Alito, and what -- what brings all
this into sharp contrast now is what we lodged last
week.
The Petitioner, Justice Alito, himself, is
fully participating in the Scottish proceedings.
JUSTICE ALITO: If the -- if the Convention
said explicitly that a court in this country or whatever
other sending countries involved could order the child
back, this case would not be moot; is that correct?
MR. CULLEN: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: And you -- but you say that
the Convention, in effect, says exactly the opposite;
once the child leaves, there can't be an order requiring
their return.
MR. CULLEN: Right. And there would be a
problem, Justice Alito, if we didn't have the motion to
stay concept, if we didn't have all of the alternatives
for district courts to enter different types of motions
to stay. What -- what at least will happen from the
Chafin case, I'm sure, will be everyone will know that
you need to ask for a motion to stay, everyone will know
you need to ask for different types of motions to
stay --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But asking is not
enough.
MR. CULLEN: Well, ask --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Because the mother can
get on the plane the moment she hears that someone's
asked.
MR. CULLEN: The mother can get on the plane
when she is allowed to get on the plane, and in this
particular case, probably because she had to come in
under humanitarian parole, there was considerable
urgency in this case. And it was a very young child,
and the Scottish court was ready to beseize the
jurisdiction.
Why would Judge Johnson not do what the
treaty was telling her to do? Get the child back to
Scotland, I found habitual residence in Scotland, and
let's let Scotland move forward.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Manely, you have four minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL E. MANELY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. MANELY: Thank you, Your Honor.
With that, I'd like to touch on four points.
First of all, these courts have inherent authority to
order the child be brought back. It is a way of
reversing the wrong decision of the district court.
When we are talking about the object of the Convention,
it is, in part, rapid return, but that is kind of
putting the cart before the horse.
The critical issue is where is the
appropriate habitual residence of the child, and that is
the place that then needs to make the custodial
decision --
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, what he says is that,
after 18 months in Scotland, the Scottish court will
decide where is the habitual residence of the child. We
are now in August of year 2, and what happened before
January of year 1 is now totally irrelevant. So even if
the American courts decided prior to January of year 1
the correct habitual residence was Alabama, when the --
when the Scottish courts decide what is his habitual
residence as of 18 months later, they won't pay any
attention at all to that American decision because it is
not relevant.
That, I take it, to be his argument, which
depends on the long time, 18 months. So what is your
response?
MR. MANELY: I think that may well be his
argument. I disagree with it entirely. As was pointed
out earlier, courts are quite used to having children
have to transfer from one place to another. The closest
case on point I can think of --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that was the purpose
of the Convention, was to cut that out. That's the
whole reason for the Convention, that they wanted to
stop the shuttling of children.
Do you -- are you aware of rereturn?
Your -- your thesis is that the -- that, now, the court
of appeals could tell the district judge, you were
wrong. And then the father, armed with that, can go and
get a rereturn order from the Scottish court under the
Convention.
Have there been instances under the
Convention, was this question of rereturn -- is rereturn
authorized, assuming that there was a valid return
order, at least valid when it was entered and when the
child was returned --
MR. MANELY: Your Honor --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What is the incidence of
rereturn under the Hague Convention?
MR. MANELY: There are no cases because we
don't run into this problem, quite frankly. And -- and
rereturn is a catch phrase that was created here.
Bringing the child back would be a part of the court's
inherent authority -- part of the district court or the
court of appeals' inherent authority, and it's the basis
upon which Scotland has the child in the first place.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Isn't there a Spanish
case?
MR. MANELY: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Isn't there a Spanish
case?
MR. MANELY: There is a Scottish custody
case pending --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Not a Scottish, Spain, a
case from Spain.
MR. MANELY: A Spain -- a Spanish case, yes,
Your Honor, there is.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Where the child was, in
fact, returned when --
MR. MANELY: The child was sent to Poland
based upon the trial court's decision in that case, and
the child returned from Poland, based upon the Supreme
Court of Spain's decision in that case. So there is a
confusion between --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Was the child returned?
Or was it just a decision that the appeal could not be
avoided? Was the child returned by Poland?
MR. MANELY: Well, I don't know, ultimately,
if the child was returned from Poland, so much as the
Supreme Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That's -- see, that's the
whole problem, is that you -- you're going to have rival
decrees of two countries, which is what -- exactly what
the Convention was meant to avoid.
MR. MANELY: Except that we never have.
I mean, this is a fairly young convention.
We haven't had it that long. But we never have had that
problem before.
It's been easy enough -- Ohlander v. Larson
out of the Tenth Circuit is a great case to look at, for
where the United States has been very giving in sending
children back. We have not had this problem before.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, there is an
amici brief here that says that the Scottish courts will
not pay attention to the habitual residence of a child
at the time of the removal. The amici brief that was
filed with us yesterday, if I'm reading it correctly,
suggests that the court believes that hasn't been
settled in English law; is that correct?
MR. MANELY: That's my reading of it as
well, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That that -- so that
proposition is not as settled as the amici suggests?
MR. MANELY: Correct. I think they are
waiting to see what -- what we want to do.
So you've got Villamonte v. Marquez, where
the issue there is it's not moot because it's possible
an extradited person could one day voluntarily return,
so it's not moot.
But in this case, there is nothing
preventing the mother, who filed the case before the
district court and is still a party to the case, from
voluntarily returning. That enough is -- is enough to
survive this --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that sounds
awfully speculative and conjectural. That doesn't
sound -- whether you're analyzing it under standing in
the first instance or mootness later, that doesn't sound
to be the sort of concrete injury that's required.
MR. MANELY: The concrete injury has to do
with the habitual residence determination in the
district court, which switches if the appellate court
reverses and grants habitual residence here and orders
the child be brought back. That is the concrete
interest.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
