IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
UNITED STATES, :
Petitioner : No. 11-210
v. :
XAVIER ALVAREZ. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, February 22, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:21 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
Petitioner.
JONATHAN D. LIBBY, ESQ., Deputy Federal Public Defender,
Los Angeles, California; for Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JONATHAN D. LIBBY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 50
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:21 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 11-210, United States v.
Alvarez.
General Verrilli.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GENERAL DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
GENERAL VERRILLI: Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
Military honors play a vital role in
inculcating and sustaining the core values of our
nation's armed forces. The military applies exacting
criteria in awarding honors, and Congress has a long
tradition of legislating to protect the integrity of the
honors system.
The Stolen Valor Act continues that
tradition by prohibiting knowingly false statements that
one has been awarded a military honor. It regulates a
carefully limited and narrowly drawn category of
calculated factual falsehoods. It advances a legitimate
substantial, and, indeed, compelling governmental
interest, and it chills no protected speech.
This Court has recognized --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, may I pose a
hypothetical? During the Vietnam War, a protester holds
up a sign that says I won a Purple Heart -- for killing
babies.
Knowing statement. He didn't win the Purple
Heart. As a reader, I can't be sure whether he did and
is a combat veteran who opposes the war or whether he's
a citizen protesting the war.
Is that person -- if he's not a veteran
having received a medal, is he liable under this Act?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think, Your Honor, it
would depend on whether that was -- that expression was
reasonably understood by the audience as a statement of
fact or as an exercise in political theater. If it's
the latter, it's not within the scope of the statute --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Somewhat dangerous,
isn't it --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- and it wouldn't be
subject to liability.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- to subject speech to
the absolute rule of no protection? Which is what
you're advocating, I understand.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That there are no
circumstances in which this speech has value. I -- I
believe that's your bottom line.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, what -- what I
would say with respect to that, Your Honor, is that this
Court has said in numerous contexts, numerous contexts,
that the calculated factual falsehood has no First
Amendment value for its own sake.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, that's not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm -- I'm not sure
that that's quite correct. It has said it often but
always in context where it is well understood that
speech can injure. Defamation, Gertz -- page 12 of your
brief, you make this point, and it's what Justice
Sotomayor is indicating. You think there's no value to
falsity.
But I -- I simply can't find that in our
cases, and I -- I think it's a sweeping proposition to
say that there's no value to falsity. Falsity is a way
in which we contrast what is false and what is true.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I want to be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And --
GENERAL VERRILLI: I want to respond with
precision, Justice Kennedy, that the -- I think what
this Court -- and Gertz is a good example -- has done is
to draw a line, and that line -- and I think it is Gertz
itself that contains this Court's statement that false
statements of fact have no First Amendment value. That
doesn't automatically mean that a false statement of
fact lacks First Amendment protection.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that's in the context
of a defamation case.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And you want to take the
Gertz case, where it's well understood that defamation
is actionable, and say that as a general matter, that
the government can inveigh against what's false.
GENERAL VERRILLI: The -- no, I'm trying to
say something much narrower than that, Justice Kennedy,
that, with respect to factually false statements, the
government has the authority, if it can meet the
"breathing space" principles that this Court's cases
have articulated, along with the recognition that
factually false statements have no intrinsic First
Amendment value. Those are substantial constraints, but
they are substantial constraints that are satisfied in
this case because the Stolen Valor Act regulates a very
narrowly drawn and specific category of calculated
factual falsehood, a verifiably false claim that an
individual has won a military honor, and that's
information that is within you, and only punishes speech
about yourself. So, it is speech that's uniquely within
the knowledge of the individual speaker.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose -- suppose,
General Verrilli, that the decorations were left out and
Congress had said we don't like people saying that they
were in the Marine Corps for 25 years when they never
served for a single day in any armed force. So, they
have a statute just like this one, but it is directed to
the false claim that one has served in the armed forces.
I don't see in your argument that there's
something special about the decorations.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I do think the
decorations matter, Justice Ginsburg. We -- we think
that that kind of a statute would be a harder case and,
under the Court's "breathing space" principles, closer
to the line because the category is much broader, much
harder to define, and it would depend on the interest.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why is it much harder to
define? I don't -- why does the broadness have anything
to do with the breathing space? I mean, I suppose your
argument here is that there is harm; it's not just
falsehood, but it's falsehood conjoined with harm, just
as libel is.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's -- that's exactly
our argument, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. So -- and in the
example that Justice Ginsburg just gave -- in your case
there's harm to those courageous men and women who
receive the decorations. In the -- in the example that
Justice Ginsburg gave, there's harm to the people who
honorably served in the armed forces.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, why isn't that just
as --
GENERAL VERRILLI: And if that's the -- and
if that is the -- that's what I was trying to get to,
Justice Scalia, is that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Their service is demeaned
when everybody says I served in the armed forces.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Congress -- under this
Court's "breathing space" principles, Congress would
need to articulate a substantial interest. We think
that would likely qualify. We just think that's
a harder case to make.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, where do you
stop? I mean, there are many things that people know
about themselves that are objectively verifiable where
Congress would have an interest in protecting. High
school diploma. It is a crime to state that you have a
high school diploma if you know that you don't. That's
something you can check pretty easily. And Congress can
say: We want people to finish high school. It's a big
thing to have a high school diploma. So, we want to
make sure nobody goes around saying they do when they
don't.
What about that case?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think that that case,
Your Honor, I think if it's an objectively verifiable
fact -- it would seem more likely that a State
legislature might enact a law like that. If it were an
objectively verifiable fact and the State could
articulate a substantial interest of the kind that Your
Honor identified, States --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The substantial
interest is the one that I've just said.
GENERAL VERRILLI: States -- States do have
laws, some States do have laws respecting false claims
to have received a diploma from a public university.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But that's -- that's for
submitting résumés. That's -- when -- that's fraud.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I do -- if I could get
back to Your Honor's point about the nature of the harm,
it is true that in Gertz you had the particularized
harm, but this Court -- the common characteristic that
allowed this Court to move from defamation to
false-light privacy, to intentional infliction of
emotional distress in the Falwell case, then to baseless
lawsuits, the sham exception in Noerr-Pennington, the
sham exception under the National Labor Relations Act,
the common characteristic was not an analogy to the
particularized harm that existed in defamation contexts.
The common characteristic that this Court's opinions
identify is the calculated factual falsehood.
It is true that the harm here is different.
It's a --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: They were -- they were in
a context, though, of recognized torts, intentional
infliction for emotional distress. Here it does seem to
me that you can argue that this is something like a -- a
trademark, a medal in which this -- the government and
the armed forces have a particular interest, and we
could carve out a narrow exception for that. I think
we'd have to do that.
But just to say that the cases you mentioned
say that there's no value to false speech, I just simply
cannot agree that they stand for that broad proposition.
They do in the particular context of a recognized tort
like intentional infliction of emotional distress.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That -- that is true.
And this -- this is a case in which the -- one of the
harms that justifies this statute is the
misappropriation of the government-conferred honor and
esteem, and that is a real harm and a significant harm.
And there is also the particularized harm of the erosion
of the -- of the value of the military honors confirmed
-- conferred by our government; and those are
particularized harms that are real. And the kind of
speech that this statute regulates are a genuine threat
to those harms in a way that, looking backwards, looking
and anchoring this argument in the tradition of this
Court's precedents, this is a type of calculated factual
falsehood that
has --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Harms -- General, I
spent a lot of time going through the multiple cases
that you cited in your brief defining the various
statutes that basically impose penalties for
impersonation of some sort or another. And virtually in
every one of them, except perhaps one, there was either
an economic interest that was harmed by the
impersonation, either by the face of the -- by the very
face of the statute or by the nature of the claim, a
dilution of a trademark by taking on someone else's
valuable property rights.
And so, I went back reading our cases, and
Justice Story many, many years ago said, look,
falsehoods have no value as such, but the "breathing
space" concept is defined by those falsehoods which
cause injury to rights that people possess, to pecuniary
-- to pecuniary interests that they have, or to the
reputation of others. And almost every statute where
we've approved a harm concept as being permissible for
recovery has affected one of those three things.
So, please tell me what's wrong with
Justice Story's view, number one; and, number two, how
does the definition of harm fit in that? What's the
harm here that fits within that descriptor?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I think three
points. First, if I could just make a general point in
response to Your Honor's question. I think that one
reality here is that, as I read this Court's cases, this
Court has never held or even suggested in any context
when the government wants to regulate a properly defined
category of calculated factual falsehood, that it has to
meet strict scrutiny. That would be a real break and a
-- and a real change in the law that would subject --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I didn't mention --
neither did Justice Story.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And -- but -- and
again -- but --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: He said if you want to
regulate a falsehood, it has to cause a harm in this
way.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And that's why I want to
get to -- that's why -- but I think it's relevant, Your
Honor, to the point about Justice Story in the following
way: The -- the -- there are a series of statutes, 18
U.S.C. 1001, 18 U.S.C. 962, the impersonating a Federal
officer statute; 1001 being the false statement statute;
perjury statutes. Those are designed to protect the
integrity of the government processes. There isn't --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Not really. They're
intended to protect the right of the government to
secure truthful information.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Rights --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The government has a
right to subpoena you at trial, subject you to oath, and
force you to tell the truth.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Statute --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, if you -- that's a
right. That fits within Story's definition.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But not a -- as -- as I
read what Justice Story is talking about, he was talking
about the rights of private citizens, and what I'm
saying is there is an additional category of
long-recognized, well-accepted government regulation of
-- of factual -- calculated factual falsehood that
serves systemic interests. And, of course, with respect
to the Stolen Valor Act, the -- Congress -- Congress is
building the Stolen Valor Act on a statute that Congress
enacted in 1923 which prohibited the -- the wearing of
medals without justification to wear the medals.
And, of course, one of the reasons Congress
acted in 1923 to do that was out of concern that the
misappropriation of the government conferral of esteem
was going to cause substantial harm. That's been on the
books for the better part --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is your --
JUSTICE KAGAN: General --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- of a century --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is your argument limited to
statements that a person makes about himself or herself?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. It is. That's the
category that the statute regulates. That is -- and it
seems to me in a situation in which the statute is
limited to factually verifiable information, the person
is speaking about himself or herself, and the category
of what's prescribed is clear --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's the principal reason
for drawing the line there? Suppose the statute also
made it a crime to represent falsely that someone else
was the recipient of a military medal, so that if
someone said falsely and knowingly that a spouse or a
parent or a child was a medal recipient, that would also
be covered.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think --
JUSTICE ALITO: That would be protected by
the First Amendment?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think that would be a
-- that would be a case in which under the "breathing
space" principles that this Court applies when we're
talking about calculated factual falsehood, you'd have
to answer a question, which is, how much risk is there
of chilling constitutionally protected speech, because
when you're talking about somebody else --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't see any difference
as far as that risk goes. I hope that in your earlier
colloquy with Justice Kennedy, you -- you were not
retreating from what our cases have repeatedly said,
that there is no First Amendment value in falsehood.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And that only -- and
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now, this doesn't mean that
every falsehood can be punished, because in -- in
punishing some falsehoods you -- you risk deterring --
deterring truth.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And that's -- that was
what I was trying to say in response to Justice Alito's
question. You have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I believe that there's no
First Amendment value in -- in falsehood.
GENERAL VERRILLI: You have to answer the
question in that case of whether there was a material
risk of deterring expression that's truthful because
what -- who knows whether your grandfather was telling
the truth when he -- when he said he won the medal. And
so, you -- it may be a more difficult case. But under
the Court's "breathing space" principles, that's the
question that one would have to answer.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, is that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, the assumption --
the assumption is that it's false. That was -- and that
it's not so hard to find out if somebody claims to have
the Medal of Honor and he doesn't. So that -- first,
you answered yes, that it's only self, and now you said,
no, it's -- it can be -- or at least I think you said --
making a false statement of fact. And the concern is --
and I gave you the question of just in service, leaving
out the -- the decorations -- other statements of fact,
false statements like "I deny that the Holocaust ever
occurred." That's a statement -- a false statement of
fact, isn't it?
GENERAL VERRILLI: It could be. I think a
statute seeking to regulate that, Justice Ginsburg,
would have viewpoint discrimination problems of the kind
that the Court identified in R.A.V., and I think also
under the Court's "breathing space" analysis you
would -- you'd have to look long and hard and have
significant concerns about that kind of a -- a statement
because it's so bound up with matters of ideological
controversy that -- that you'd want to exercise care,
but that's really quite different from what we have
here.
This is a pinpoint accuracy, a specific
verifiable factual claim about yourself, that you've won
a medal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could I -- I want to
follow up on Justice Scalia's question because I'm not
sure I understood. The Government's position is that
there is no First Amendment value in a false
representation of fact, by which I understand you to
mean not parody or something like that, but a statement
that's intended to be understood as true. There is no
First Amendment value in that statement. It may be
protected because of the "breathing space" argument, but
in whatever context, in whatever guise, there's no
protection in that false representation as such.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, that is the
position we've taken in this case, Your Honor, and the
reason we've taken it is because we read the Court's
precedents, Gertz and many others, Falwell v. Hustler,
as saying precisely that. In fact, Falwell goes a step
further and says false statements of fact are
affirmatively harmful to First Amendment interests
because they impede the -- the search for truth.
That's -- so, our -- our position is based
on the precise language of cases stretching back a half
a century. Garrison said calculated falsehood is a
category of speech that is no part of the expression of
ideas or the search for truth, and then it
cites Chaplinsky --
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, what -- what about
these State statutes -- there are more of them than I
thought that there would be -- that say no demonstrable
falsehoods by a political candidate in a political race,
and prohibit demonstrable falsehoods by political
candidates? How would your analysis apply to those?
Would they come out the other end as constitutional?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think that those kinds
of statutes are going to have a lot harder time getting
through the Court's "breathing space" analysis because
the context in which they arise is one that would create
a more significant risk of chill.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, suppose it says
demonstrable falsehoods about yourself -- -
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think -- I think --
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- just about your
qualifications, about what you've done in your life,
your -- you know, whether you have a Medal of Honor,
whether you've been in military service, whether you've
been to college. So, any demonstrable statement that a
candidate, political candidate, makes about himself.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. I think under the
Court's "breathing space" analysis, because of the
political candidate context, those statutes are going to
pose a particular risk of chill that this statute does
not pose because this is a statute about verifiable
factual falsehoods.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I guess I don't understand
why it would be more chilling in the one case than in
the other. They're the same kind of statement, and one
knows the same sorts of things about oneself.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I think the idea
would be, in a situation like that one, the government's
power and authority is being trained specifically on the
political process and statements in the political
process. And this is -- this is quite different. This
is a statute that says --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, I assume that that
would be, in the case of these State statutes, because
the State feels that it has a specially important
interest in maintaining the political sphere free of
lies.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But I -- what -- I guess
the chilling effect seems to me, at least, to be
materially different than in a situation like this one,
where what we're talking about is a very specific
pinpoint thing, one thing: Have you been awarded a
military honor or not? And a statement that is about
yourself only, not about somebody else, and that -- and
is supported by a quite strong particularized interest
in ensuring the integrity of the military honors system.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I suppose that even in the
commercial context we allow a decent amount of lying,
don't we? It's called "puffing."
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Although -- although, you
know, making false representations to sell a product is
-- is unlawful, we do allow puffing, don't we?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, certainly, and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You won't buy it cheaper
anywhere else, and --
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's -- that's
certainly right. But when we're -- and that is the line
that was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, maybe we allow a
certain amount of puffing in political speech as well.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And I do think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Nobody believes all that
stuff, right?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI: I do think the Court's --
I do think the Court's breathing space analysis would
call for that, I think that's true. But this is a
different context.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And I suppose it
might have something to do with -- I don't know whether
to call it collateral or not. I mean, I would think the
concern in the midst of a political campaign is you have
the U.S. attorney or the deputy district attorney
bringing a -- filing a prosecution of someone 2 weeks
before the election saying, well, you lied about this or
that. And maybe there'd have to be a deposition, or
maybe there'd have to be a trial. I don't -- nothing
like that's involved here.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Nothing at all, Your
Honor. And that is what I was trying to say --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It seems to me your best
analogy is the trademark analogy, Olympics case,
et cetera. You put that in a rather minor -- not an
afterthought, but it's a secondary argument in your
brief. It seems to me it's the -- it's the strongest
one.
The whole breathing space thing almost has
it backwards. It presumes that the government is going
to have a ministry of truth and then -- and allow
breathing space around it. I just don't think that's
our tradition. On the other hand, I have to acknowledge
that this does diminish the medal in many respects.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, and that's the
government's interest here, and we do think that that
kind of -- I think, Your Honor, that the reason that I
think our -- we have a lot of "slippery slope" type
questions here today, but the -- I would urge the Court
not to -- not to decline to make a sound decision about
this statute based on concern about not being able to
draw the line, because this statute is as narrow as you
can get --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, but I have a
problem, which is it's not as narrow as it could get.
Wouldn't take much to do exactly what Congress said it
was doing, which was to protect against fraudulent
claims of receiving a medal, and the example it used was
someone who used a fraudulent claim of receiving a medal
to get money.
What I'm trying to get to is what harm are
we protecting here? I thought that the core of the
First Amendment was to protect even against offensive
speech. We have a legion of cases that said your
emotional reaction to offensive speech is not enough.
If that is the core of our First Amendment, what I hear,
and that's what I think the court below said, is you
can't really believe that a war veteran thinks less of
the medal that he or she received because someone's
claiming fraudulently that they got one. They don't
think less of the medal. We're reacting to the fact
that we're offended by the thought that someone's
claiming an honor they didn't receive.
So, outside of the emotional reaction,
where's the harm? And I'm not minimizing it. I too
take offense when people make these kinds of claims, but
I take offense when someone I'm dating makes a claim
that's not true.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And -- and --
GENERAL VERRILLI: And as -- as the father
of a 20-year-old daughter, so do I, Justice Sotomayor.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You know --
GENERAL VERRILLI: But -- but if I could
take a minute on the interest, because I do think it's
quite important.
I mean, at some level, of course, it is true
that no soldier charges up Mount Suribachi thinking,
well, I'm going to do this because I'll get a medal if I
get to the top. That's not what the military honors
system is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or I'm not going to do
this because the medal has been debased.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's not -- well,
that's not what the honors system is about. The honors
system is about identifying the attributes, the essence,
of what we want in our service men and women: Courage,
sacrifice, love of country, willingness to put your life
on the line for your comrades. And what the medals do
is say to the -- to our military this is what we care
about. It's what George Washington said in 1782, when
he set up the honors system. It's designed to
cherish -- it's designed to cherish a valorous ambition
in soldiers and to encourage every species of military
merit.
And I -- what I think with respect to the
government's interest here and why there is a harm to
that interest is that the point of these medals is that
it's a big deal. You get one for doing something very
important after a lot of scrutiny. And for the
government to say this is a really big deal and then to
stand idly by when one charlatan after another makes a
false claim to have won the medal does debase the value
of the medal in the eyes of the soldiers. It does do
that. That is the government's interest, we think that
is a real and substantial interest, and it's threatened
here --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But the reality is that
this gentleman was publicized, deriled for what he did.
His public position was compromised, as is the case with
almost everyone who's caught at lying.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But, given that this is a
category of calculated factual falsehood, we think the
government has the authority and the constitutional --
the constitutional space to try to deter this kind of
speech, as well as allow for private attorneys.
If I might --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Did the military -- did
the military ask for this? You're claiming there's a
special interest in seeing that a military honor is not
debased.
GENERAL VERRILLI: It did not, Justice
Ginsburg, but under Article I, section 8, Congress has
substantial authority to regulate our armed forces, gets
substantial deference. It's not unlike the statute that
the Court evaluated in the FAIR case in that regard,
which was not a statute that the military -- that the
military asked for, but Congress nevertheless was given
substantial deference.
If I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did the Commander in Chief
sign that -- that legislation?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, he did, Your Honor.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Verrilli.
Mr. Libby.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JONATHAN D. LIBBY
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. LIBBY: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The Stolen Valor Act criminalizes pure
speech in the form of bare falsity, a mere telling of a
lie. It doesn't matter whether the lie was told in a
public meeting or in a private conversation with a
friend or family member. And the law punishes false
claims to a military award regardless of whether harm
results or is -- even is likely to result in an
individual case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What is -- what is
the First Amendment value in a lie, a pure lie?
MR. LIBBY: Just a pure lie? There can be a
number of values. There's the value of personal
autonomy.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The value of what?
MR. LIBBY: Personal autonomy, that we get
to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What does that mean?
MR. LIBBY: Well, that we get to -- we get
to exaggerate and create --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, not
exaggerate -- lie.
MR. LIBBY: Well, when we create our own
persona, we're often making up things about ourselves
that we want people to think about us, and that can be
valuable. Samuel Clemens creating Mark Twain. That was
creating a persona, and he made things up about
himself and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but that was
for literary purposes. No one is suggesting you can't
write a book or tell a story about somebody who earned a
Medal of Honor, and it's a fictional character; so, he
obviously didn't. It just seems to me very different.
MR. LIBBY: Perhaps. But there are other
things, in addition to the fact that people tell lies
allows us to appreciate truth better.
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you really think that
there is -- that the First Amendment -- that there is
First Amendment value in a bald-faced lie about a purely
factual statement that a person makes about himself,
because that person would like to create a particular
persona? Gee, I won the Medal of Honor. I was a Rhodes
scholar. I won the Nobel Prize. There's a personal --
the First Amendment protects that?
MR. LIBBY: Yes, Your Honor, so long as it
doesn't cause imminent harm to another person or
imminent harm to a government function.
JUSTICE BREYER: An obvious example that
used to be -- are there Jews hiding in the cellar? No.
MR. LIBBY: Well, that's right, and that's
certainly a beneficial lie.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's not a
statement about one's self. This is --
MR. LIBBY: And now --
JUSTICE BREYER: Are you hiding Jews in the
cellar?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Excuse me. Sorry.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me that
the Stolen Valor Act is more narrow than that. And I
would say, in that situation, you would not describe
what the individual in Justice Breyer's hypothetical was
as simply telling a -- a false statement about himself.
It is about whether there is someone hiding in the
attic. It is not about himself.
MR. LIBBY: Well, perhaps, just dealing with
an example under the Stolen Valor Act, if a grandfather
were to make up a story that he had won a medal in order
to persuade a grandchild to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: In order to --
MR. LIBBY: -- to join the military --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me that
that's missing the limitation that the Government has
read into this statute: Not damage, not for parody, not
to avoid the discovery of someone who should be hidden,
not in order to do something with respect to one's
grandson. It's just a purely false statement about
oneself. What -- what -- what is the First Amendment
value in that, again?
MR. LIBBY: Well, another value is the fact
that the purpose of the First Amendment was a limit on
government power. It's -- it's -- our founders believed
that Congress, as a general principle, doesn't get to
tell us what we as individuals can and cannot say.
Now --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, of course,
they do in countless areas, the state does, whether
you're talking about defamation, trademark, perjury, all
sorts of things. You can't adopt that as a general
principle and apply it without regard to the situation.
MR. LIBBY: Well, that's right, Mr. Chief
Justice, but in all of those examples, those are
examples where we have harm attached to the falsehood.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, sometimes the harm is
just the impairment of governmental purposes, such as
section 1001, which criminalizes the making of a false
statement to any Federal agent, for Pete's sake. How do
you justify that? Because the making of the false
statement impairs a governmental investigation. And
what is being urged here is that the making of this type
of a false statement impairs the government's ability to
honor valorous members of the armed forces.
MR. LIBBY: Well, we believe there's --
there's a difference there, Your Honor. With respect to
1001, there's the substantial risk of imminent harm to a
government investigation. Whether it in fact causes
that direct harm, there's still a significant risk of
imminent harm resulting from telling a lie to a
government investigator.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Libby, you've
suggested to us that we should apply strict scrutiny to
all of these cases. Now, almost nothing passes strict
scrutiny. Why should 1001 pass strict scrutiny? I
mean, it seems to me you're proposing a test that would
invalidate all of the laws on the books regarding false
statements.
MR. LIBBY: Well, no, Your Honor. What
we're suggesting is false statements -- false statements
laws do have a history in this country. And the Court
could recognize a historical category of -- of imminent
harm or potential risk of imminent harm to government
functions. And perjury certainly falls into that
category. 1001 very well may fit into that category.
Since the beginning of our nation, Congress has passed
these various false statement laws.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And do we give some
deference to Congress as to whether there is a harm to
governmental purposes, or do we make it up ourselves?
When Congress passed this legislation, I assume it did
so because it thought that the value of the awards that
these courageous members of the armed forces were
receiving was being demeaned and diminished.
MR. LIBBY: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: By charlatans. That's what
Congress thought.
MR. LIBBY: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that utterly
unreasonable that we can't accept it?
MR. LIBBY: Justice Scalia, it's not
entirely clear what Congress thought here because
Congress held no hearings on this. It made a broad
general finding that false statements harm the
reputation --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's a matter --
it's a matter of common sense that it, it seems to me --
that it demeans the medal. Let me ask you this: What
do you do with the statute that prohibits the wearing of
a medal that has not been earned?
MR. LIBBY: Wearing medals is a slightly
different category because there you're dealing with
conduct rather than content.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I'm not so sure.
You know, the Tinker case with the arm band; it's purely
expressive speech, it seems to me. I think if you
prevail here that the wearing prohibition must also be
in serious doubt.
MR. LIBBY: It may be or it may be in doubt
under certain situations where one is wearing a medal.
But certainly Congress has an interest in protecting
non-expressive purposes of wearing the medals.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I think it is, if the
whole purpose of the person who puts the medal on his
tuxedo that he didn't earn is an expressive purpose.
That's pure expression.
MR. LIBBY: It may be, Your Honor. But
again, we -- we view it under a different prism. We --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why? I mean, it's
expressive. One is I am speaking through conduct, and
the other is I'm speaking through words. You wear the
medal and you're saying I am a Medal of Honor winner.
MR. LIBBY: That's right. And as I said, it
may ultimately be the case that the Court finds that, if
in fact it's unconstitutional --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, you think that the
wearing --
MR. LIBBY: -- in this provision, that it
could be.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: -- that the wearing of a
military decoration that you haven't earned, that that's
also of questionable consistency with the First
Amendment?
MR. LIBBY: It may be. But, again, it would
depend on the circumstances.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: No circumstances. Where
you go out in the street with the -- with the medal on
you for everybody to see.
MR. LIBBY: If -- if there's -- if Congress
does not have a non-speech purpose for prohibiting the
wearing of the medals, then if it's strictly an
expressive purpose, then, yes, there would be a
significant First Amendment problem.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, don't you think
that's the case? There's no non-expressive purpose that
I can think of.
MR. LIBBY: Well -- and that very well may
be. What I can say is in this case what we're dealing
with is strictly a content-based regulation on speech.
JUSTICE ALITO: But you -- you acknowledge
that the First Amendment allows the prohibition or the
regulation of false speech if it causes at least certain
kinds of harms. And the problem I have with your
argument is determining which harms you think count and
which harms don't count.
Would you go as far as was suggested earlier
to say that only pecuniary harm counts? If you -- if
you say that, then the -- the classic case of
intentional infliction of emotional distress is
unconstitutional, going up to someone and saying falsely
your -- your child has just been run over by a bus. So,
how do we determine which harms are sufficient?
MR. LIBBY: I believe -- what we believe the
right way of looking at this is you -- you determine
whether or not there is imminent harm or a significant
risk of imminent harm to an individual or to a
government function that would result from the speech.
JUSTICE ALITO: When you say "imminent," you
mean -- what do you mean by that?
MR. LIBBY: I guess I'm suggesting the
Brandenburg standard, which is -- if --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, if that's the
standard, then most of the prosecutions for making false
statements to a Federal law enforcement officer are not
going to survive, are they?
MR. LIBBY: Well, but the issue is what
about the law. And the issue with 1001 and those false
statement statutes is it's the substantial risk of
imminent harm to the government that could result from
the falsehood.
So -- well, certainly, it may not result in
a particular case, but the substantial risk of imminent
harm is there.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, then you're not really
talking about imminent harm, I don't think. You're just
talking about harm.
MR. LIBBY: Well, when one lies to a
government investigator, presumably you're doing it in
order to send them in the wrong direction, even if it
doesn't do that. So, the harm may not be there, but
there's certainly a significant risk of harm that the
government has the right to protect itself from. And
that's why we believe that's -- that's where you draw
the line. And that's where this Court appears to have
drawn the line in those categories of speech that it has
said are unprotected, such as --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But Mr. Libby, let's suppose
that I agree with Gertz that there is no constitutional
value in a false statement of fact, and the reason why
we protect some false statements of fact is to protect
truthful speech.
So, if -- if that's so, is -- how is it that
this statute will chill any truthful speech? What
truthful speech will this statute chill?
MR. LIBBY: Your Honor, it's not clear that
it may necessarily chill any truthful speech. I mean,
it's -- we certainly concede that one typically knows
whether or not one has won a medal or not. We certainly
-- we concede that point.
JUSTICE KAGAN: So, boy, I mean, that's a
big concession, Mr. Libby. Then you're saying you can
only win this case if this Court decides that the Gertz
statement was a kind of overstatement, an exaggeration,
puffery.
MR. LIBBY: Well, we do -- well, we do have
the situation where we believe the statute currently
does cover -- someone could be prosecuted for engaging
in parody or satire or exaggeration. Certainly, there's
nothing on the face of the statute to suggest that
those --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the Government has
said that's not how we read the statute. And the courts
read statutes to avoid a constitutional collision. So,
let's assume that we are not going to cover
performances, satire. It's just a bald-faced lie.
That's all that this covers.
MR. LIBBY: Then it's still our position
that it's still a -- that all speech is presumptively
protected unless we go back and it fits into one of the
historical categories of speech that this Court has
found historically is unprotected. And bare falsity
certainly has never previously been recognized by this
Court as being an unprotected category of speech.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, my --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't understand
the Government to argue that the speech at issue here is
totally unprotected. I understand them to argue -- I
mean, is -- it's totally unprotected. I understand them
to argue that it can be limited under its "breathing
space" rationale. In other words, it's not within one
of the categories of totally unprotected speech. You do
have to analyze it under the First Amendment, and you
analyze it to determine if it chills protected speech.
MR. LIBBY: I suppose I read the
Government's argument differently. As I read the
Government's argument, it's that it's entitled to, at
most, limited protection. So, the Government seems to
start from the presumption that it's not fully protected
speech; whereas, of course, what we should be starting
with is the presumption that it is fully protected
speech unless this Court has previously said it's in one
of these historical categories of unprotected speech.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: May I -- if I understood
your argument, you're saying historically we have not
protected false statements that cause harm. I think
that's your argument.
MR. LIBBY: That's correct. Yes, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. Assuming --
so, it's -- we do protect false statements
presumptively, but the historical exception, like
defamation, are those that cause harm.
So, I go back to Justice Alito's question
because you really haven't answered his question.
You've dealt with the government process cases, although
I -- we could argue about whether that's protecting a
process or protecting a government right to truthful
information. That's a different issue.
But the question is how do you deal with the
intentional infliction of emotional distress? Because
damage -- we require injury, and it's defined under law
what kind of injury. So, tell me how you define harm in
the nongovernmental situation, number one, and then tell
me why that -- this situation doesn't fit that
definition.
MR. LIBBY: Well, in the situation with
intentional infliction of emotional distress, you are
dealing with an instantaneous harm, a mental distress
that results from the false statement. So, there --
there's imminent harm as a result of -- that results in
intentional infliction of emotional distress for
false-light --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, why isn't the
outrage that medal winners, legitimately entitled medal
winners, experience in seeing fake people or hearing
fake people claim a medal -- why isn't that comparable?
MR. LIBBY: Well, I don't believe that fits
into the same category of -- of mental distress that we
look at in intentional infliction of emotional distress.
Certainly, people are entitled to be upset
by these false claims. I mean, I'm personally upset by
these false claims. But the fact that there is a
certain level of upset doesn't mean that you were --
you're harmed in the sense of the intentional infliction
of emotional stress tort. And so, what we're dealing
with here is simply a non-instantaneous harm.
Now, what the Government has suggested is
that there's no harm that really results from a single
claim, that Mr. Alvarez's falsehood did not cause harm
to any individual.
JUSTICE ALITO: It seems to me what you're
-- what you're arguing is that we should determine that
there are certain harms that are sufficient to allow the
prohibition of a false statement and there are certain
harms that are not sufficient, irrespective of what
judgment Congress made about the significance of those
harms. Is that -- is that accurate?
MR. LIBBY: That's certainly part of it. I
mean, we believe that there needs to be imminent harm,
that it needs to be targeted harm to an individual or
to -- to government function, that it can't be the type
of diffuse harm that the Government --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not?
MR. LIBBY: -- says took place here.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why not? Because, after
all, we're willing to protect the Olympics Committee
when a false person saying he's the Olympics Committee
might deprive the Olympics Committee of a penny, while
here they're saying that to win this great medal, say,
the congressional Medal of Honor, the highest award in
the military the nation can give, you're deserving of
the most possible, grandest possible respect, and we
don't -- we don't even want you to have to think about
somebody having taken that name falsely; and so, we will
just criminalize it to discourage such activity that
undermines the very thought and purpose of giving the
medal. All right?
So, I'm just saying in my mind there's real
harm. And there's real harm, and yet, I can think of
instances where we do want to protect false information.
And I want you to accept that as a given because that
isn't my question.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: My question is: If I'm
right that there are very good First Amendment reasons
sometimes for protecting false information, and if this
also would cause serious harm, what the government is
aiming after, are there less restrictive ways of going
about it? And, if so, what and why?
MR. LIBBY: There are. First of all, more
speech. There's time to fix the problem. If someone
tells a lie about having received an honor, there's time
for them to be exposed. And, in fact, that's
what typically happens--
JUSTICE SCALIA: The government is going to
hire people to follow, you know -- is that realistic?
MR. LIBBY: Well, what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, there is a
sanction. You know, when there's a sanction in place,
you think twice before you tell the lie. But if there's
no sanction except you might be exposed, who's going to
expose you? That sanction already exists, and there are
a lot of people nonetheless who tell the lie. You
really expect the government to hire investigators to go
around the country outing people who falsely claim
military honors?
MR. LIBBY: Well, Justice Scalia, isn't
that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not going to happen.
MR. LIBBY: Isn't that exactly what's
happening right now with this law? Because the law is
on the books, the government is sending FBI agents out
to investigate these allegations. How do they find out
about it? It's because it's reported. Individuals hear
the statement, and they think it may be false. They
investigate it. And -- and conduct their own
investigations.
So, that's what happens, and that's what's
supposed -- that's the whole idea of more speech.
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there anything else --
that the threat of criminal prosecution might discourage
from lying who would never be caught. So, at least as
to that set, exposure won't work. So, you have a less
restrictive alternative that helps some but not
completely. Are there others?
MR. LIBBY: Well, of course if you're never
caught, then under the Government's theory, then no one
has been harmed individually or in the --
JUSTICE BREYER: Not under my theory. My
theory is that it does hurt the medal, the purpose, the
objective, the honor, for people falsely to go around
saying that they have this medal when they don't. Okay?
So, I might be wrong about that. I just ask you to
assume that for purposes of argument because what I'm
trying to get to is I want as big a list as I can to
think about of what the less restrictive alternatives
are.
MR. LIBBY: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: Or might be.
MR. LIBBY: The military can redouble its
efforts at honoring those who in fact are entitled to
the awards. There was a congressional hearing that
suggested that the military has been a little lax in
identifying true heroes and awarding them medals. So,
that could be done.
The government could publicize the names of
true winners. It could create educational programs to
let the nation know what it takes to win these awards,
what these awards are, who has won them. All the heroic
acts that have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: How about giving a medal of
shame to those who have falsely claimed to have earned
the medal of valor?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think that would be a
good idea.
MR. LIBBY: Well, Your Honor, actually,
that's certainly something the government could do.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, not under your
theory, right? I mean, it -- I mean, it's still a
sanction for telling something that you say is protected
under the First Amendment, whether you get 6 months or a
medal of shame doesn't matter under your theory.
MR. LIBBY: Well, there is a significant
difference between a criminal sanction that puts someone
in prison versus simply exposing them for what they are,
which is a liar. And Mr. Alvarez -- whether or not he
in fact was sentenced to a crime, he still was exposed
for who he was, which was a liar.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Suppose -- suppose the
statute were amended, as has been proposed, to require
an intent to obtain anything of value.
MR. LIBBY: That would turn the law into a
fraud statute. And, of course, fraud is an unprotected
category of speech. So, that certainly would be a
constitutional law.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But that wouldn't -- that
wouldn't reach this speaker. Is that -- is that -- that
wouldn't reach Alvarez because he didn't obtain anything
of value.
MR. LIBBY: Well, that's -- I mean, that's
not what we have here. What we do know is that
Mr. Alvarez did not obtain a thing of value.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How do we -- how do
we know that? He was politically active, right?
MR. LIBBY: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: He was involved --
well, doesn't it help a politician to have a
congressional Medal of Honor?
MR. LIBBY: Perhaps, Your Honor. I mean,
for -- certainly, there are many people out there that
would consider that to be a great thing. There are also
a lot of people out there who don't know what it is.
And so, to them, it might not mean a whole lot.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But it seems to me
that your willingness to say that this statute is valid
so long as there's some benefit to the person who lies,
it's an awfully big concession.
MR. LIBBY: Well, it would -- if it --
again, if Congress were to amend the law to require that
it be done with the intent to obtain a thing of value,
again, it becomes fraud. And fraud is something that
the government does have the right to prosecute.
JUSTICE ALITO: So that would mean --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Something of value. It has
to be something of commercial value, right? It's --
doing it just to -- just to obtain praise and the higher
esteem of your fellow citizens, that's -- that's not
enough.
MR. LIBBY: Well, Your Honor, as I --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You have to get a penny out
of it, right?
MR. LIBBY: As I understand the proposed
amendment, it just says anything of a non-de minimis
value. How that is ultimately interpreted --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That's just the basic
definition of fraud in the criminal law.
MR. LIBBY: That's right. Now, could it --
could it be a nonpecuniary thing of value? As it's
currently proposed, yes. But that's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, if he -- so, if
he makes this statement at a debate when he's running
for office, then you can prosecute him because getting
the office is presumably something of value. It
presumably has some pecuniary aspect to it.
MR. LIBBY: Perhaps, Your Honor. And,
again, it may come down to how the courts ultimately
interpret a thing of value. It's not clear that simply
trying to obtain a vote from somebody is necessarily a
thing of value, would be considered a thing of value.
Obviously, if you promise to give up your votes in
office in return for support, that would be a little
different.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if he just gets the
cheers of the crowd? He's up there. I'm
a congressional Medal of -- the crowd cheers, and they
give him a parade down Main Street. Is -- is that
something of value?
MR. LIBBY: It could be. Again, it -- it
will come down to, over time, how that ultimately
gets --
JUSTICE ALITO: But that's not -- the answer
is would the First Amendment permit that.
MR. LIBBY: That's a difficult question,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, that's sort of the
question we have to answer here.
MR. LIBBY: Sure.
(Laughter.)
MR. LIBBY: And I get that.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose what the person gets
is -- is a date with a potential rich spouse. Would
that be enough?
MR. LIBBY: Your Honor, I think when it
comes -- when you get into the situation where you're
getting something like a date, I do not know that -- I
certainly wouldn't consider that a non-de minimis thing
of value.
(Laughter.)
MR. LIBBY: But --
JUSTICE ALITO: Some people might have a
different opinion.
(Laughter.)
MR. LIBBY: Well, that -- that -- and that
may be, which is why, should that ultimately become the
law, courts will have to look at that very closely.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, how does it work in
the law now, where we have similar statutes, and there's
an additional requirement when you're imitating, say, a
Federal officer or somebody else you shouldn't, you have
to perform an overt act that asserts authority that the
impersonator claims to have. What does that add?
Do you have to -- does it add enough to just
make it not pure speech, to limit -- to wall off the
things about -- the things that we're worried about in
the First Amendment? Or there's another one, you have to
falsely assume or exercise powers, duties, and
privileges. Those are ways statutes have of limiting
this thing. How does that work?
MR. LIBBY: Well, when you get into the
issue of impersonation, then you're -- the Court perhaps
should be assessing it under the amount of -- of
imminent harm to an individual that can result.
JUSTICE BREYER: It has nothing to do with
harm. It's a way of walling off things that are of
concern under the First Amendment from those that
aren't. And what they use -- I read you what they use:
Performing -- you know -- you know the language. It's
written about in the briefs. And I just want to know
how you would think about a statute that imported that
kind of language, which is limiting language.
MR. LIBBY: It -- it would be important,
certainly in the First Amendment context, to limit the
language as much as possible. You want to make it as
narrow as possible because, again, we're supposed to
start from the presumption that we have the right to say
pretty much what we want to say, and then we start to
limit it where -- again -- and, I guess, it goes again
back to what this Court said in Stevens and
Entertainment Merchants, which is, is it one of these
historically unprotected types of speech that is not
entitled to constitutional protection?
Mr. Libby.
remaining.
Unless the Court has additional questions --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
General Verrilli, you have 3 minutes
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
JUSTICE KENNEDY: My -- my only -- one of my
questions is the slippery slope problem, college degrees
and so forth.
Could you address that?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, Your Honor. The --
we think the "breathing space" analysis does a very
substantial degree of work in controlling the -- what
Your Honor is describing as a slippery slope problem.
The government's got to have a substantial interest --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- the statute's got to
be narrowly drawn. It's got to meet all of those tests.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: College degrees.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, as I think I said
in my -- in my opening statement, that -- I actually
think that's a case in which you could argue that one
either way because there might be, if the government
articulated a substantial interest in protecting its --
diplomas issued by its public --
JUSTICE KAGAN: How about extramarital
affairs?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Excuse me, Your Honor. I
didn't hear the question.
JUSTICE KAGAN: The government has a strong
interest in the sanctity of the family, the stability of
the family; so, we're going to prevent everybody from
telling lies about their extramarital affairs.
GENERAL VERRILLI: In addition to the -- in
addition to the -- the governmental interest, Your
Honor, there's -- it's got to be tailored in a way that
avoids chill, and I think it would be very difficult in
that situation --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But this is something about
the person's own experience, that the person knows
everything about. You either had one or you didn't have
one.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's right. And that's
a hard case, but I do think, with respect to the
chilling effect analysis, you -- you would, I think,
have a great deal of difficulty sustaining that statute.
But, of course, that's not the kind of statute that we
have here. This is a targeted statute that's designed
to deal with a particular harm.
JUSTICE BREYER: The trouble is that you can
think of 10,000 instances that meet your criteria that
one candidate or another could bring up in a political
campaign. And we don't know what will come up, but I
can easily think of examples. And then, if this is
lawful and constitutional, then you have people in
political campaigns suddenly worrying that the U.S.
attorney is going to come in and start indicting him.
Now, that's part of the chilling effect. And you've
assumed you can get around this chilling effect, but I'm
less certain.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I think -- but
that's why I think the "breathing space" analysis
requires before a statute gets upheld that it -- that it
not have that kind of chilling effect.
JUSTICE BREYER: How do we know this
doesn't?
GENERAL VERRILLI: And this statute doesn't,
and that's the key here. This statute doesn't.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, it seems to me
that you're asking us to value the speech in context.
We're not talking about the effect of the speech and
whether you can regulate that. You're asking us to say,
you know, the guy who says he's a college graduate in a
political campaign, that could chill political speech.
So, in that lie in that context, you can't sanction, but
you can sanction that lie in a different context. On a
date.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't know because, on
a date, it doesn't chill political speech, and it will
induce a young woman to date someone who she thinks is
more of a professional, because that harms the parents,
it harms the family.
GENERAL VERRILLI: May I answer, Mr. Chief
Justice?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Thank you.
The Respondent has conceded that this
statute chills nothing. That should be a sufficient
answer to Your Honor's concern that, with respect to
other statutes in the future, they can be evaluated to
determine whether or not they impose a -- a chill that
would lead as an instrumental matter to the conclusion
that they ought not to be found to satisfy the First
Amendment.
As Respondent concedes, there is no chill
here. So, this statute is constitutional.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General,
counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the case in the
