IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
TERRY TIBBALS, WARDEN, :
Petitioner : No. 11-218
v. :
SEAN CARTER :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, October 9, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ALEXANDRA T. SCHIMMER, ESQ., Solicitor General,
Columbus, Ohio; on behalf of Petitioner.
SCOTT MICHELMAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ALEXANDRA T. SCHIMMER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
SCOTT MICHELMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 16
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ALEXANDRA T. SCHIMMER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 35
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 11-218, Tibbals v. Carter.
Ms. Schimmer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ALEXANDRA T. SCHIMMER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. SCHIMMER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case is here from the Sixth Circuit,
which held that habeas claims can be stayed indefinitely
because prisoners have a statutory right to competence
to assist in their case, but even Mr. Carter now disowns
the circuit's rationale, and the court's indefinite stay
order was wrong for two other reasons.
First, habeas claims cannot be stayed
indefinitely. Doing so is fundamentally incompatible
with the timeliness concerns underlying AEDPA.
Second, while we readily acknowledge that
limited stays will be appropriate in some situations,
this is not one of them. All of Mr. Carter's claims are
record based and, therefore, resolvable without his
assistance.
JUSTICE KAGAN: What situations would they
be appropriate in?
MS. SCHIMMER: Limited stays, we think, Your
Honor, would be stay -- appropriate in situations where
the prisoner's ability to effectively communicate with
his counsel or to disclose evidence would be necessary
to his claim. And we think that would be true in a
case, potentially, where AEDPA does not restrict Federal
review to the state court record.
So here, for instance, we think that the
prisoner's assistance would not be necessary, and
therefore, even a limited stay would not be appropriate
because all of Mr. Carter's claims were vetted before
the state courts and decided on the merits. And
therefore, under 2254(d), in this Court's decision in
Pinholster, the Federal court is limited to reviewing
the state court record.
We don't think that the prisoner's
assistance in that case is necessary. We don't think
Mr. Carter has made a case for why his assistance would
be necessary in this specific case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, why -- why shouldn't
the rule be that an indefinite stay is -- is never
necessary? You just proceed based on the evidence you
have?
Sometimes, we have evidence where a witness
is missing. We have to go on with the case. Then it
could be open to argue in a later case that there was
new evidence that was not available.
MS. SCHIMMER: Well, we absolutely agree,
Justice Kennedy, that indefinite stays are never
appropriate, regardless of the circumstances; that
indefinite stays contravene AEDPA's timeliness concerns.
And to the extent that all of the parties in this case
agree now that, to the extent district courts have some
power to issue stays -- we say only limited stays -- in
these cases, that power is grounded in equitable
discretion.
And we do not think that it comports with
equitable discretion to allow a prisoner essentially to
win his case, to obtain a suspension of his capital
sentence, the ultimate end relief that he seeks --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What about the second part
of -- of the equation? So, suppose that there's no
stay, that the habeas proceeding is adjudicated against
the petitioner. He then becomes competent and claims
there's new evidence. Would -- would that be grounds to
reopen, you think?
MS. SCHIMMER: Well, we think in those
situations -- certainly, the State of Ohio wouldn't
contest, for instance, under 2254(b), that if you were
incompetent before, that that would be a legitimate
basis, potentially, for not having been able to
reasonably discover a new claim, if one had a new claim.
So we do think that -- moving forward, that
no indefinite stay should be permitted. And when the
courts move forward, yes, if someone's competency is
later restored, there are backstops. The person,
certainly in Ohio, can always go back to state court
and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And would the backstop be
newly discovered evidence?
MS. SCHIMMER: The backstop would be a newly
discovered claim, I would say. I think that would be
what --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Schimmer, if you are
right that no stay was appropriate in these
circumstances, we would never reach the question of how
much of a stay is appropriate in other circumstances;
isn't that right?
MS. SCHIMMER: I think that's right because
I think -- to the extent that, using this case as a
springboard, the Court could draw the boundary line --
could -- could draw one bright boundary line and say
indefinite stays are never permitted, but limited stays
might be permitted in cases where the claims are not
record based. I --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I'm saying the exact
opposite.
MS. SCHIMMER: Oh.
JUSTICE KAGAN: In other words, if there was
one bright line, which says that stays are not
appropriate in a record-based claim because there's
really nothing that the client can contribute, then we'd
have no need or cause to reach the second question of
what happens, in a case where a stay might be
appropriate, how long that stay should be.
MS. SCHIMMER: That's correct, Your Honor.
I'm sorry, I agree -- I agree with you that the Court
could rule on that ground.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Alternatively, we could --
we could rule that indefinite stays are never
appropriate; in which case, it would be unnecessary to
decide whether any stay is appropriate where -- for a
record-based claim, right?
is --
end.
suppose.
MS. SCHIMMER: That is true, too. That
JUSTICE SCALIA: We can do it from either
MS. SCHIMMER: That is true, too --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or we could decide both, I
MS. SCHIMMER: I suppose, yes. I mean, we
would -- we would -- we would urge the Court to, I
think, do both, to say --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Am I -- am I
understanding that your position, in response to the
question from Justice Scalia and Justice Kennedy, is
that, for you, indefinite is any stay whatsoever?
It sounds like what you are proposing -- or
in response to them, is that no stay for purposes of
determining competence, whether it's short or long, is
permissible. Is that your argument?
MS. SCHIMMER: That is not our argument,
Justice Sotomayor. Our -- our definition of an
indefinite stay is a stay that is imposed until the
prisoner is restored to competence. That --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Like -- like the stay in
Rees?
MS. SCHIMMER: Like -- like the stay in
Rees, or, really, like the stay the Sixth Circuit has
issued.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You would have to -- to
maintain your position, the Court would have to qualify
Rees, or at least the interpretation that says the stay
should be indefinite once the petitioner is found
incompetent because that's what has happened there. The
court said, find out if he's competent. The answer was,
he is incompetent. And then the court just let it sit
until the man died.
MS. SCHIMMER: Well, Your Honor, we don't
think that Rees really has any force or provides any
guidance in this case. That, of course, was a case
where a prisoner was seeking to abandon his further
appeals.
There are multiple reasons why we -- why we
think that Rees does not endorse the power of Federal
courts to indefinitely stay habeas proceedings.
One is the fact that the Court's stay order
was completely unexplained and very terse. It didn't
announce any rule of law.
Second, the historical record shows that the
Court's stay in Rees was, at most, a judicially
negotiated settlement, meaning far from a demonstration
of the Court's inherent power. It seemed to be a very
carefully orchestrated exercise of consented-to power.
The third point is that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I could take objection
to that characterization because the clerk of the court
told the court that neither party was happy with what
was happening, and the court still entered the order.
But let me go back to my question a moment.
Amici say that most competency issues are resolved
within months and that many individuals -- the vast
majority, are restored to competency with proper
medication within months. Are you opposing those kinds
of stays?
MS. SCHIMMER: For -- not in -- not where
it's appropriate, no, Your Honor. And again, Your
Honor, our definition of an indefinite stay is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But under your
definition, it's never appropriate, really.
MS. SCHIMMER: No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You argue -- you argue
two things. You say, under Pinholster, they -- courts
always have to rely on the record.
MS. SCHIMMER: Correct. We would -- here's
how we would taxonomize the appropriateness of stays:
We would say indefinite stays are never permitted,
meaning a court can never premise a stay exclusively on
the restoration of the prisoner's competency, in saying
however long it takes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Even though a doctor
says, it can be done, we have to try?
MS. SCHIMMER: If -- if a doctor says, it
can be done, we have to try, and it's a situation where
it's appropriate --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, they can never
say, it can be done. They can say --
MS. SCHIMMER: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- we have to try.
MS. SCHIMMER: There is a reasonable
probability that it can be done. We would say,
Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That -- that's also --
I'm not sure how they can do that until they try.
MS. SCHIMMER: Right. So we would say, in
certain situations, yes, that would be perfectly
appropriate.
The State of Ohio certainly agrees that
having a competent prisoner is a desirable thing in a
habeas case and that courts do have some discretion to
try to vindicate that goal.
Our point, though, is simply that it cannot
come at all cost, meaning --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Rees -- Rees was not an
indefinite stay in -- in the absolute sense, was it?
MS. SCHIMMER: No.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Because the trial
proceeded. There -- there was going to be an end,
right?
MS. SCHIMMER: Well, the court -- the court
in the end held up the cert petition for several decades
without deciding the case. So -- and in the end,
Mr. Rees died and then the cert petition was ultimately
later dismissed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't understand
how your approach works. We, the defendant, the habeas
petitioner, the allegation is made, I'm incompetent,
there is support for it. The district court says, okay,
I can't enter an indefinite stay, but you are going to
be treated; I want you to come back in 6 months, okay?
And we will look at it then.
He comes back in 6 months, and there's been
no change. What happens then? Another 6 months? At
what point does it become indefinite?
MS. SCHIMMER: Right. Well, since we are
playing on the field of equitable discretion,
Your Honor, it's going to be difficult to put forward a
hard and fast rule.
But Justice Sotomayor rightly points --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, give me a
loose and soft rule. I mean, is it --
(Laughter.)
MS. SCHIMMER: Sure. A loose and soft rule.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is it two years? Or
is it ten years?
MS. SCHIMMER: We would say, presumptively,
a year.  And we think there is support for that, even
from Mr. Carter's own amici. The brief of the American
Psychiatric Association, pages 19 to 21, and especially
footnote 30, talks about how most prisoners who are
ultimately successfully restored to competency, that
does happen in a matter of months, 6 to 9 months at the
longest end. About 90 percent of them are restored
within 6 to 9 months.
So we think, presumptively, a year would be
an appropriate period of time for --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Ms. Schimmer, why
would that be? I mean, assume a case where you say a
stay would be appropriate. So it's not a closed record
case. It's a case where the client might be expected to
provide information that's -- let's -- let's assume it's
necessary to a full and fair adjudication of the habeas
claim.
Why would you cut it off at a year? Why
wouldn't it be still true in 2 years, that a full and
fair adjudication couldn't take place in those
circumstances.
MS. SCHIMMER: Well, we think, Your Honor,
at the point at which you say that the test for a
limited stay is however long it takes to restore
somebody's competency is the point at which we have
returned to the definition of saying that indefinite
stays are proper.
And the bottom line is that we think that --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, it's not an indefinite
stay. I think the judge would do what the Chief Justice
suggested, that -- you know, it's not for ever and ever.
We're just going to come back to it periodically. But
if the answer is the same, which is that the client's
participation is necessary for a full and fair
adjudication, then the court's answer should be the
same, too. Why isn't that right?
MS. SCHIMMER: Because we do think that
there comes a point, given the finality concerns
underlying AEDPA, that a limited stay, when that window
expires -- the person has a reasonable period of time to
be restored to competency; that when that window
expires, at some point, the proceedings do have to
continue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's really -- it's
really not the same question when it comes back, is it?
Because there are two questions: Is -- is reasonable
competence useful for his defense? But, also, the
second question, is there a reasonable probability that
he can be restored to competence?
The first time, there obviously is that, and
you give him a year. When you come back a second time,
you say, well, it's been a year, they usually come back
within 6 to 9 months, there is no longer a reasonable
probability.
MS. SCHIMMER: That's exactly right,
Justice Scalia. And to the extent that we are balancing
different parties' interests in these cases, after the
preliminary limited stay expires, we believe at that
point the prisoner's interest in a continued stay has
diminished, and the state's interest in the proceedings
continuing and moving forward has then increased, and
that the court should then move on.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And there'd be no stay at
all, unless it's necessary for just adjudication of the
claim, so that would be a threshold question.
MS. SCHIMMER: That would be the threshold
question, and there seems to be a good amount of
consensus on that point. It's the test articulated by
the Sixth and Ninth Circuits and by my colleague here
today. And we're -- we're willing to accept that as the
test for when limited stays can be imposed.
And with that, if there aren't further
questions, I'll reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Michelman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SCOTT MICHELMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. MICHELMAN: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Ohio and the United States have agreed today
that courts have the authority to stay habeas
proceedings when the petitioner is mentally incompetent.
So then the questions for this Court are when may such
stays issue and how long may such stays be?
The Court's answers should reflect the
important principle that no individual should lose
potentially meritorious claims because of mental
illness.
I'd like to begin by addressing --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Petitioner says they
won't because they can come back with new evidence after
habeas is closed. Why is that inadequate?
MR. MICHELMAN: I -- I think that's --
that's a crucial question, Justice Sotomayor, that
Justice Kennedy asked as well, and -- and it goes to the
limits on second or successive petitions. They can't
come back if they are later competent, if they first
lose their claims, because they didn't have the evidence
they needed and then try again later.
They are subject to the bar on second or
successive petitions, which requires, not only that they
have new facts, but also that they have new law. So
that's a very restrictive standard that would not allow
them to simply pick up where they left off.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. I -- I
didn't follow that exactly. What -- what prevents them
from picking up where they left off?
MR. MICHELMAN: Mr. Chief Justice,
Section 2244(b), the bar on second or successive
petitions.
Imagine Mr. Carter has a potentially
meritorious claim now that he can't speak to because of
his incompetence, it's adjudicated without him, he loses
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Oh, it's
adjudicated. Okay. Sorry.
MR. MICHELMAN: Imagine it's adjudicated
without him, he loses it. And then he can't simply
waltz back into court and say, I'm here, I'm competent,
hear me out.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm presume -- I presume
that the one claim among your many -- yours is the
defendant who was excluded from trial, correct?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So that if he comes back
and says, I told my attorneys I would behave, and I
wanted to come back earlier, and they never let me back
in, this would not be a new claim, this would be part of
the old claim that has been adjudicated, correct?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But without his
information?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes. And, in fact, the --
the record lends some support to this suggestion by
showing that counsel frequently put their own safety and
their own concerns ahead of my client's interests, for
example, stating on the record -- and I'm quoting here
from trial counsel -- "I am still worried about him
behaving during this phase, so the bottom line is he
wants to stay where he is." So there is a question of
whether trial counsel was -- was really looking out for
Mr. Carter's interests at that time.
There's also the question of whether --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, that, you could
see from the record. The question in my mind would be
whether he told counsel he would behave, and counsel
ignored that information, correct?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Sotomayor.
There is strong support in the record to suggest that
Mr. Carter has additional information to provide, both
about his desire to return to the courtroom and about
his competence once he was removed from the courtroom.
Was he hallucinating during the trial? Could he see it?
Could he communicate with counsel?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could -- could you help me
with your discussion of 2244(b)? I have it in front of
me. And the hypothetical was that he's incompetent, the
claim is adjudicated, then he becomes competent, and he
says now is there some new evidence, which could not
have been discovered.
I thought you told us that you not only have
to have new evidence, but new law. That's not the way I
read --
MR. MICHELMAN: I'm -- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- (b)(2)(B)(1), unless I
misunderstood you.
MR. MICHELMAN: You're -- no, you're right,
Justice Kennedy. I misspoke. He needs new law or new
facts, but the new facts have to come with a showing of
actual innocence. I misstated that. I apologize.
But, either way, new law is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no, no.
MR. MICHELMAN: -- new facts are not enough.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no. This says, "or
the factual predicate for the claim could not have been
discovered previously through the exercise of due
diligence," period.
MR. MICHELMAN: And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes?
MR. MICHELMAN: And (b)(2) --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes?
MR. MICHELMAN: -- "the facts underlying the
claim, if proven, would show that, but for the
Constitutional error" --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes, clear and convincing,
that's true.
MR. MICHELMAN: Right. So he needs not only
the new facts, but needs to meet that higher standard,
showing that no reasonable factfinder would have found
him guilty.
But one of his claims, his ineffective
assistance of counsel in mitigation, goes to not his
guilt, but his punishment. So that claim would be
barred under 2254. Additionally, his competence doesn't
go to his guilt either.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, is it your position
that any time a petitioner raises an ineffective
assistance of counsel claim, the habeas proceeding can
potentially be stayed indefinitely?
MR. MICHELMAN: That's potentially correct,
Justice Alito. But I would emphasize the role of the
district courts as gatekeepers for only potentially
meritorious claims that are -- are truly suggested on
the record that someone --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry. Go --
finish your answer to Justice Alito.
MR. MICHELMAN: It's -- where it's truly
suggested on the record that the petitioner could help,
if competent, so that we wouldn't be engaging in
imaginative speculation or claims that were purely
record based.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So what -- it's a
truly suggested by the record standard?
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, I would say that --
that it would be suggested by the record. I'm not sure
the adverb "truly" is necessary, but -- you know.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well -- well, how is
it compared to a motion to dismiss standard?
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, I would look to this
Court's decision --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is it more
stringent?
MR. MICHELMAN: I think it would be -- well,
I guess not -- not compared to the Iqbal standard, Your
Honor. Probably the plausibility standard would
actually be somewhat analogous, although --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, now we've gone
from plausible to truly -- plausible -- well, truly
suggested by the record. I mean, suggested by the
record might be plausible.
It seems to me that it's a pretty loose
standard that entitles the defendant to a stay.
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, that -- but that --
that's not the only criterion, Mr. Chief Justice. It
would be not only that it was suggested by the record
that it was a potentially meritorious claim, as the --
as the district court found and the standard this Court
endorsed in Rhines, but also that the petitioner is
genuinely incompetent. This doesn't happen very often.
In fact, in the state's amicus brief
discussing how, in -- in their characterization, this
type of litigation has exploded in the Ninth Circuit, in
their characterization, they pointed only to nine cases
in the past nine years, so -- and not all of those
resulted in --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why isn't what you're
proposing just a mechanism that will permit stays in
virtually every capital case, if that's what the
petitioner wants -- if that's what petitioner's counsel
wants?
Let's say you have a case where there is a
small amount of mitigating evidence about the
petitioner's childhood, but not enough to -- to sway
the -- the sentencing authority. It's alleged that if
the petitioner had been -- if the petitioner was
competent, the petitioner could provide a lot more
information about what went on during his childhood
years; and, therefore, the -- the proceeding has to be
stayed indefinitely until the petitioner is restored to
confidence or he dies, as happened in Rees.
What do you do with that situation?
MR. MICHELMAN: Justice Alito, I think
district courts have a wide amount of discretion in that
matter, and they could say, well, it looks like there is
a little evidence here, but based on what I think you
could tell me, I don't think there is enough.
Here, by contrast, the district court did
find that Mr. -- Mr. Carter's competent assistance was
necessary. So I think we have to trust the district
courts to be gatekeepers --
JUSTICE ALITO: So if the -- if the district
court says, well, there's a little bit here, and I can't
rule out the possibility that there might be a lot more
that's locked in the petitioner's mind, but he is unable
to provide it because he is incompetent, then I'm going
to grant a stay until he is restored to competence; and
then that would be insulated from being overturned on
appeal by abuse of discretion standard. That's what
you're arguing?
MR. MICHELMAN: That's -- that's correct,
Justice Alito. That would be something --
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think that is
consistent with AEDPA? That Congress, knowing, in
particular, that a lot of district judges and a lot of
court of appeals judges don't like the death penalty and
will go to some length to prevent the imposition of that
sentence, that we're just going to leave that all to the
discretion of every individual district judge?
MR. MICHELMAN: I think it is consistent
with AEDPA, Your Honor, because of this Court's recent
jurisprudence in Martinez, in Holland, in Rhines, which
make clear that AEDPA did not pursue finality at all
cost. It did not eliminate the discretion, the
equitable discretion of the district courts that they
traditionally enjoyed, as this Court stated in Holland.
And as this Court stated in Martinez, the
Court is concerned that there could be claims that no
court will have heard, not the state court, not the
Federal court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Michelman, we -- we
have established a different standard for the degree of
competence that has to exist in order to prevent
execution, right? The -- the prisoner has to be aware
of what is being done and why it's being done.
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And that's a much lower
standard than the standard of competence required for
deciding whether he can assist counsel, right?
MR. MICHELMAN: It's a different standard,
Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, it's -- no, it's a
much -- it's a much easier standard for the state to
establish.
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, it could be easier in
some cases, but harder than others. Mental -- mental
health science is complex, so one might be competent
to because --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, wait. All he has to
know to prevent -- to prevent execution is he has to
know that he's being executed for a crime, right?
And --
MR. MICHELMAN: And he has to understand
why.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- in order to assist
counsel, doesn't he have to know a lot more than that?
MR. MICHELMAN: That's -- that's true,
Justice Scalia. The test --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, just make believe
that I'm right about that, okay?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: That there are two
standards, and one is really quite more difficult than
the other. Why isn't the difference between the
standards utterly eliminated? Because whenever there is
a capital case, a habeas petition is filed, and counsel
says, my -- my client cannot -- cannot -- cannot assist
me. Oh, yes, he understands why he's being executed,
but he may have a new claim, he may be able to tell me
stuff, so we have to stay the execution indefinitely
until he can assist -- assist me in -- in continuing his
defense.
You've just converted the standard for
proceeding with the execution from an easier one to a
much more difficult one.
MR. MICHELMAN: I -- I don't think that's
true, Justice Scalia, because the -- the two standards
are different and for different purposes. So there
could be individuals who meet one and not the other.
It's not -- it's not an either/or choice.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But then -- but then you
are fighting the -- the arguendo assumption.
Let's assume that the Ford standard -- the
standard for competence should be executed, is more
lenient, less -- less forgiving than competence to
assist counsel. Let's assume that. Then Justice Scalia
has to be right. You've -- you've simply eliminated the
Ford standard altogether.
MR. MICHELMAN: Not necessarily, Your Honor,
because even if one is easier --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: At least only -- only in
cases where the competence -- the claim of incompetence
is genuine. I mean, if anyone says, oh, I want to
make -- take advantage of the more defendant-friendly
standard, all I have to do is allege I'm incompetent.
But that's not the case. He has to be --
there has to be a hearing that determines he is, indeed,
incompetent. So - and -- and most defendants I don't
think would be able to establish that they are, indeed,
incompetent.
MR. MICHELMAN: That's right,
Justice Ginsburg. We -- our standard builds in the
assumption that there will be mental health experts that
will testify to the condition of the petitioner.
So the petitioner can't simply select a
standard and declare that he meets it. He would have to
satisfy mental health professionals that he meets that
standard, whether it's competency to be executed or
competency for these purposes. And so that will --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mental health experts
always agree, don't they? Those provided by the defense
always agree with those provided by the prosecution.
Yes.
(Laughter.)
MR. MICHELMAN: I understand sometimes
that's not true, Justice Scalia, but that's -- that's
why we rely on the district courts to do what they do
every day in the trial competency context and adjudicate
conflicting claims about a petitioner's mental
competence --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Am I -- am I -- is it
correct that the petitioners in both cases -- pardon me,
that the criminal defendants in both cases here, the
Respondents, have all but conceded that there is no
Constitutional basis for the right to competency during
habeas, or am I overstating that?
MR. MICHELMAN: I don't think you are,
Justice Kennedy, though I won't speak for Mr. Gonzales.
Mr. Carter does not press a Constitutional
argument here, only the argument that a district court's
discretion, which the State of Ohio recognizes, to stay
habeas proceedings should cover --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But once you concede the
Constitutional point, so that there's no fundamental
unfairness, then it seems to me that -- that you have
all but given away your case.
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, I don't think there
needs to be Constitutional unfairness for there to be
unfairness. For instance, this Court's opinion in
Martinez --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, it's fairness that's
not fundamental -- or --
MR. MICHELMAN: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's unfairness that's not
fundamental.
MR. MICHELMAN: I think Martinez v. Ryan is
an excellent illustration of that point,
Justice Kennedy, because, there, the Court held -- not
that there was a Sixth Amendment right to effective
assistance of counsel at the habeas stage, but that
ineffective assistance on initial review collateral
proceedings could provide cause and prejudice to
overcome a procedural default, in order that the
petitioner would not lose his claim, and that -- to
prevent a situation where no court would hear the claim
before he was executed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but in that
case, the -- the whole basis of the analysis was that,
although it was collateral, it really was the first
opportunity to raise a particular claim.
You say that, earlier, that trial judges do
this all the time in the trial context. It's an
important distinction in our jurisprudence if there's a
difference in terms of the rights to which you are
entitled preconviction and post-conviction.
MR. MICHELMAN: That's -- that's correct,
Mr. Chief Justice. But if the facts haven't been
presented -- and here what the district court found was
there were facts missing, facts that were exclusively
within Mr. Carter's knowledge.
They weren't presented to the state court,
they haven't been available to either the state court or
the Federal court, so it's possible this man could be
executed and no one could have fully heard these
potentially meritorious claims.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What is your -- what
is your limit? You think there is no limit on the
inherent authority, that these things can go on and on?
Or as -- I mean, your -- your friend on the other side
suggested, 1 year as a presumption? Do you have any
limit?
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, we -- we would leave
it, in the first place, to the district court's
discretion. We -- as far as the question of indefinite
stays go, we agree with the State of Ohio that most
competency issues are resolved within a matter of
months. So we can expect --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But not this one because
the claim is he was never competent; isn't that so? He
wasn't competent to stand trial, and he never --
MR. MICHELMAN: That's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And his mental condition
never improved. So this person, if -- if the -- the
standard is he's got to be competent, the likelihood is
he will never be competent because he wasn't even,
according to him, competent at the time he was tried.
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Ginsburg. And
this -- this would be a rare case in which a stay might
need to be more than 6 months, 9 months, a year. But
because most -- most situations, the competency issue
will resolve in a short period of time, this Court
shouldn't fear that it's opening the floodgates to long
stays in many, many cases.
There -- this is a rare case with a very
severely ill man, with potentially meritorious claims
that require his assistance. That's not something
that --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why can't the
competency -- why can't the issue of competency at trial
be resolved?
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, because the issue --
JUSTICE ALITO: You have to be competent
during the habeas proceeding in order to assist in
proving that he was -- that he was incompetent at the
time of trial?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Alito. And
that's because the competency question at this point is
retrospective. We're not talking -- it's not a matter
of simply examining Mr. Carter today and saying, How do
you feel? What do you experience? Are you hearing the
voice of the devil?
But it's a question of was he doing that
during his trial 14 years ago? And that's why it's
important that he be able to participate now.
What the Sixth Circuit ordered in this case
was a remand for a narrow stay with appropriate
monitoring by the district court, to make sure that this
didn't become -- just sit around on the docket for years
with nobody looking at it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Did you say that the
question is whether or not -- not whether he is
competent today to assist his counsel, but whether he
was 14 years ago?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How in the world --
I mean --
MR. MICHELMAN: With respect to the
underlying claim. That's the question.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. How is a --
do mental health professionals make those determinations
on a regular basis?
MR. MICHELMAN: I understand that they do,
Your Honor. I understand it is possible for a person
with a psychosis to recover and have memories of
experiences during that psychosis. Now, I admit that's
not a fact in -- in the record, but that's something
that, if we're dispositive, could be established on
remand in this case.
So it's because of the -- the rarity of
these claims, because they are not going to come up
every day, and because district courts exist as strong
checkpoints to prevent non-genuine claims of competence
or not potentially meritorious claims for which the
petitioner's assistance is necessary, a narrow stay
authority should be preserved and should be applied to
Mr. Carter's case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But not staying
everything, according to the Sixth Circuit. The Sixth
Circuit said that -- that there are issues or may be
issues that can go forward right away. And as to that,
is there any issue that could be argued, despite the
incompetence?
MR. MICHELMAN: Yes, Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And what -- what are
those?
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, in this case -- and I
think it really illustrates the narrowness of -- of the
Sixth Circuit's order. In this case, he had, for
example, claims about the jury instructions. He had
claims about prosecutorial misconduct. He has a claim
about the method of execution that the State of Ohio
uses.
These claims may go forward because they
don't require his assistance. And it's -- it's a
measure of the Sixth Circuit's moderation and discretion
that they held that only the claims that genuinely
require his assistance should be stayed; the others may
go forward with the help of the next friend.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's a pretty
inefficient system, isn't it? That the judge has to
learn a particular record to dispose of claims 1 through
9, when he knows that he's not going to be able to
dispose of the petition until -- until the petitioner is
competent, maybe a year later, then he has to go through
the whole thing again?
MR. MICHELMAN: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't see a
district court saying, well, I'm not going to get into
this until I can dispose of the whole thing.
MR. MICHELMAN: Well, I -- I suppose there
would be some appeal to the notion that the district
court might stay the rest of it, simply waiting, Your
Honor; but we -- we don't think that's likely to happen
frequently.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Schimmer, you have three minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ALEXANDRA T. SCHIMMER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MS. SCHIMMER: Thank you.
First off, there is nothing narrow about
what the Sixth Circuit held. At page 15-A of the
petition appendix, the Sixth Circuit ordered that all of
the ineffective assistance of counsel claims be stayed
until Mr. Carter is competent, meaning these claims will
be stayed at any and all cost to the progress and
finality of the proceedings. I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me what
the value is to wait for the Ford analysis or the Ford
examination to the time of execution?
MS. SCHIMMER: We think there are a few
values, Justice Sotomayor. First of all is that the
state has -- still has an interest -- first of all, we
don't concede that Mr. Carter is Ford incompetent.
Those -- that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Putting that aside.
MS. SCHIMMER: Putting that aside, though,
the State's interest is that it still has a powerful
interest in the finality of its conviction and sentence.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: "At all costs" is what
you seem to be saying.
MS. SCHIMMER: No. But even if the
implementation of that sentence is ultimately
forestalled by a Ford ruling, that's true in a dignitary
sense, but it's also true in a practical sense, meaning
the State should not -- if somebody regains competence
many years down the line, the whole point of AEDPA is
that the State at that time should not have to be
litigating a stale case.
And to wait potentially 5 and 10 and
15 years until someone's competency is restored on this
total speculation that something might happen runs --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, your adversary has
not said it's total speculation. He suggests that, if
we set a standard that requires -- we can talk about
what the terms are, suggestive in the record, plausible
in the record, typical sort of situation -- but assuming
that there is some basis to believe that the defendant
can provide information of importance to the claim, why
should that be -- that door be shut?
MS. SCHIMMER: Well, again, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And how do you deal with
his answer that, if the claim is not a new claim, but
just new information about an old claim, that he will be
barred from a successive petition?
MS. SCHIMMER: Right. Well, we still don't
see how that has any traction in a case like this where,
whether competent or not competent, 2254(d) and
Pinholster say this claim -- all of these claims were
adjudicated on the merits in state court and, therefore,
no new evidence can be considered by the Federal court.
So that, we think, resolves that.
And in terms of how do you deal with limited
stays and then going on, we would say simply that the
State of Ohio's experience in this case has been that
the State of Ohio has been standing ready for 10 years
to defend the judgment of its state courts in this case,
even though all of Mr. Carter's claims are record based.
There is no right to competence. Everybody
seems to now agree on that. Indefinite stays contravene
AEDPA, and we don't think that any stay is justified
here because of the record-based claims.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
(Whereupon, at 10:40 a.m., the case in the
