IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND :
HUMAN SERVICES, ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 11-398
v. :
FLORIDA, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, March 26, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:12 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
ROBERT A. LONG, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; as
Court-appointed amicus curiae.
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
Petitioners.
GREGORY G. KATSAS, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
ROBERT A. LONG, ESQ.
As the Court-appointed amicus curiae 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 30
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
GREGORY G. KATSAS, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 56
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
ROBERT A. LONG, ESQ.
As the Court-appointed amicus curiae 73
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:12 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument this morning in Case Number 11-398, Department
of Health and Human Services v. Florida.
Mr. Long.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT A. LONG
AS THE COURT-APPOINTED AMICUS CURIAE
MR. LONG: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Anti-Injunction Act imposes a "pay
first, litigate later" rule that is central to Federal
tax assessment and collection. The Act applies to
essentially every tax penalty in the Internal Revenue
Code. There is no reason to think that Congress made a
special exception for the penalty imposed by section
5000A. On the contrary, there are three reasons to
conclude that the Anti-Injunction Act applies here.
First, Congress directed that the section
00A penalty shall be assessed and collected in the
same manner as taxes. Second, Congress provided that
penalties are included in taxes for assessment purposes.
And, third, the section 5000A penalty bears the key
indicia of a tax.
Congress directed that the section 5000A
penalty shall be assessed and collected in the same
manner as taxes. That directive triggers the
Anti-Injunction Act, which provides that "no suit for
the purpose of restraining the assessment or collection
of any tax may be maintained in any court by any
person."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that depends, as --
as the Government points out, on whether that directive
is a directive to the Secretary of the Treasury as to
how he goes about getting this penalty, or rather a
directive to him and to the courts. All of the other
directives there seem to me to be addressed to the
Secretary. Why should this one be directed to the
courts? When you say "in the same manner," he goes
about doing it in the same manner, but the courts simply
accept that -- that manner of proceeding but nonetheless
adjudicate the cases.
MR. LONG: Well, I think I have a three-part
answer to that, Justice Scalia. First, the text does
not say that the Secretary shall assess and collect
taxes in the same manner; it just says that it shall be
assessed in the same manner as a tax, without addressing
any party particularly.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, he's assessing and
collecting it in the same manner as a tax.
MR. LONG: Well, the assessment -- the other
two parts of the answer are, as a practical matter, I
don't think there's any dispute in this case that if the
Anti-Injunction Act does not apply, this penalty, the
section 5000A penalty, will as a practical matter be
assessed and collected in a very different manner from
other taxes and other tax penalties.
There are three main differences. First,
when the Anti-Injunction Act applies, you have to pay
the tax or the penalty first and then litigate later to
get it back with interest. Second, you have to exhaust
administrative remedies. Even after you pay the tax,
you can't immediately go to court. You have to go to
the Secretary and give the Secretary at least 6 months
to see if the matter can be resolved administratively.
And, third, even in the very carefully defined
situations in which Congress has permitted a challenge
to a tax or a penalty before it's paid, the Secretary
has to make the first move. The taxpayer is never
allowed to rush into court before the tax -- before the
Secretary sends a notice of deficiency to start the
process.
Now, if -- if the Anti-Injunction Act does
not apply here, none of those rules apply. And that's
not just for this case; it will be for every challenge
to a section 5000A penalty going forward. The taxpayer
will be able to go to court at any time without
exhausting administrative remedies; there will be none
of the limitations that apply in terms of you have to
wait for the Secretary to make the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why will the
administrative remedies rule not be applicable,
exhaustion rule not be applicable?
MR. LONG: Well, because if the
Anti-Injunction Act doesn't apply, there's no
prohibition on courts restraining the assessment or
collection of this penalty, and you can simply --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, but courts apply the
exhaustion rule. I mean, I know you've studied this.
I'm just not following it. Why couldn't the court say,
well, you haven't exhausted your remedies; no
injunction?
MR. LONG: Well, in -- you could do that, I
think, as a matter of -- of common law or a judicially
imposed doctrine, but in the code itself, which is
all -- I mean, the Anti-Injunction Act is an absolutely
central statute to litigation --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes. Yes.
MR. LONG: -- about taxes. And the code
says -- first it says you must pay the tax first and
then litigate. So, that's the baseline. And then, in
addition, it says you must -- I mean, it's not common
law; it's in the code -- you must apply for a refund,
you must wait at least 6 months. I mean, that's -- many
of these provisions are extremely specific, with very
specific time limits.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But they would apply
even if the rule is not jurisdictional. The only
difference would be that the court could enforce it or
not enforce it in particular cases, which brings me to
the Davis case, which I think is your biggest hurdle.
It's a case quite similar to this in which the
constitutionality of the Social Security Act was at
issue, and the government waived its right to insist
upon the application of this Act.
Of course, if it's jurisdictional, you can't
waive it. So, are you asking us to overrule the Davis
case?
MR. LONG: Well, Helvering v. Davis was
decided during a period when this Court interpreted the
Anti-Injunction Act as simply codifying the
pre-statutory equitable principles that usually, but not
always, prohibited a court from enjoining the assessment
or collection of taxes. So, that understanding, which
is what was the basis for the Helvering v. Davis
decision, was rejected by the Court in Williams Packing
and a series of subsequent cases -- Bob Jones. And so,
I would say, effectively, the Davis case has been
overruled by subsequent decisions of this Court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Long, why don't we
simply follow the statutory language? I know that
you've argued that the Davis case has been overtaken by
later cases, but the language of the Anti-Injunction Act
is "no suit shall be maintained." It's remarkably
similar to the language in -- that was at issue in Reed
Elsevier: "No civil action for infringement ... shall
be instituted." And that formulation, "no suit may be
maintained," contrasts with the Tax Injunction Act. It
says the district court shall not enjoin. That Tax
Injunction Act is the same pattern as 2283, which says
"courts of the United States may not stay a proceeding
in State court." So, both of those formulas, the TIA
and the no injunction against proceedings at State
court, are directed to "court." The Anti-Injunction
Act, like the statute at issue in Reed Elsevier, says
"no suit shall be maintained." And it has been argued
that that is suitor-directed in contrast to
court-directed.
MR. LONG: Right. Well, I mean, this Court
has said several times that the Tax Injunction Act was
based on the Anti-Injunction Act. You're quite right,
the language is different; but we submit that the
Anti-Injunction Act itself, by saying that "no suit
shall be maintained," is addressed to courts as well as
litigants. I mean, after all, a case cannot go from
beginning to end without the active cooperation of the
court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But how is that different
from "no civil action for infringement shall be
instituted" -- "maintained" and "instituted"? Anything
turn on that?
MR. LONG: Well, it's -- I mean -- perhaps a
party could initiate an action without the active
cooperation of the court, but to maintain it from
beginning to end, again, requires the court's
cooperation.
And even if -- I mean, if the Court were
inclined to say as an initial matter, if this statute
were coming before us for the first time today, given
all of your recent decisions on jurisdiction, that you
might be inclined to say this is not a jurisdictional
statute, a lot of water has gone over the dam here. The
Court has said multiple times that this is a
jurisdictional statute. Congress has not disturbed
those decisions. To the contrary --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, the Court said that
many times, but is there any case in which the result
would have been different if the Anti-Injunction Act
were not viewed as jurisdictional but instead were
viewed as a mandatory claims-processing --
MR. LONG: There's --
JUSTICE ALITO: -- rule?
MR. LONG: There's certainly a number of
cases where the Court dismissed saying it is
jurisdictional.
As I read the cases, I don't think any of
them would necessarily have come out differently,
because I don't think we had a case where the argument
was, well, you know, the government has waived this, so,
you know, even -- if it's not jurisdictional, it --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, the clearest -- the
clearest way of distinguishing between the
jurisdictional provision and a mandatory
claims-processing rule is whether it can be waived and
whether the court feels that it has an obligation to
raise the issue sua sponte.
Now, if there are a lot of cases that call
it jurisdictional, but none of them would have come out
differently if the Anti-Injunction Act were simply a
mandatory claims-processing rule -- you have that on one
side.
And on the other side, you have Davis, where
the Court accepted a waiver by the Solicitor General;
the Sunshine Anthracite coal case, where there also was
a waiver; and there's the Williams Packing case, which
is somewhat hard to understand as viewing the
Anti-Injunction Act as a jurisdictional provision.
The Court said that there could be a suit if
there's no way the government could win and the
plaintiff would suffer irreparable harm. Now, doesn't
that sound like an equitable exception to the
Anti-Injunction Act?
MR. LONG: No, I think the -- I think the
best interpretation of the Court's cases is that it was
interpreting a jurisdictional statute. And, indeed, in
Williams Packing, the Court said it was a jurisdictional
statute.
But, again, even if you had doubt about
simply the cases, there's more than that because
Congress has not only not disturbed this Court's
decisions stating that the statute is jurisdictional;
they've passed numerous amendments to this
Anti-Injunction Act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it seems --
you can't separate those two points. The idea that
Congress has acquiesced in what we have said only helps
you if what we have said is fairly consistent. And you,
yourself, point out in the brief that we've kind of gone
back and forth on whether this is a jurisdictional
provision or not. So, even if Congress acquiesced in
it, I'm not sure what they acquiesced in.
MR. LONG: Well, what you have said,
Mr. Chief Justice, has been absolutely consistent for
years, since the Williams Packing case. The period
of inconsistency was after -- the first 50 years, since
the statute was enacted in 1867, and there was a period,
as I said, when the Court was allowing extraordinary
circumstances exceptions and equitable exceptions, but
then, very quickly, it cut back on that. And since --
and since Williams Packing, you've been utterly
consistent --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, even since
Williams Packing, there was South Carolina v. Regan.
And that case can also be understood as a kind of
equitable exception to the rule, which would be
inconsistent with thinking that the rule is
jurisdictional.
MR. LONG: Well, again, I mean, I think the
best understanding of South Carolina v. Regan is not
that it's an equitable exception, but it's the Court
interpreting a jurisdictional statute as it would
interpret any statute in light of its purpose, and
deciding in that very special case, it's a very narrow
exception --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Mr. Long, in Bowles, the
Court looked to the long history of appellate issues as
being jurisdictional in its traditional sense, not as a
claim-processing rule, but as a pure jurisdiction rule,
the power of the court to hear a case.
From all the questions here, I count at
least four cases in the Court's history where the Court
has accepted a waiver by the Solicitor General and
reached a tax issue. I have at least three cases, one
of them just mentioned by Justice Kagan, where
exceptions to that rule were read in.
Given that history, regardless of how we
define jurisdictional statutes versus claim-processing
statutes in recent times, isn't the fairer statement
that Congress has accepted that in the extraordinary
case, we will hear the case?
MR. LONG: No. No, Justice Sotomayor,
because in many of these amendments which have come in
the '70s and the '90s and the 2000s, the Congress has
actually framed the limited exceptions to the
Anti-Injunction Act in jurisdictional terms. And it has
written many of the express exceptions by saying
notwithstanding section 7421 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But doesn't that just
prove that it knows that the court will impose a
claim-processing rule in many circumstances, and so, in
those in which it specifically doesn't want the court
to, it has to be clearer?
MR. LONG: Well, but Congress says,
notwithstanding 7421, the court "shall have
jurisdiction" to restrain the assessment and collection
of taxes in very limited --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you go back to the
question that Justice Alito asked? Assuming we find
that this is not jurisdictional, what's the parade of
horribles that you see occurring if we call this a
mandatory claim-processing rule? What kinds of cases do
you imagine that courts will reach?
MR. LONG: Right. Well, first of all, I
think you'd be saying that for the refund statute as
well as for the Anti-Injunction Act, which has very
similar wording. So, if the Anti-Injunction Act is not
jurisdictional, I think that's also going to apply to
the refund statute, the statute that says you have to
first ask for a refund and file, you know, within
certain time. So, it would be -- it would be both of
those statutes. And, you know, we are dealing with
taxes here. If people can litigate --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That wasn't my question.
MR. LONG: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: My question was, if we
deem this a mandatory claim-processing rule --
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- what cases do you
imagine courts will reach on what grounds? Assuming the
government does its job and comes in and raises the AIA
as an immediate defense --
MR. LONG: Well, that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- what -- where can a
court then reach the question, despite --
MR. LONG: That would certainly be the first
class of cases that occurs to me, where, if the
government does not raise it in a timely way, it could
be waived. I would think plaintiffs would see if there
was some clever way they could get a suit going that
wouldn't immediately be apparent that it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Assumes the lack of
competency of the government, which I don't, but what
other types of cases?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Long, I don't think
you're going to come up with any, but I think your
response is you could say that about any jurisdictional
rule. If it's not jurisdictional, what's going to
happen is you're going to have an intelligent Federal
court deciding whether you're going to make an
exception, and there will be no parade of horribles
because all Federal courts are intelligent.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, it seems to me it's a
question you can't answer. It's a question which asks
why should there be any jurisdictional rules? And you
think there should be.
MR. LONG: And, Justice Scalia, I mean,
honestly, I can't predict what would happen, but I would
say that not all people who litigate about Federal taxes
are necessarily rational. And I think there would be a
great --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Long --
JUSTICE BREYER: I just don't want to lose
the second half of your argument. And we've spent all
the time so far on jurisdiction. And I accept pretty
much -- I'm probably leaning in your favor on
jurisdiction, but where I see the problem is in the
second part, because the second part says "restraining
the assessment or collection of any tax."
Now, here, Congress has nowhere used the
word "tax." What it says is "penalty." Moreover, this
is not in the Internal Revenue Code but for purposes of
collection.
And so, why is this a tax? And I know you
point to certain sentences that talk about taxes within
the code --
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and this is not attached
to a tax. It is attached to a health care requirement.
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, why does it fall within
that word?
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, the first point
is our -- our initial submission is you don't have to
determine that this is a tax in order to find that the
Anti-Injunction Act applies, because Congress very
specifically said that it shall be assessed and
collected in the same manner as a tax, even if it's a
tax penalty and not a tax. So, that's one argument --
JUSTICE BREYER: But that doesn't mean the
AIA applies. I mean -- and then they provide some
exceptions, but it doesn't mean the AIA applies.
It says "in the same manner as." It is then
attached to chapter 68, when that -- it references that
as being "the manner of." Well, that it's being applied
or if it's being collected in the same manner as a tax
doesn't automatically make it a tax, particularly since
the reasons for the AIA are to prevent interference with
revenue sources. And here, an advance attack on this
does not interfere with the collection of revenues.
I mean, that's -- you've read the arguments,
as have I. But I'd like to know what you say succinctly
in response to those arguments.
MR. LONG: So, specifically on the argument
that it is actually a tax, even setting aside the point
that it should be assessed and collected in the same
manner as a tax, the Anti-Injunction Act uses the term
"tax"; it doesn't define it. Somewhat to my surprise,
"tax" is not defined anywhere in the Internal Revenue
Code. In about the time that Congress passed the
Anti-Injunction Act, "tax" had a very broad definition.
It's broad enough to include this exaction, which is
codified in the Internal Revenue Code. It's part of the
taxpayer's annual income tax return. The amount of the
liability and whether you owe the liability is based in
part on your income. It's assessed and collected by the
IRS.
JUSTICE SCALIA: There's at least some doubt
about it, Mr. Long, for the reasons that Justice Breyer
said, and I thought that we had a -- a principle that
ousters of jurisdiction are narrowly construed; that,
unless it's clear, courts are not deprived of
jurisdiction. And I find it hard to think that this is
clear. Whatever else it is, it's easy to think that
it's not clear.
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, the Anti-Injunction
Act applies not only to every tax in the code but, as
far as I can tell, to every tax penalty in the code.
And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Long, you said
before -- and I think you were quite right -- that the
Tax Injunction Act is modeled on the Anti-Injunction
Act. And, under the Tax Injunction Act, what -- what
can't be enjoined is an assessment for the purpose of
raising revenue. The Tax Injunction Act does not apply
to penalties that are designed to induce compliance with
the law, rather than to raise revenue. And this is not
a revenue-raising measure because, if it's successful,
they -- nobody will pay the penalty, and there will be
no revenue to raise.
MR. LONG: Well, in Bob Jones, the Court
said that they had gotten out of the business of trying
to determine whether an exaction is primarily
revenue-raising or primarily regulatory. And this one
certainly raises -- is expected to raise very
substantial amounts of revenues, at least $4 billion a
year by the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But Bob Jones involved a
statute where it denominated the exaction as a tax.
MR. LONG: That's -- yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Here we have one where
the Congress is not denominating it a -- as a tax; it's
denominating it as a penalty.
MR. LONG: That's -- that's absolutely
right, and that's obviously why -- if it were called a
tax, there would be absolutely no question that the
Anti-Injunction Act applies.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Absolutely. But even
the section of the code that you referred to previously,
the one following 7421, the AIA, it does very clearly
make a difference -- 7422 -- make a difference between
tax and penalties. It's very explicit.
MR. LONG: Yes, that's -- it does; that is
correct. And there are many other places in the code
where tax --
JUSTICE BREYER: The best collection I've
found in your favor, I think, is in Mortimer Caplin's
brief on page 16, 17. He has a whole list. All right?
So -- I let my law clerk to look all those up. And it
seems to me that they all fall into the categories of
either, one, these are penalties that were penalties
assessed for not paying taxes; or, two, they involve
matters that were called by the court taxes; or, three,
in some instances, they were deemed by the code to be
taxes.
Now, what we have here is something that's
in a different statute that doesn't use the word "tax"
once, except for a collection device and, in fact, in
addition, the underlying AIA reason, which is to say to
the Solicitor General: We don't care what you think;
we, in Congress, don't want you in court where the
revenue of a State -- Tax Injunction Act -- or the
revenue of the Federal Government is at stake, and,
therefore, you can't waive it.
Now, I got that. Here it's not at stake,
and here there are all the differences I just mentioned.
So, I ask that because I want to hear your response.
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, there are penalties
in the Internal Revenue Code that you really couldn't
say are related in any -- in any close way to some other
tax provision. There's a penalty -- it's discussed in
the briefs -- for selling diesel fuel that doesn't
comply with EPA's regulations, you know. So, there are
all kinds of penalties in the code, and I think it's --
that it's reliable.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Long, aren't there
places in this Act -- fees and penalties -- that were
specifically put under the Anti-Injunction Act? There's
one on health care plans, there's one on pharmaceutical
manufacturers, where Congress specifically said the
Anti-Injunction Act is triggered for those. It does not
say that here. Wouldn't that suggest that Congress
meant for a different result to obtain?
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, Congress didn't use
the language the Anti-Injunction Act "shall apply" --
JUSTICE KAGAN: No, but it -- in section
9008 and in section 9010, it specifically referred --
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- to the part of the code
where the Anti-Injunction Act is.
MR. LONG: All of subtitle F, which picks up
lots of administration and procedure provisions, but
those are fees, and they're not -- Congress did not
provide, you know, in the sections themselves that they
should be paid as part of a tax return. So, they were
free-standing fees. And by using that subtitle F
language, Congress plugged in a whole set of rules for
how to collect and administer the fees, and it went not
just to assessment and collection -- and the IRS has
recognized this -- but to examination, privacy, a whole
series of additional things.
So, I think it would be a mistake to look at
that language and say, oh, here's Congress saying they
want the Anti-Injunction Act to apply. They're actually
doing more than that.
And, yes, I grant you, you could look at
section 5000A, the individual coverage requirement, and
say, well, they could have been clearer about saying the
Anti-Injunction Act applied. And that's certainly true,
but, again, they were trying to accomplish a lot. And
it's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It's easier to talk about
this case if we just forget the words "for the purpose
of restraining assessment or collection." In a sense,
that brings the jurisdictional question and
Justice Breyer's question together.
It seems to me -- maybe you could just
comment on that language. Is that sort of language
usually contained in a jurisdictional provision? I
mean, you often don't know the purpose of a suit until
after the thing is under way. I can see it with
malicious prosecution and some civil rights cases. Does
it strike you as somewhat unusual to have this provision
in a jurisdictional sense?
MR. LONG: It does strike me, honestly --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes. Excuse me.
MR. LONG: -- as a bit unusual, but this is
an old statute. I mean, this -- the core language is
essentially unchanged since 1867, and it -- you know, I
think that's part of the explanation for it. And,
again, it's, you know, become the center of a series of
provisions that very carefully control the circumstances
in which litigation about Federal taxes can take place.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Long, there's another
argument that has been made that I would like you to
address, and that is all this talk about tax penalty --
it's all beside the point because this suit is not
challenging the penalty. This is a suit that is
challenging the must-buy provision, and the argument is
made that, if, indeed, "must-buy" is constitutional,
then these complainants will not resist the penalty.
So, what they're seeking is a determination
that the "must-buy" requirement, stated separately from
the penalty, that the "must-buy" is unconstitutional.
And, if that's so, that's the end of the case; if it's
not so, they're not resisting the penalty.
MR. LONG: Well, I think that argument
doesn't work for two reasons. I mean, first, if you
look at the plaintiffs' own complaint, they clearly
challenge both the minimum coverage requirement and the
penalty. At page 122 of the Joint Appendix, they
challenge the requirement that the individuals obtain
health care coverage or pay a penalty.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, why is that?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If that's -- if that's
the problem, it's easy to amend a complaint. They can
just take that out of the complaint. So, it can't turn
on that.
MR. LONG: Well -- and -- yes, I mean, it's
-- or another complaint would be filed, but, still, I
think that's a serious problem. But even if they had
filed a different complaint, I don't think you -- in
this case, I don't think you can separate the minimum
coverage requirement from the penalty, because the
penalty is the sole means of enforcing the minimum
coverage requirement.
So, first, I mean, I think these plaintiffs
would not be satisfied if the Court were to render a
judgment saying the minimum coverage requirement is
invalidated; the penalty, however, remains standing.
Anybody who doesn't have insurance has to pay the
penalty. Then they'd have to pay a penalty equal to the
cost of insurance and they wouldn't even have insurance.
So, I don't think that would be --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, they say they want to
obey the law --
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- and they say that your
argument puts them in the position of having to disobey
the law in order to obtain review of their claim. And
what is your answer to that?
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, first of all, I
can't find that in the record, in their declarations. I
don't see a statement that they will, you know, never
incur a penalty under any circumstances. But -- but
even if that were so, what this Court has said in
Americans United is the Anti-Injunction Act bars any
suit, not just to enjoin the collection of your own
taxes, but to enjoin the collection of anyone's taxes.
And so, even if it were really true that
these plaintiffs were not interested in the penalty and
would never pay the penalty, if they were to succeed in
this case in striking down the minimum coverage
requirement, the inevitable result would be that the
penalty would fall as well, because the government
couldn't collect a penalty for failing to follow an
unconstitutional requirement. And so, it would still be
barred because it would be a suit that would prevent the
collection of some of the --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let me take us back to
Justice Kennedy's question about the "for the purpose
of" language. I take it you interpret the statute to
mean the following: "For the purpose of" means having
the effect of. Is that correct?
MR. LONG: Well, I mean, this Court in the
Bob Jones case, where a similar kind of argument was
being made by the plaintiff in that case, said, you
know, look, you know, where the -- where it's inevitable
that this is what the suit is about, they're sort of two
sides of the same coin, that clearly is a primary
purpose of the suit. And it's -- and you can't by
clever pleading get away from that. That's just the
nature of the situation.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Long, aren't you
trying to rewrite the statute, in a way? The statute
has two sections. One is the "you have to have
insurance" section and the other is the sanction. The
statute has two different sets of exceptions
corresponding to those two different sections. You're
trying to suggest that the statute says, well, it's your
choice, either buy insurance or pay a -- or pay a fee.
But that's not the way the statute reads.
And Congress, it must be supposed, you know, made a
decision that that shouldn't be the way the statute
reads, that it should instead be a regulatory command
and a penalty attached to that command.
MR. LONG: Well, I would not argue that this
statute is a perfect model of clarity, but I do think
the most reasonable way to read the entire statute is
that it does impose a single obligation to pay a penalty
if you are an applicable individual and you're not
subject to an exemption.
And the reason I say that, if you look at
the exemptions from the penalty, I mean, the very first
one is you're exempt from the penalty because you can't
afford to purchase insurance. And it just doesn't seem
reasonable to me to interpret the statute as Congress
having said, well, you know, this person is exempt from
paying a penalty because we find they can't afford to
buy insurance; however, they still have a legal
obligation to buy insurance. That just doesn't seem
reasonable.
So, I do think, although it's -- I certainly
wouldn't argue it's clear, that that's the best way to
understand the statute as a whole.
But, again, I would say, you know, that's
not essential to the question we're discussing now, of
whether the Anti-Injunction Act applies. Again, you
know, I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me why
you think the Solicitor General's reading creates a
problem? He --
MR. LONG: Well, in going back to -- so if,
so if the result were to say simply, this is not -- oh,
I'm sorry. The Solicitor General's reading. So, now
it's not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That it is a
jurisdictional bar, but there's an exemption for those
items that Congress has designated solely as penalties
that are not like taxes.
MR. LONG: Right. Well, I mean, I think the
Solicitor General's reading would probably create the
fewest problems, as I understand it. I mean, my -- my
main objection to the Solicitor General's reading is I
don't think it makes a whole lot of sense. I mean,
basically, the Solicitor General says every penalty in
the Internal Revenue Code, every other penalty in the
Affordable Care Act is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Oh that's not -- that's
carrying it too far, because he says if a penalty is
designated as a tax by Congress, then it's subject to
the AIA, and that's most of the code, the tax code. And
he says for those portions of the Affordable Care Act
that designate things as taxes, the AIA applies. So,
it's only -- and I haven't found another statute. I'm
going to ask him if there's another one. It's only for
those statutes in which Congress has designated
something solely as a penalty.
MR. LONG: Right. Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And not indicated that
it is a tax.
MR. LONG: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They don't fall within
the AIA.
MR. LONG: I think my -- my take on it is if
you adopted the Solicitor General's approach, there are
probably three penalties for alcohol- and
tobacco-related offenses at 5114(c), 5684, and 5761 that
I think would be very difficult to distinguish from this
one, and possibly the 527(j) penalty for failure to
disclose political contributions.
If there are no further questions, I'd like
to reserve.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Long.
General Verrilli.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
GENERAL VERRILLI: Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court
This case presents issues of great moment,
and the Anti-Injunction Act does not bar the Court's
consideration of those issues. That is so even though
the Anti-Injunction Act is a jurisdictional limit that
serves what this Court described in Clintwood Elkhorn as
an exceedingly strong interest in protecting the
financial stability of the Federal Government, and even
though the minimum coverage provision of the Affordable
Care Act is an exercise of Congress's taxing power as
well as its commerce power.
Congress has authority under the taxing
power to enact a measure not labeled as a tax, and it
did so when it put section 5000A into the Internal
Revenue Code. But for purposes of the Anti-Injunction
Act, the precise language Congress used is
determinative. And there is no language in the
Anti-Injunction Act -- excuse me -- no language in
section 5000A of the Affordable Care Act or in the
Internal Revenue Code generally that provides a textual
instruction that --
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, General Verrilli,
today you're arguing that the penalty is not a tax.
Tomorrow you're going to be back and you'll be arguing
that the penalty is a tax.
Has the Court ever held that something that
is a tax for purposes of the taxing power under the
Constitution is not a tax under the Anti-Injunction Act?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, Justice Alito, but
the Court has held in the license tax cases that
something can be a constitutional exercise of the taxing
power whether or not it is called a tax. And that's
because the nature of the inquiry that we will conduct
tomorrow is different from the nature of the inquiry
that we will conduct today.
Tomorrow, the question is whether Congress
has the authority under the taxing power to enact it,
and the form of words doesn't have a dispositive effect
on that analysis. Today, we're construing statutory
text where the precise choice of words does have a
dispositive effect on the analysis.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, General, you also
have the Bailey child labor tax cases, 'cause there the
Court said that the tax, which was a prohibitory tax
alone, was a tax subject to the AIA, and then it said it
was beyond the Court's taxing power in a separate case,
correct?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. I do think, Justice
Sotomayor, that with respect to one of the arguments
that my friend from the NFIB has made in the brief, that
Bailey v. George is a significant problem because I
think their argument on the constitutionality under the
taxing power is essentially that the Affordable Care Act
provision is the same thing as the provision that was
held unconstitutional in Bailey v. Drexel Furniture.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's a different
issue. The question Justice --
GENERAL VERRILLI: But on the same day --
right, but on the same day as Bailey v. Drexel
Furniture, the Court issued Bailey v. George, which held
that the Anti-Injunction Act did bar a challenge to that
provision, even though the Court had concluded that it
was invalid under the tax power.
So -- and I think the reason for that has
been -- is clear now after Williams Packing and Bob
Jones, in that, in order to find that the
Anti-Injunction Act doesn't apply to something that
otherwise would be a tax that triggers it, you have to
conclude essentially that there's no substantial
argument that can be made in defense of it as a tax. We
don't have that here. So, I don't think you can get
around the Anti-Injunction Act if the Court were to read
it, as the amicus suggest it should be read, on that
theory, but --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Verrilli, a basic
question about your argument: If you're right about the
second part, that is, for purposes of the statute, the
Anti-Injunction statute, this penalty does not
constitute a tax, then does the Court need to decide
whether the Anti-Injunction Act in other cases, where it
does involve a tax, is jurisdictional?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. I apologize if I'm
creating any confusion about that, Justice Ginsburg. We
think by far the better route here is to understand the
statute as we have proposed that it be construed as not
applying here. From the perspective of the United
States -- and if I could, I'd like to take a minute on
this -- the idea that the Anti-Injunction Act would be
construed as not being a jurisdictional provision is
very troubling, and we don't think it's correct.
And I would, if I could, follow up on a
question, Justice Ginsburg, that you asked Mr. Long in
terms of the language of the Anti-Injunction Act,
7421(a), which can be found at page 16a of the appendix
to our brief.
I'd ask the Court to compare that to the
language of the very next provision in the code, which
is on the next page of our statutory appendix, 17a,
which is the refund statute, which we've talked about a
little bit so far this morning, 7422(a).
The refund statute this Court held in Dolan
was jurisdictional, and the Court in both Dolan and
Brockamp held that the statute of limitations that
applies to the refund statute cases is jurisdictional.
The language in 7422(a) is virtually
identical to the language in 7421(a) --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: That is correct, although
in the refund context, you have the sovereign immunity
problem, in which we presume that that has not been
waived.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Right. But I --
7421(a) --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you're correct on --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- and 7422(a) were the
same --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The language is quite
parallel.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And, originally, they
were the same statutory provision.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI: They were only separated
out later. So, I do think that's the strongest textual
indication, Justice Ginsburg, that -- that 7421(a) is
jurisdictional.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the question that I
asked you is, if you're right that this penalty is not
covered by section 7421, if you're right about that, why
should we deal with the jurisdictional question at all?
Because this statute, correct, the way you're reading --
read it doesn't involve a tax that's subject to the
Anti-Injunction Act.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, that is exactly our
position. And the reason we don't --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So -- so, you agree that
we would not -- if we agree with you about the correct
interpretation of the statute, we need not decide the
jurisdiction.
GENERAL VERRILLI: There would be no reason
to decide the jurisdictional issue.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Don't you want to know the
answer?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI: Justice Kennedy, I think
we all want to know the answer to a lot of things in
this case. But -- but I do -- but I do think that the
prudent course here is to construe the statute in the
manner that we read it.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you indicated -- there
was a discussion earlier about why does the government
really care, they have competent attorneys, et cetera.
But -- and you began your argument by saying it would be
very troubling to say that it's not jurisdictional.
I'd like you to comment on that. It's not
for us to tell a party what's in its best interests. It
would seem to me that there might be some instances in
which the government would want to litigate the validity
of a tax right away and would want to waive. But you
say it's -- that's not true; that it's very troubling.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think there are two
problems. One is the problem that Justice Scalia
identified, that if it's not jurisdictional, then courts
have authority to craft equitable exceptions. And it
may seem from where we stand now that that authority is
or could be very, very tightly cabined. But if -- if
this Court were to conclude that it isn't
jurisdictional, that does empower courts to find other
circumstances in which they might find it equitable to
allow cases to go forward in the absence of -- despite
the existence of the Anti-Injunction Act.
And, second, although I certainly am not
going to stand up here and disparage the attorneys for
the United States in the slightest, the reality is that
if this isn't jurisdictional, then it's -- the argument
-- it's open to the argument that it's subject to
forfeiture by a simple omission in failing to raise it
in an answer. And that -- and that's a troubling
prospect.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, can I ask --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How likely is it --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Justice Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How likely is it -- I
mean, the government is going to be defending these
suits. How likely is it that the government will
overlook the Anti-Injunction Act? So, it seems to me
that this is arming the government by saying it's
waivable at the government's option.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's -- that is not our
assessment of the institutional interests of the United
States, Justice Ginsburg. And we do think that the --
the right way to go in this case is to read the statute
as not applying to the minimum coverage provision of --
of the Affordable Care Act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It was -- it was the
calculation of the interests of the United States that
your predecessor made in the Davis case.
There, the Solicitor General exercised
authority that we sanctioned to waive the
Anti-Injunction Act. And, of course, that couldn't be
done if it were jurisdictional.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's true,
Mr. Chief Justice. Several points about that, though.
We do agree with Mr. Long's analysis that
Davis occurred in -- during a time in -- in which under
the Standard Nut case, the Court had interpreted the
Anti-Injunction Act as doing no more than codifying the
traditional equitable principles which allowed courts
discretion to conclude that in certain circumstances, a
case could go forward.
Williams Packing repudiated that analysis,
and Bob Jones v. Simon again repudiated that analysis
and said, no, we're no longer abiding by that. It is
true that the Davis case has not formally been
overruled, but we do think it's fundamentally
inconsistent with the Court's understanding now of --
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought Davis was the
case that -- where a shareholder sues the corporation.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And the remedy is that the
corporation shouldn't pay the money to the tax
authority. Now, it's a little technical, but that isn't
actually an injunction against the tax authority
collecting. He's not -- they're not restraining the
collection of the tax. They're saying to the taxpayer,
don't pay it.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. And --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know how far that
gets you.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, in fairness,
Justice Breyer, the United States did intervene in the
-- in the Davis case and was a party, and so -- not as
far as I'd like, I guess, is the answer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't do it again, because
I think that goes too far.  I don't think that's
restraining the collection of the tax. It's restraining
the payment of the tax.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You don't want to let that
bone go, right?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI: Our view here is that it
is jurisdictional. Because it's jurisdictional as this
Court understands jurisdiction now, it's not waivable.
And, therefore, we don't think that -- that that part of
the Davis decision is good law.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, can I ask you about
Reed Elsevier? Justice Ginsburg suggested that the
language was very similar in Reed Elsevier as it is
here, but there are even further similarities. Reed
Elsevier pointed out that the provision in question
wasn't in Title 28. Here, too, it's not in Title 28.
In Reed Elsevier, it was pointed out that the provision
there had numerous exceptions to it. Here, too, there
are numerous exceptions that we find that have been
created by the courts over the years.
In Reed Elsevier, the question was
essentially one about timing. Come to court after you
file your registration. Here, too, the question is one
about timing. Come to court after you make -- after you
pay your taxes.
So, Reed Elsevier seems in multiple respects
on all fours with this case.
Why is that wrong?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I don't think so, Justice
Kagan. First, we think -- I guess I'm repeating myself
and I apologize. But we think the closest analogue is
the very next provision in the United States Code,
7422(a), which this Court has held is jurisdictional,
and is phrased in exactly the same way as 7421(a). In
fact, as I said, they were the same provision back in
the earlier days. That's the closest analogue.
This isn't -- and it's actually 7422 that's
a statute that says do something first. But this
statute is just a flat-out command that no suit shall be
maintained to restrain --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I take the point --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- the assessment or
collection.
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- but if you would comment
on the similarities of Reed Elsevier to this case. How
do you think it's different, at all?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, because the -- I
think the best answer to that is that there are no magic
words, and that history and context matter, as the Court
said in Henderson. And the history and context here is
that 7422 and 7421 function together to protect an
exceedingly strong interest that the Court has held with
respect to 7422, sufficiently strong that it explains
the jurisdictional nature of that. The same interest
applies here.
This isn't just a matter of do X and then
you can -- and then you can come to court. It's just a
fundamentally different set of interests at stake.
So, we do think that that makes a big
difference. And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why isn't Reed
Elsevier -- if you're dividing jurisdiction from claims
processing -- it says you have to register before you
can sue. There are a lot of things you have to do
before you can sue. So, why isn't Reed Elsevier like
you have to pay a filing fee before you can file a
complaint?
GENERAL VERRILLI: It is -- we do think it's
very much in that nature and different from this case,
Your Honor.
And one way I think it's helpful to get at
this is to look at the history. We've cited a string of
court of appeals cases in a footnote in our opening
brief, and over time, it's been very consistent that the
courts of appeals have treated the Anti-Injunction Act
as a jurisdictional provision.
Again, if the Court agrees with our
statutory construction, we don't need to reach this
issue. But they have -- in fact, one of those cases,
the Hansen case, the district court in that case had
dismissed the complaint under Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 12(b)(6). The court of appeals vacated and
sent it back with instructions to dismiss under
12(b)(1), which is the subject-matter jurisdiction
provision.
So, I do think that, to the extent this
issue is before the Court, it is jurisdictional, but it
doesn't need to be before the Court because of the
statutory construction argument that we had offered.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: On your statutory
construction argument, is there any other exaction
imposed under the Internal Revenue Code that would not
qualify as a tax for Anti-Injunction Act purposes, or is
5000A just out there all by itself?
GENERAL VERRILLI: It's -- it's not quite
out there all by itself. There are other provisions
that fall outside of subchapter B of chapter 68 and,
therefore, wouldn't be governed by the instruction in
section 6671(a), which answers the question about the
applicability of the Act for most penalties.
The ones that we've identified -- I may be
overlapping a little bit with Mr. Long here -- one is 26
U.S.C. 857, which imposes certain penalties in
connection with the administration of real estate
investment trusts.
There are provisions that Mr. Long
identified in his brief, sections 6038(a) through (c) of
the code, which impose certain penalties with respect to
reporting requirements for foreign corporations.
We have, in addition, in footnote 22 at page
of our brief, identified three provisions that Mr.
Long also identified about -- about alcohol and tobacco.
Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could we -- could we
address, General, the question of whether there are any
collateral consequences for the failure to buy -- to not
buy health insurance? Is the only consequence the
payment of the penalty?
The Private Respondents argue that there are
other collateral consequences such as for people on
probation who are disobeying the law. If they don't buy
health insurance, they'd be disobeying the law and could
be subject to having their supervised release revoked.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. That is not a
correct reading of the statute, Justice Sotomayor. The
only consequence that ensues is the tax penalty. And
the -- we have made a representation, and it was a
carefully made representation, in our brief that it is
the interpretation of the agencies charged with
interpreting this statute, the Treasury Department and
the Department of Health and Human Services, that there
is no other consequence apart from the tax penalty.
And I do think, if I could talk for a couple
of minutes about the argument that was discussed as to
whether this can be conceived of as a suit just
challenging the requirement, which is entirely
stand-alone based on inferences drawn from the
exemptions, I really don't think that's right. And if I
could spend a minute on it, I think it's important.
The exemptions in section 5000A -- it is
true that there are two categories of exemptions. There
are exemptions to the penalty and exemptions to the
subsection (a) requirement. But the -- but I think, not
only as a practical matter, but I think there's a
textual indication and even as a legal matter,
they are -- they both function as exceptions to the
requirement.
First, as a practical matter, one of those
exemptions is a hardship exemption. And if the Court
will just bear with me for one minute here, it's at page
a of the appendix to our brief. It provides that a
person can go to the Secretary of HHS and obtain a
hardship exemption for -- which would, as a formal
matter here, excuse compliance with the penalty.
It seems to me to make very little sense to
say that someone who has gone to an official of the
United States and obtained an exemption would,
nonetheless, be in the position of being a law breaker.
We think another way in which you can get to
the same conclusion slightly differently is by
considering the provision on the prior page, 10a, which
is 5000A -- 5000A(e)(3), members of Indian tribes.
Members of Indian tribes are exempt only from the
penalty as a formal matter under the structure of the
statute here, but the reason for that is because members
of Indian tribes obtain their health care through the
Indian Health Service, which is a clinic-based system
that doesn't involve insurance at all, and it's an
entirely different system.
They were taken out of this statute because
they get their health care through a different system.
And it doesn't make any sense to think that persons
getting their health care through the Indian Health
Service are violating the law because -- because exempt
only from the penalty but still under a legal obligation
to have insurance, when the whole point of this is that
they're supposed to be in a clinic-based system.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is your whole point that
this was inartful drafting by Congress, that, to the
extent that there is an exemption under the penalty,
it's an exemption from the legal obligation?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I guess what I would say
about it, Your Honor, is that the way in which this
statute is drafted doesn't permit the inference that my
friends from the NFIB are trying to draw from it.
And there is an additional textual
indication of that, which one can find at page 13 of our
reply brief. This is a provision that is 42 U.S.C.A.
section 18022(e). This is a provision that provides for
a certification that certain individuals can get. And
this is the paragraph starting with the words "Other
provisions" contains the quote.
And it says, "an individual with a
'certification' ... that the individual is exempt from
the requirement under Section 5000A ... by reason of
section 5000A(e)(1) of such Code," is entitled to a
certificate that allows for enrollment in a particular
program for this category of people.
But you can see here, Congress is saying an
exemption under 5000A(e)(1), which is the exemption from
the penalty, and not the underlying requirement, is, as
Congress says, an exemption from the requirement of
section 5000A.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General --
JUSTICE ALITO: 5000A says, directly, "an
applicable individual shall ensure that the individual
has the minimum essential coverage." And you're saying
it doesn't really mean that, that if you're not subject
to the penalty, you're not under an obligation to
maintain the minimum essential coverage.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's correct. And we
think that's what Congress is saying, both in the
provision I just pointed to, Your Honor, and by virtue
of the fact -- by virtue of the way the exemptions work.
I just think that's the -- reading this in context, that
is the stronger reading of the statute.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose somebody --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It makes it easy for
the government to drop the other shoe in the future,
right? You've been under the law subject to this
mandate all along. You've been exempt from the penalty.
So, all they have to do is take away the penalty.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I don't -- I don't think
so, Mr. Chief Justice. I don't think it makes it easy
for the government in the future. We think this is the
fairest reading of the statute, that the -- that the --
you cannot infer from the fact that someone is exempt
from the penalty, that they're still under an obligation
to have insurance. That's just not the fairest reading
of the statute.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Could I --
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose -- go ahead.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Sorry.
JUSTICE ALITO: No, go ahead.
JUSTICE KAGAN: The nature of the
representation you made, that the only consequence is
the penalty, suppose a person does not purchase
insurance, a person who is obligated to do so under the
statute, doesn't do it, pays the penalty instead, and
that person finds herself in a position where she is
asked the question, have you ever violated any Federal
law, would that person have violated a federal law?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. Our position is that
person should give the answer "no."
JUSTICE KAGAN: And that's because --
GENERAL VERRILLI: That if they don't pay
the tax, they've violated a Federal law.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But as long as they've paid
the penalty --
GENERAL VERRILLI: If they've paid the tax,
then they're in compliance with the law.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why do you keep saying it's
a tax?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI: If they pay the tax
penalty --
JUSTICE BREYER: Thank you.
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- they're in compliance
with the law. Thank you, Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: The penalty.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Right. That's right.
JUSTICE ALITO: Suppose a person who has
been receiving medical care in an emergency room -- has
no health insurance but, over the years, goes to the
emergency room when the person wants medical care --
goes to the emergency room, and the hospital says, well,
fine, you're eligible for Medicaid, enroll in Medicaid.
And the person says, no, I don't want that. I want to
continue to get -- just get care here from the emergency
room. Will the hospital be able to point to the mandate
and say, well, you're obligated to enroll?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, I don't think so,
Justice Alito, for the same reason I just gave. I think
that the -- that the answer in that situation is that
that person, assuming that person -- well, if that
person is eligible for Medicaid, they may well not be in
a situation where they're going to face any tax penalty
and therefore --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, they're not facing the
tax penalty.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Right. Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: So, the hospital will have
to continue to give them care and pay for it themselves,
and not --
GENERAL VERRILLI: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- require them to be
enrolled in Medicaid.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Right.
JUSTICE ALITO: Will they be able to take
this out and say, well, you really should -- you have a
moral obligation to do it; the Congress of the United
States has said you have to enroll?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I do think it's --
JUSTICE ALITO: No, they can't say that?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think it's certainly
fair to say that the Congress wants people in that
position to sign up for Medicaid. I think that's
absolutely right. And I think the statute is structured
to accomplish that objective, but the reality still is
that the only consequence of noncompliance is the
penalty.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, but I thought
that people who were eligible for Medicaid weren't
subject to the penalty. Am I wrong? I could be just
factually wrong.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, it all -- the
penalty is keyed to income.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And the -- it's keyed to
a number of things. One is, are you making so little
money that you aren't obligated to file a tax return?
And if you're in that situation, you're not subject to
the penalty. It's also if the cost of insurance would
be more than 8 percent of your income, you're not
subject to the penalty.
So, there isn't necessarily a precise
mapping between somebody's income level and their
Medicaid eligibility at the present moment. That will
depend on where things are and what the eligibility
requirements are in the State.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But for those people
below --
GENERAL VERRILLI: Right. As a general
matter, for people below the poverty line, it's almost
inconceivable that they're ever going to be subject to
the penalty, and they would, after the Act's Medicaid
reforms go into place, be eligible for Medicaid at that
point.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, is your point that the
tax and authority -- what we want to do is get money
from these people. Most of them will bet -- that the
money by buying the insurance, and that will help pay.
But if they don't, they're going to pay this penalty,
and that will help, too. And the fact that we put the
latter in brings it within the taxing power. But as far
as this Act is concerned, about the injunction, they
called it a penalty and not a tax for a reason. They
wanted it to fall outside that.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's in a different
chapter, et cetera.
Is that what the heart of what you're
saying?
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's the essence of it.
They called it a penalty. They didn't give any other
textual instruction in the Affordable Care Act or in the
Internal Revenue Code that that penalty should be
treated as a tax --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, except you --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- for Anti-Injunction
Act purposes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You agree with
Mr. Long, isn't -- I mean, I thought you just agreed
with Justice Breyer that one of the purposes of the
provision is to raise revenue.
GENERAL VERRILLI: It will -- well, it
will raise revenue. It has been predicted by the CBO
that it will raise revenue, Your Honor. But even though
that's the case -- and I think that would be true of
any -- of any penalty, that it will raise some revenue,
but even though that's the case, there still needs to be
textual instruction in the statute that this penalty
should be treated as a tax for Anti-Injunction Act
purposes, and that's what's lacking here.
JUSTICE ALITO: After this takes effect,
there may be a lot of people who are assessed the
penalty and disagree either with whether they should be
assessed the penalty at all or with the calculation of
the amount of their penalty. So, under your
interpretation of the Act, all of them can now go to
court? None of them are barred by the Anti-Injunction
Act?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Those are two different
things, Justice Alito. I think for reasons that
Justice Kennedy, I think, suggested in one of his
questions to Mr. Long, all of the other doctrines, that
exhaustion of remedies and related doctrines, would
still be there, and the United States would rely on them
in those circumstances. And -- and so, I don't think
the answer is that they can all go to court, no.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, why isn't --
JUSTICE ALITO: Two former -- two former
commissioners of the IRS have filed a brief saying that
your interpretation is going to lead to a flooded
litigation. Now, they're wrong on that?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. We don't -- we've
taken this position after very careful consideration,
and we've assessed the institutional interests of the
United States, and we think we're in the right place.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But tell me something,
why isn't this case subject to the same bars that --
that you list in your brief? The Tax Court, at least so
far, considers constitutional challenges to statutes.
So, why aren't we -- why isn't this case subject to a
dismissal for failure to exhaust?
GENERAL VERRILLI: We don't -- because the
exhaustion would go to the individual amount owed, we
think, and that's a different situation from this case.
If the Court has no further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Katsas.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GREGORY G. KATSAS
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. KATSAS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Let me begin with the question whether the
Anti-Injunction Act is jurisdictional.
Justice Ginsburg, for reasons you suggested,
we think the text of the Anti-Injunction Act is
indistinguishable from the text of the statute that was
unanimously held to be non-jurisdictional in Reed
Elsevier. That statute said no suit shall be
instituted. This statute says no suit shall be
maintained. No --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: They are different
things.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Big difference, though.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This says
"Immediately" -- the Reed Elsevier statute says
immediately after instituted unless a copyright is
registered.
MR. KATSAS: Unless the copyright is
registered. And this goes -- this goes to the character
of the lawsuit. The statute in Reed Elsevier says
register your copyright and then come back to court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, why isn't that like
the filing fee? Before you can maintain a suit for
copyright infringement, you have to register your
copyright?
MR. KATSAS: It -- it's a precondition to
filing suit. The -- the analogous precondition here is
pay your taxes and then come back to court. The point
is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: No, that -- that's not
true. The suit here has nothing to do with hearing the
action. It has to do with the form of relief that
Congress is barring. It's not permitting -- it is not a
tax case; you can come in afterwards. It's not
permitting the court to exercise what otherwise would be
one of its powers.
MR. KATSAS: It has to be the same
challenge, Justice Sotomayor, or else South
Carolina v. Regan would say the Anti-Injunction Act
doesn't apply. You are right that once you file -- once
you pay your taxes and then file the refund action, the
act of filing the taxes converts the suit from one
seeking prospective relief into one seeking money
damages. And in that sense, you could think of the
statute as a remedial limitation on the courts.
But whether you think of it as an exhaustion
requirement or a remedial limitation, neither of those
characterizations is jurisdictional. In
Davis v. Passman, you said that a remedial limitation
doesn't go --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It does seem strange to
think of a -- a law that says no court can entertain a
certain action and give a certain remedy as merely a
claim-processing rule. What the -- the court is being
ousted from -- from what would otherwise be its power to
hear something.
MR. KATSAS: The suit is being delayed, I
think, is the right way of looking at it. The
jurisdictional apparatus in the district court is
present. Prospective relief under 1331, money damages
action under 1346. If the Anti-Injunction Act were
jurisdiction-ousting, one might have expected it to be
in Title 28 and to qualify those statutes and to use
jurisdictional limits.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, how do you deal with
this case and our Gonzalez -- our recent Gonzalez case,
where we talked about --
MR. KATSAS: Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- the language of the
COA statute, that no appeal will be heard absent the
issuance of?
MR. KATSAS: Gonzalez -- Gonzalez v. Thaler
rests on a special rule that applies with respect to
appeals from one Article III court to another.
That's -- that explains Gonzalez, and it explains Bowles
before it.
You have five unanimous opinions in the last
decade in which you have strongly gone the other
direction on what counts as jurisdictional.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There is an argument
that we should just simply say that Bowles applies only
to appeals, but we haven't said that.
MR. KATSAS: Though, you came very close.
In Henderson, Justice Sotomayor, you said that Bowles,
which is akin to Thaler, is explained by the special
rules and understandings governing appeals from one
Article III court to another. And you specifically said
that it does not apply to situations involving a party
seeking initial judicial review of agency action, which
is what we have here.
So, while you're right, the texts in Bowles
and Thaler are not terribly different, those cases are
explained by that principle. Under Henderson, it
doesn't apply to this case.
The text in this case speaks to the suit,
the cause of action of the litigant. It doesn't speak
to the jurisdiction or power of the court. The
Anti-Injunction Act is placed in a section of the tax
code governing procedure. It's not placed in --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, all of those --
all of that in particular --
MR. KATSAS: You did rely on that in Reed
Elsevier as one consideration.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And we haven't relied on
it in other cases.
MR. KATSAS: Another -- another
consideration in Reed Elsevier that cuts in our favor is
the presence of exceptions. You said three in Reed
Elsevier cut against jurisdictional characterization.
Here, there are 11. And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Many of which themselves
speak in very clear jurisdictional language.
MR. KATSAS: Well, some of them have no
jurisdictional language at all, and not a single one of
them uses the word "jurisdiction" to describe the
ability of the court to restrain the assessment and
collection of taxes, which is what one would have
expected --
JUSTICE BREYER: It basically, basically the
difference -- of language is relevant. There are a lot
of relevant things. But one thing that's relevant in my
mind is that taxes are, for better or for worse, the
life's blood of government.
MR. KATSAS: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And so, what Congress is
trying to do is to say there is a procedure here that
you go through. You can get your money back, or you go
through the Tax Court, but don't do this in advance for
the reason that we don't want 500 Federal judge --
judges substituting their idea of what is a proper
equitable defense, of when there shouldn't be an
exception made about da, da, da, for the basic rule.
No. Okay?
And so, there is strong reason that is
there. You tried to apply that reason to the copyright
law. You can't find it. Registration with the
copyright register is not the life's blood of anything.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Copyright exists
regardless. So, the reasoning isn't there.
MR. KATSAS: Except --
JUSTICE BREYER: The language -- you're -- I
see the similarity of language. I've got that. But
it's the reasoning, the sort of underlying reason for
not wanting a waiver here that is -- has a significant
role in my mind of finding that it is jurisdictional.
Plus the fact that we've said it nonstop since that
Northrop or whatever that other case is.
MR. KATSAS: Justice Breyer, as to
reasoning, you -- you give an argument -- you give an
argument why, as a policy matter, it might make sense to
have a non-jurisdictional statute. But of course, this
Court's recent cases time and again say Congress has to
clearly rank the statute as non-jurisdictional in its
text and structure. It seems to me a general appeal to
statutory policies doesn't speak with sufficient
clarity --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's fine. I just asked
in case you wanted to answer the policy.
MR. KATSAS: Okay. As to policy -- as to
policy, I think Helvering v. Davis is the refutation of
this view. It is true that in most cases, the
government doesn't want and Congress doesn't want people
coming into court. But Davis shows that there may be
some cases including, for instance, constitutional
challenges to landmark Federal statutes where the
government sensibly decides that its revenue-raising
purposes are better served by allowing a party to come
into court and waiving its defense. That's what the
Solicitor General did in Davis, and this Court accepted
that waiver.
As for prior cases, we have the holding in
Davis and the holding in all of the equitable exception
cases like Williams Packing. The government --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, why don't we say --
so, why don't we say it's jurisdictional except when the
Solicitor General waives?
MR. KATSAS: You have used --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why would that not
promote Congress's policy of ensuring -- or Congress
explicitly says --
MR. KATSAS: It's jurisdictional except when
the Solicitor General waives it?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes. It's a
contradiction in terms. I don't disagree. I don't
disagree.
MR. KATSAS: It is a contradiction in terms.
All of your cases analyze the situation as if a statute
is jurisdictional, then it's not subject to waiver. If
you were to construe this as such a one-off unique
statute, it seems to me we would still win because the
Solicitor General with full knowledge of the
Anti-Injunction Act argument available to him
affirmatively gave it up. This is not just a forfeiture
where a government lawyer is -- through inadvertence
fails to raise an argument. This is a case where the
government --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They raised it and then
gave it up.
MR. KATSAS: They made it below. They know
what it is. And not only are they not pursuing it here;
they're affirmatively pursuing an argument on the other
side.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Katsas, is your basic
position that when we're talking about the jurisdiction
of the district courts, a statute has to say it's
jurisdictional to be jurisdictional?
MR. KATSAS: I wouldn't go quite that far.
I think at a minimum, it has -- it has to either say
that or at least be directed to the courts, which is a
formulation you've used in your cases and which is the
formulation that Congress used in the Tax Injunction Act
but did not use in this statute.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, how is -- I mean, I
suppose one could try to make a distinction between this
case and Reed Elsevier by focusing on the difference
between instituting something and maintaining something.
I'm suggesting that instituting is more what a litigant
does, and maintaining, as opposed to dismissing, is more
what a judge does.
MR. KATSAS: I don't think so, Justice
Kagan, because we have an adversarial system, not an
inquisitorial one. The parties maintain their lawsuits,
I think, is the more natural way of thinking of it.
If I could turn -- if I could turn to the
merits question on the AIA before my time runs out.
The purpose of this lawsuit is to challenge
a requirement -- a Federal requirement to buy health
insurance. That requirement itself is not a tax. And
for that reason alone, we think the Anti-Injunction Act
doesn't apply.
What the amicus effectively seeks to do is
extend the Anti-Injunction Act, not just to taxes which
is how the statute is written, but to free-standing,
nontax legal duties. And it's just --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The whole point --
the whole point of the suit is to prevent the collection
of penalties.
MR. KATSAS: Of taxes, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, prevent the
collection of taxes. But the idea that the mandate is
something separate from whether you want to call it a
penalty or tax just doesn't seem to make much sense.
MR. KATSAS: It's entirely separate, and let
me explain to you why.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's a command. A
mandate is a command.
MR. KATSAS: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Now, if there's
nothing behind the command -- it's sort of, well, what
happens if you don't follow the mandate, and the answer
is nothing -- it seems very artificial to separate the
punishment from the crime.
MR. KATSAS: I'm not sure the answer is
nothing, but even assuming it were nothing, it seems to
me there is a difference between what the law requires
and what enforcement consequences happen to you. This
statute was very deliberately written to separate
mandate from penalty in several different ways.
They are put in separate sections. The
mandate is described as a "legal requirement" no fewer
than 20 times, 3 times in the operative text and 17
times in the findings. It's imposed through use of a
mandatory verb "shall." The requirement is very well
defined in the statute, so it can't be sloughed off as a
general exhortation, and it's backed up by a penalty.
Congress then separated out mandate
exceptions from penalty exceptions. It defined one
category of people not subject to the mandate. One
would think those are the category of people as to whom
Congress is saying you need not follow this law. It
then defined a separate category of people not subject
to the penalty, but subject to the mandate. I don't
know what that could mean other than --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why would you
have a requirement that is completely toothless? Pay --
you know, buy insurance or else. Or else what? Or else
nothing.
MR. KATSAS: Because Congress reasonably
could think that at least some people will follow the
law precisely because it is the law. And let me give
you an example of one category of person that might be:
The very poor, who are exempt from the penalty but
subject to the mandate.
Mr. Long says this must be a mandate
exemption because it would be wholly harsh and
unreasonable for Congress to expect people who are very
poor to comply with a requirement to obtain health
insurance when they have no means of doing so.
That gets things exactly backwards. The
very poor are the people Congress would be most
concerned about with respect to the mandate to the
extent one of the justifications for the mandate is to
prevent emergency room cost shifting when people receive
uncompensated care. So, they would have had very good
reason to make the very poor subject to the mandate, and
then they didn't do it in a draconian way; they gave the
very poor a means of complying with the insurance
mandate, and that is through the Medicaid system.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Katsas, do you think a
person who is subject to the mandate but not subject to
the penalty would have standing?
MR. KATSAS: Yes, I think that person would,
because that person is injured by compliance with the
mandate.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And what would that look
like? What would the argument be as to what the injury
was?
MR. KATSAS: The injury -- when that person
is subject to the mandate, that person is required to
purchase health insurance. That's a forced acquisition
of an unwanted good. It's a classic pocketbook injury.
But even if I'm wrong about that question,
Justice Kagan, the question of who has standing to bring
the challenge that we seek to bring seems to me very
different -- your hypothetical plaintiff is very
different from the actual plaintiffs. We have
individuals who are planning for compliance in order to
avoid a penalty, which is what their affidavits say.
And we have the States, who will be subject no doubt to
all sorts of adverse ramifications if they refuse to
enroll in Medicaid the people who are forced into
Medicaid by virtue of the mandate.
So, we don't have the problem of no adverse
consequences in the case.
And then, we have the separate distinction
between the question of who has Article III standing in
order to maintain a suit and the question of who is
subject to a legal obligation. And you've said in your
cases that even if there may be no one who has standing
to challenge a legal obligation like the incompatibility
clause or something, that doesn't somehow convert the
legal obligation into a legal nullity.
Finally, with respect to the States, even if
we are wrong about everything I've said so far, the
States clearly fall within the exception recognized in
South Carolina v. Regan. They are injured by the
mandate because the mandate forces 6 million new people
onto their Medicaid rolls. But they are not directly
subject to the mandate, nor could they violate the
mandate and incur a penalty.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Could I just understand, Mr.
Katsas, when the States say that they're injured, are
they talking about the people who are eligible now but
who are not enrolled? Or are they also talking about
people who will become newly eligible?
MR. KATSAS: It's people who will enroll --
people who wouldn't have enrolled had they been given a
voluntary choice.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But who are eligible now.
MR. KATSAS: That's the largest category. I
think there could be future eligibles who would enroll
because they're subject to a legal obligation but
wouldn't have enrolled if given a voluntary choice.
But I'm happy to -- I'm happy to focus on
currently eligible people who haven't enrolled in
Medicaid. That particular class is the one that gives
rise to, simply in Florida alone, a pocketbook injury on
the order of 500 to $600 million per year.
JUSTICE KAGAN: But that does seem odd, to
suggest that the State is being injured because people
who could show up tomorrow with or without this law
will show up in greater numbers. I mean, presumably the
State wants to cover people whom it is declared eligible
for this benefit.
MR. KATSAS: They could, but they don't.
What the State wants to do is make Medicaid available to
all who are eligible and choose to obtain it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why would --
MR. KATSAS: And in any event --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why would somebody not
choose to obtain it? Why -- that's one puzzle to me.
There's this category of people who are Medicaid
eligible; Medicaid doesn't cost them anything. Why
would they resist enrolling?
MR. KATSAS: I -- I don't know, Justice
Ginsburg. All I know is that the difference between
current enrollees and people who could enroll but have
not is, as I said, on the -- is a $600 million delta.
And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But it may be just that
they haven't been given sufficient information to
understand that this is a benefit for them.
MR. KATSAS: It's possible, but all we're
talking about right now is the standing of the States.
And the only arguments made against the standing of the
States -- I mean, there is a classic pocketbook injury
here. The only arguments made about -- against the
standing of the States are, number one, this results
from third-party actions. That doesn't work, because
the third-party actions are not unfettered in the sense
of Lujan; they are coerced in the sense of
Bennett v. Spear. Those people are enrolling because
they're under a legal obligation to do so.
The second argument made against the States'
standing is that the States somehow forfeit their
ability to challenge the constitutionality of a
provision of Federal law because they voluntarily choose
to participate --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm -- I'm a little bit
confused, and this is what I'm confused about: There --
there's a challenge to the individual mandate.
MR. KATSAS: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right? What does
the fact that the State is challenging Medicaid -- how
does it give the State standing to challenge an
obligation that is not imposed on the State in any way?
MR. KATSAS: The principal theory for State
standing is that States are challenging the mandate
because the mandate injures them when people are forced
to enroll in Medicaid.
Now, it is true they are not directly
subject to the mandate, but --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes. That's what I'm --
MR. KATSAS: Okay. Let me -- let me try
to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- a little confused by.
MR. KATSAS: Let me try it this way -- may I
finish the thought?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. KATSAS: In South Carolina v. Regan, the
State was not subject to the tax at issue. The State
was harmed as the issuer of the bonds, and the bond
holders were the ones subject to the tax. So, the State
is injured not because it is the direct object of the
Federal tax, but because of its relationship to the
regulated party as issuer/bond holder.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Katsas.
MR. KATSAS: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Long, you have 5
minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF ROBERT A. LONG
AS THE COURT-APPOINTED AMICUS CURIAE
MR. LONG: Everyone agrees that the section
00A penalty shall be assessed and collected in the
same manner as taxes. And the parties' principal
argument why that does not make the Anti-Injunction Act
applicable is that, well, that simply goes to the
Secretary's activities.
And I would simply ask, if you look at
chapters 63 and 64 of the Internal Revenue Code, which
are the chapters on assessment and collection, they are
not just addressed to the Secretary. There are many
provisions in there that are addressed to courts and
indeed talk about this interaction, the very limited
situations in which courts are permitted to restrain the
assessment and collection of taxes.
There was a statement made that there
aren't -- and many of the exceptions to the
Anti-Injunction Act are in the assessment and collection
provisions -- there was a statement made that none of
these directly confer jurisdiction to restrain the
assessment and collection of taxes. That's not true.
In footnote 11 of our opening brief, we cite several.
I'll simply mention section 6213 as an
example. That says -- I quote: "Notwithstanding the
provisions of section 7421(a), the making of such
assessment or the beginning of such proceeding or levy
during the time such prohibition is in force may be
enjoined by a proceeding in the proper court, including
the Tax Court. The Tax Court shall have no jurisdiction
to enjoin any action or proceeding or order any refund
under this subsection unless a timely petition for
redetermination of the deficiency has been filed and
then only in respect of the deficiency that is the
subject of such petition."
JUSTICE BREYER: All that's going to really
what I'd think Congress's intent was meant to be in
sticking the collection thing into chapter 68, and --
and it's certainly an argument in your favor.
The over-arching thing in my mind is it's up
to Congress, within leeway. And they did not use that
word "tax," and they did have a couple of exceptions.
And it is true that all this language that you quote --
you know, the first two sentences and so forth, it talks
about the use of "tax" in the IRC. It talks about the
penalties and liabilities provided by this subchapter.
And we look over here, and it's a penalty and liability
provided by a different law, which says collect it
through the subchapter. And it has nothing to do with
the IRC. See?
So, we've got it in a separate place. We
can see pretty clearly what they're trying to do. They
couldn't really care very much about interfering with
collecting this one. That's all the statutory argument.
Are you following me?
MR. LONG: Well, I --
JUSTICE BREYER: You see? I'm trying to get
you to focus on that kind of argument that I'm just
making.
MR. LONG: I mean, I think I'm following
you, but the fact that it's not in the particular
subchapter for assessable penalties in my view makes no
difference, because they said it's still clearly -- it's
assessed and collected in the same manner --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, it is.
MR. LONG: -- as a penalty in that
subchapter, and those penalties are collected in the
same manner as taxes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, yes.
MR. LONG: And so, that's -- I think it's
rather detailed, but I think it's a rather clear
indication that the Anti-Injunction Act applies.
The -- the refund statute that does
specifically refer to penalties -- that has nothing to
do with this argument that it's assessed and collected
in the same manner as a tax. That would simply go to
the point that, well, you can't just call it a tax,
because they've referred to it as a penalty.
And, finally, on jurisdiction, you know, I
think the key point is we have a long line of this
Court's decisions that's really been ratified by
Congress, with all these exceptions in jurisdictional
terms.
As I read Bowles and John R. Sand & Gravel,
the gist of those decisions was not any sort of special
rule about appeals, It's that when we have that
situation, which I would submit applies as much to the
collection of Federal taxes as it does to appeals from
Federal district courts when we have this degree of --
of precedent, including precedent from Congress in the
form of amendments to this Anti-Injunction Act, that
should be -- the presumption should be that this is
jurisdictional.
If there are no further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Long, you were
invited by this Court to defend the proposition that the
Anti-Injunction Act barred this litigation. You have
ably carried out that responsibility, for which the
Court is grateful.
MR. LONG: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will continue
argument in this case tomorrow.
(Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the case in the
