IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND :
HUMAN SERVICES, ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 11-398
v. :
FLORIDA, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, March 27, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:00 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
Petitioners.
PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
Respondents Florida, et al.
MICHAEL A. CARVIN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; for
Respondents NFIB, et al.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PAUL D. CLEMENT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents Florida, et al. 55
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL A. CARVIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents NFIB, et al. 82
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 110
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:00 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will continue
argument this morning in Case 11-398, The Department of
Health and Human Services v. Florida.
General Verrilli.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
GENERAL VERRILLI: Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
The Affordable Care Act addresses a
fundamental and enduring problem in our health care
system and our economy. Insurance has become the
predominant means of paying for health care in this
country. Insurance has become the predominant means of
paying for health care in this country. For most
Americans, for more than 80 percent of Americans, the
insurance system does provide effective access. Excuse
But for more than 40 million Americans who
do not have access to health insurance either through
their employer or through government programs such as
Medicare or Medicaid, the system does not work. Those
individuals must resort to the individual market, and
that market does not provide affordable health
insurance. It does not do so because it -- because the
multibillion dollar subsidies that are available for
the -- the employer market are not available in the
individual market. It does not do so because ERISA and
HIPAA regulations that preclude -- that preclude
discrimination against people based on their medical
history do not apply in the individual market. That is
an economic problem. And it begets another economic
problem.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why aren't those problems
that the Federal Government can address directly?
GENERAL VERRILLI: They can address it
directly, Justice Scalia, and they are addressing it
directly through this -- through this Act by regulating
the means by which health care -- by which health care
is purchased. That is the way this Act works.
Under the Commerce Clause, what Congress has
done is to enact reforms of the insurance market,
directed at the individual insurance market, that
preclude -- that preclude discrimination based on
pre-existing conditions, that require guaranteed issue
and community rating. And it uses -- and the minimum
coverage provision is necessary to carry into execution
those insurance reforms --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can you create Congress --
commerce order to regulate it?
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's not what's going
on here, Justice Kennedy, and we're not seeking to
defend the law on that basis.
In this case, the -- what is being regulated
is the method of financing health -- the purchase of
health care. That itself is economic activity with
substantial effects on interstate commerce. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, any self-purchasing?
Anything I -- you know, if I'm in any market at all, my
failure to purchase something in that market subjects me
to regulation.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. That's not our
position at all, Justice Scalia. In the health care
market -- the health care market is characterized by the
fact that aside from the few groups that Congress chose
to exempt from the minimum coverage requirement -- those
who for religious reasons don't participate, those who
are incarcerated, Indian tribes -- virtually everybody
else is either in that market or will be in that market,
and a distinguishing feature of that is that they
cannot -- people cannot generally control when they
enter that market or what they need when they enter that
market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the same, it
seems to me, would be true, say, for the market in
emergency services: police, fire, ambulance, roadside
assistance, whatever.
You don't know when you're going to need it;
you're not sure that you will. But the same is true for
health care. You don't know if you're going to need a
heart transplant or if you ever will. So, there's a
market there. In some extent, we all participate in it.
So, can the government require you to buy a
cell phone because that would facilitate responding when
you need emergency services? You can just dial 911 no
matter where you are?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, Mr. Chief Justice.
think that's different. It's -- we -- I don't think we
think of that as a market. This is a market. This is
market regulation. And, in addition, you have a
situation in this market not only where people enter
involuntarily as to when they enter and won't be able to
control what they need when they enter, but when they --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It seems to me
that's the same as in my hypothetical. You don't know
when you're going to need police assistance. You can't
predict the extent to emergency response that you'll
need, but when you do -- and the government provides it.
I thought that was an important part of your argument,
that when you need health care, the government will make
sure you get it.
Well, when you need police assistance or
fire assistance or ambulance assistance, the government
is going to make sure to the best extent it can that you
get it.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think the fundamental
difference, Mr. Chief Justice, is that that's not an
issue of market regulation. This is an issue of market
regulation, and that's how Congress -- that's how
Congress looked at this problem. There is a market.
Insurance is provided through a market system --
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think there is a
market for burial services?
GENERAL VERRILLI: For burial services?
JUSTICE ALITO: Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, Justice Alito, I
think there is.
JUSTICE ALITO: All right. Suppose that you
and I walked around downtown Washington at lunch hour
and we found a couple of healthy young people and we
stopped them and we said: You know what you're doing?
You are financing your burial services right now because
eventually you're going to die, and somebody is going to
have to pay for it, and if you don't have burial
insurance, or you haven't saved money for it, you're
going to shift the cost to somebody else.
Isn't that a very artificial way of talking
about what somebody is doing?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No --
JUSTICE ALITO: And if that's true, why
isn't it equally artificial to say that somebody who is
doing absolutely nothing about health care is financing
health care services?
GENERAL VERRILLI: It's -- I think it's
completely different. The -- and the reason is that the
burial example is not -- the difference is here you are
regulating the method by which you are paying for
something else -- health care -- and the insurance
requirement I think -- the key thing here is my
friends on the other side acknowledge that it is within
the authority of Congress under Article I under the
commerce power to impose guaranteed-issue and
community-rating reforms, to end -- to impose a minimum
coverage provision. Their argument is just that it has
to occur at the point of sale, and --
JUSTICE ALITO: I don't see the difference.
You can get burial insurance. You can get health
insurance. Most people are going to need health care,
almost everybody. Everybody is going to be buried or
cremated at some point.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, one big
difference --
JUSTICE ALITO: What's the difference?
GENERAL VERRILLI: One big difference,
Justice Alito, is the -- you don't have the cost
shifting to other market participants. Here --
JUSTICE ALITO: Sure you do, because if you
don't have money, then the State is going to pay for it
or some --
GENERAL VERRILLI: But that's different.
JUSTICE ALITO: A family member is going to
pay for it.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's a difference, and
it's a significant difference, that this -- in this
situation, one of the economic effects Congress is
addressing is that the -- there -- the many billions of
dollars of uncompensated costs are transferred directly
to other market participants. It's transferred directly
to other market participants because health care
providers charge higher rates in order to cover the cost
of uncompensated care, and insurance companies reflect
those higher rates in higher premiums, which Congress
found translates to a thousand dollars per family in
additional health insurance costs.
JUSTICE ALITO: But isn't that really a
small part of what the mandate is doing? You can
correct me if these figures are wrong, but it appears to
me that the CBO has estimated that the average premium
for a single insurance policy in the non-group market
will be roughly $5,800 in -- in 2016.
Respondents -- the economists who have
supported the Respondents estimate that a young, healthy
individual targeted by the mandate on average consumes
about $854 in health services each year. So, the
mandate is forcing these people to provide a huge
subsidy to the insurance companies for other purposes
that the Act wishes to serve, but isn't -- if those
figures are right, isn't it the case that what this
mandate is really doing is not requiring the people who
are subject to it to pay for the services that they are
going to consume? It is requiring them to subsidize
services that will be received by somebody else.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, I think that -- and I
do think that's what the Respondents argue. It's just
not right. I think it -- it really gets to a
fundamental problem with their argument.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: If you're going to have
insurance, that's how insurance works.
GENERAL VERRILLI: (A) it is how insurance
works, but (b) the problem that they -- that they're
identifying is not that problem. The guaranteed-issue
and community-rating reforms do not have the effect of
forcing insurance companies to take on lots of
additional people who they then can't afford to cover
because they're -- they tend to be the sick, and that
is -- in fact, the exact opposite is what happens here.
The -- when you enact guaranteed-issue and
community-rating reforms, and you do so in the absence
of a minimum coverage provision, it's not that insurance
companies take on more and more people and then need a
subsidy to cover it; it's that fewer and fewer people
end up with insurance because the rates are not
regulated. Insurance companies, when they -- when they
have to offer guaranteed issue and community rating,
they're entitled to make a profit. They charge rates
sufficient to cover only the sick population because
healthy people --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could you help -- would
help me with this? Assume for the moment -- you may
disagree. Assume for the moment that this is
unprecedented. This is a step beyond what our cases
have allowed, the affirmative duty to act to go into
commerce. If that is so, do you not have a heavy burden
of justification?
I understand that we must presume laws are
constitutional, but, even so, when you are changing the
relation of the individual to the government in this,
what we can stipulate is, I think, a unique way, do you
not have a heavy burden of justification to show
authorization under the Constitution?
GENERAL VERRILLI: So, two things about
that, Justice Kennedy. First, we think this is
regulation of people's participation in the health care
market, and all it -- all this minimum coverage
provision does is say that, instead of requiring
insurance at the point of sale, that Congress has the
authority under the commerce power and the necessary and
proper power to ensure that people have insurance in
advance of the point of sale because of the unique
nature of this market, because this is a market in
which -- in which you -- although most of the population
is in the market most of the time -- 83 percent visit a
physician every year; 96 percent over a 5-year period --
so, virtually everybody in society is in this market.
And you've got to pay for the health care
you get, the predominant way in which it's -- in which
it's paid for is insurance, and -- and the Respondents
agree that Congress could require that you have
insurance in order to get health care or forbid health
care from being provided --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why do you -- why do you
define the market that broadly? Health care. It may
well be that everybody needs health care sooner or
later, but not everybody needs a heart transplant. Not
everybody needs a liver transplant. Why -- I mean --
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's correct, Justice
Scalia, but you never know whether you're going to be
that person.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could you define the
market -- everybody has to buy food sooner or later.
So, you define the market as food; therefore,
everybody's in the market; therefore, you can make
people buy broccoli.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, that is quite
different. It is quite different. The food market,
while it shares that trait that everybody's in it, it is
not a market in which your participation is often
unpredictable and often involuntary. It is not a market
in which you often don't know before you go in what you
need, and it is not a market in which, if you go in
and -- and seek to obtain a product or service, you will
get it even if you can't pay for it. It doesn't have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, is that a principled
basis for distinguishing this from other situations?
mean, you know, you could also say, well, the person
subject to this has blue eyes. That would indeed
distinguish it from other situations.
GENERAL VERRILLI: It is a --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it a principled basis?
I mean, it's -- it's a basis that explains why the
government is doing this, but is it -- is it a basis
which shows that this is not going beyond what -- what
the system of enumerated powers allows the government to
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes, for two reasons.
First, this -- the test, as this Court has articulated
it, is: Is Congress regulating economic activity with a
substantial effect on interstate commerce?
The way in which this statute satisfies the
test is on the basis of the factors that I have
identified. It --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Verrilli, I thought
that your main point is that, unlike food or any other
market, when you made the choice not to buy insurance,
even though you have every intent in the world to
self-insure, to save for it, when disaster strikes, you
may not have the money. And the tangible result of it
is -- we were told -- there was one brief that Maryland
hospital care bills 7 percent more because of these
uncompensated costs, that families pay a thousand
dollars more than they would if there were no
uncompensated costs.
I thought what was unique about this is it's
not my choice whether I want to buy a product to keep me
healthy, but the cost that I am foisting on other people
if I don't buy the product sooner rather than later.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That is -- and that is
definitely a difference that distinguished this market
and justifies this as a regulation --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, if that is
your difference --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- of common activity.
JUSTICE BREYER: If that is your difference,
I'm somewhat uncertain about your answers to -- for
example, Justice Kennedy asked, can you, under the
Commerce Clause, Congress, create commerce where
previously none existed?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, I thought the answer
to that was, since McCulloch v. Maryland, when the
Court said Congress could create the Bank of the United
States which did not previously exist, which job was to
create commerce that did not previously exist, since
that time the answer has been "yes." I would have
thought that your answer to, can the government, in
fact, require you to buy cell phones or buy burials,
that if we propose comparable situations, if we have,
for example, a uniform United States system of paying
for every burial such as Medicare Burial, Medicaid
Burial, CHIP Burial, ERISA Burial, and emergency burial
beside the side of the road, and Congress wanted to
rationalize that system, wouldn't the answer be, yes, of
course, they could?
GENERAL VERRILLI: So --
JUSTICE BREYER: And the same with the
computers or the same with the -- the cell phones, if
you're driving by the side of the highway and there is a
Federal emergency service. Just as you say you have to
buy certain mufflers for your car that don't hurt the
environment, you could -- I mean, you see, doesn't it
depend on the situation?
GENERAL VERRILLI: It does, Justice Breyer,
and if Congress were to enact laws like that, we --
JUSTICE BREYER: Would be up here defending
GENERAL VERRILLI: It would be my
responsibility to defend them --
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. So, then the
question -- fine.
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- and I would defend
them on a rationale like that, but I do think that we
are advancing a narrower rationale.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, then the question
is whether or not there are any limits on the Commerce
Clause. Can you identify for us some limits on the
Commerce Clause?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. The -- the
rationale purely under the Commerce Clause that we're
advocating here would not justify forced purchases of
commodities for the purpose of stimulating demand.
We -- the -- it would not justify purchases of insurance
for the purposes -- in situations in which insurance
doesn't serve as the method of payment for a service --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But why not? If --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- Congress can regulate.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: If Congress says that
interstate commerce is affected, isn't, according to
your view, that the end of the analysis?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. The -- we think that
in a -- when -- the difference between those situations
and this situation is that in those situations, Your
Honor, Congress would be moving to create commerce.
Here Congress is regulating existing commerce, economic
activity that is already going on, people's
participation in the health care market, and is
regulating to deal with existing effects of existing
commerce.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That, it seems to
me, is -- and it's a passage in your reply brief that I
didn't quite grasp. It's the same point. You say,
"Health insurance is not purchased for its own sake like
a car or broccoli; it is a means of financing
health-care consumption and covering universal risks."
Well, a car or broccoli aren't purchased for
their own sake, either. They're purchased for the sake
of transportation or, in broccoli, covering the need for
food.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't understand
that distinction.
GENERAL VERRILLI: The difference, Mr. Chief
Justice, is that health insurance is the means of
payment for health care, and broccoli is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, now that's a
significant -- I'm sorry.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And broccoli is not the
means of payment for anything else. And an automobile
is not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's the means of
satisfying a basic human need --
GENERAL VERRILLI: But --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- just as your
insurance is the means of satisfying --
GENERAL VERRILLI: But I do think that's the
difference between existing commerce, activity in the
market already occurring -- the people in the health
care market purchasing, obtaining health care
services -- and the creation of commerce. And the
principle that we're advocating here under the Commerce
Clause does not take the step of justifying the creation
of commerce.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General Verrilli, can
we go --
GENERAL VERRILLI: This is a regulation of
existing commerce.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can we go back to --
Justice Breyer asked a question, and it kind of
interrupted your answer to my question. And tell me if
I'm wrong about this, but I thought a major, major point
of your argument was that the people who don't
participate in this market are making it much more
expensive for the people who do; that is, they will
get -- a goodly number of them will get services that
they can't afford at the point when they need them, and
the result is that everybody else's premiums get raised.
So, you're not -- it's not your free choice
just to do something for yourself. What you do is going
to affect others, affect them in a major way.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That -- that absolutely
is a justification for Congress's action here. That is
existing economic activity that Congress is regulating
by means of this rule.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Verrilli, you could say
that about buying a car. If people don't buy cars, the
price that those who do buy cars pay will have to be
higher. So, you can say in order to bring the price
down, you're hurting these other people by not buying a
car.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That is not what we're
saying, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not -- that's not
what you're saying.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's not -- not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought it was. I
thought you're saying other people are going to have to
pay more for insurance because you're not buying it.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. It's because you're
going -- in the health care market, you're going into
the market without the ability to pay for what you get,
getting the health care service anyway as a result of
the social norms that allow -- that -- to which we've
obligated ourselves so that people get health care.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, don't obligate
yourself to that. Why -- you know?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I can't imagine
that that -- that the Commerce Clause would -- would
forbid Congress from taking into account this deeply
embedded social norm.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, you could do it. But
does that expand your ability to issue mandates to –
to the people?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I -- this is not a
purchase mandate. This is a -- this is a law that
regulates the method of paying for a service that the
class of people to whom it applies are either
consuming --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- or inevitably will
consume.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, I see or have
seen three strands of arguments in your briefs, and one
of them is echoed today. The first strand that I've
seen is that Congress can pass any necessary laws to
effect those powers within its rights, i.e., because it
made a decision that to effect -- to effect mandatory
issuance of insurance, that it could also obligate the
mandatory purchase of it.
The second strand I see is self-insurance
affects the market; and so, the government can regulate
those who self-insure.
And the third argument -- and I see all of
them as different -- is that what the government is
doing -- and I think it's the argument you're making
today -- that what the -- what the government is saying
is if you pay for health -- if you use health services,
you have to pay with insurance, because only insurance will
guarantee that whatever need for health care that you
have will be covered, because virtually no one, perhaps
with the exception of 1 percent of the population, can
afford the massive cost if the unexpected happens.
This third argument seems to be saying what
we're regulating is health care, and when you go for
health services, you have to pay for insurance, and
since insurance won't issue at the moment that you
consume the product, we can reasonably, necessarily tell
you to buy it ahead of time, because you can't buy it at
the moment that you need it.
Is that -- which of these three is your
argument? Are all of them your argument? I'm just not
sure what the --
GENERAL VERRILLI: So, let me try to state
it this way: The Congress enacted reforms of the
insurance market, the guaranteed-issue and
community-rating reforms. It did so to deal with a very
serious problem that results in 40 million people not
being able to get insurance and therefore not access to
the health care market. Everybody agrees in this case
that those are within Congress's Article I powers.
The minimum coverage provision is necessary
to carry those provisions into execution, because
without them, without those provisions, without minimum
coverage, guaranteed issue and community rating will, as
the experience in the States showed, make matters worse,
not better. There will be fewer people covered; it will
cost more. Now, the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, on that ground --
GENERAL VERRILLI: So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- you're answering
affirmatively to my colleagues that have asked you the
question, can the government force you into commerce?
GENERAL VERRILLI: So -- no. No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And there's no limit to
that power.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, because that's --
that's the first part of our argument.
The second part of our argument is that the
means here that Congress has chosen, the minimum
coverage provision, is a means that regulates the --
that regulates economic activity, namely your
transaction in the health care market, with substantial
effects on interstate commerce; and it is the
conjunction of those two that we think provides the
particularly secure foundation for this statute under
the commerce power.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, you've talked on --
a couple of times about other alternatives that Congress
might have had, other alternatives that the Respondents
suggest to deal with this problem, in particular, the
alternative of mandating insurance at the point at which
somebody goes to a hospital or an emergency room and
asks for care.
Did Congress consider those alternatives?
Why did it reject them? How should we think about the
question of alternative ways of dealing with these
problems?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I do think, Justice
Kagan, that the point of difference between my friends
on the other side and the United States is about one of
timing. They've agreed that Congress has Article I
authority to impose an insurance requirement or other --
or other penalty at the point of sale, and they have
agreed that Congress has the authority to do that to
achieve the same objectives that the minimum coverage
provision in the Affordable Care Act is designed to
achieve.
This is a situation in which we are talking
about means. Congress gets substantial deference in
the choice of means, and if one thinks about the
difference between the means they say Congress should
have chosen and the means Congress did choose, I think
you can see why it was eminently more sensible for
Congress to choose the means that it chose.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I'm not sure which way it
cuts, if the Congress has alternate means. Let's assume
that it could use the tax power to raise revenue and to
just have a national health service, single payer. How
does that factor into our analysis? In one sense, it
can be argued if this is what the government is doing,
it ought to be honest about the power that it's using
and use the correct power.
On the other hand, it means that since the
Court can do it any way -- Congress can do it any way,
we give it a certain amount of latitude. I'm not sure
which way the argument goes.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Let me try to answer that
question, Justice Kennedy, and get back to the question
you asked me earlier. The -- the -- I do think one
striking feature of the argument here that this is a
novel exercise of power is that what Congress chose to
do was to rely on market mechanisms and efficiency and a
method that has more choice than would the traditional
Medicare or Medicaid type model. And so, it seems a
little ironic to suggest that that counts against it.
But beyond that, in the sense that it's
novel, this provision is novel in the same way, or
unprecedented in the same way, that the Sherman Act was
unprecedented when the Court upheld it in the Northern
Securities case, or the Packers and Stockyards Act was
unprecedented when the Court upheld it, or the National
Labor Relations Act was unprecedented when the Court
upheld it in Jones & Laughlin, or the dairy price
supports in Wrightwood Dairy and Rock Royal. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no, it's not. They all
involved commerce. There was no doubt that what was
being regulated was commerce. And here you're
regulating somebody who isn’t commerce.
By the way, I don't agree with you that the
relevant market here is health care. You're not
regulating health care. You're regulating insurance.
It's the insurance market that you're addressing, and
you're saying that some people who are not in it must be
in it, and that's -- that's different from regulating in
any manner commerce that already exists out there.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, to the extent that
we're looking at the comprehensive scheme, Justice
Scalia, it is regulating commerce that already exists
out there. And the means in which that regulation is
made effective here, the minimum coverage provision, is
a regulation of the way in which people participate, the
method of their payment in the health care market. That
is what it is.
And I do think, Justice Kennedy, getting
back to the question you asked before, what -- what
matters here is whether Congress is choosing a tool
that's reasonably adapted to the problem that Congress
is confronting. And that may mean that the tool is
different from a tool that Congress has chosen to use in
the past. That's not something that counts against the
provision in a Commerce Clause analysis.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. That's -- it's both
"Necessary and Proper." What you just said addresses
what's necessary. Yes, has to be reasonably adapted.
Necessary does not mean essential, just reasonably
adapted. But in addition to being necessary, it has to
be proper. And we've held in two cases that something
that was reasonably adapted was not proper, because it
violated the sovereignty of the States, which was
implicit in the constitutional structure.
The argument here is that this also is -- may be
necessary, but it's not proper, because it violates an
equally evident principle in the Constitution, which is
that the Federal Government is not supposed to be a
government that has all powers, that it's supposed to be
a government of limited powers. And that's what all
this questioning has been about. What -- what is left?
If the government can do this, what -- what else can it
not do?
GENERAL VERRILLI: This does not violate the
norm of proper, as this Court articulated it in Printz
or in New York, because it does not interfere with the
States as sovereigns. This is a regulation that -- this
is a regulation --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that -- no, that wasn't
my point. That is not the only constitutional principle
that exists.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But it --
JUSTICE SCALIA: An equally evident
constitutional principle is the principle that the
Federal Government is a government of enumerated powers
and that the vast majority of powers remain in the
States and do not belong to the Federal Government. Do
you acknowledge that that's a principle?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Of course, we do, Your
Honor, but this is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. And that's what
we're talking about here.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And the way in which this
Court in its cases has policed the boundary that -- of
what's in the national sphere and what's in the local
sphere is to ask whether Congress is regulating economic
activity with a substantial effect on interstate
commerce.
And here I think it's really impossible, in
view of our history, to say that Congress is invading
the State sphere. This is a -- this is a market in
which 50 percent of the people in this country get their
health care through their employer. There is a massive
Federal tax subsidy of $250 billion a year that makes
that much more affordable. ERISA and HIPAA regulate
that to ensure that the kinds of bans on pre-existing
condition discrimination and pricing practices that
occur in the individual market don't occur.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand your
point. Whatever the States --
GENERAL VERRILLI: This is in --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whatever the States have
chosen not to do, the Federal Government can do?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No, not at all.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I mean, the Tenth Amendment
says the powers not given to the Federal Government are
reserved, not just to the States, but to the States and
the people.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But what --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And the argument here is
that the people were left to decide whether they want to
buy insurance or not.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But this -- but, Your
Honor, this is -- what the Court has said, and I think
it would be a very substantial departure from what the
Court has said, is that when Congress is regulating
economic activity with a substantial effect on
interstate commerce, that will be upheld. And that is
what is going on here. And to embark on -- I would
submit with all due respect, to embark on the kind of
analysis that my friends on the other side suggest the
Court ought to embark on is to import Lochner-style
substantive due process --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But what Congress --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The key --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Excuse me,
Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The key in Lochner
is that we were talking about regulation of the States,
right, and the States are not limited to enumerated
powers. The Federal Government is. And it seems to me
it's an entirely different question when you ask
yourself whether or not there are going to be limits on
the Federal power, as opposed to limits on the States,
which was the issue in Lochner.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I agree, except,
Mr. Chief Justice, that what the Court has said, as I
read the Court's cases, is that the way in which you
ensure that the Federal Government stays in its sphere
and the sphere reserved for the States is protected is
by policing the boundary. Is the national government
regulating economic activity with a substantial effect
on interstate commerce?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the -- the reason this
is concerning is because it requires the individual to
do an affirmative act. In the law of torts, our
tradition, our law has been that you don't have the duty
to rescue someone if that person is in danger. The
blind man is walking in front of a car, and you do not
have a duty to stop him, absent some relation between
you. And there's some severe moral criticisms of that
rule, but that's generally the rule.
And here the government is saying that the
Federal Government has a duty to tell the individual
citizen that it must act. And that is different from
what we have in previous cases.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that changes the
relationship of the Federal Government to the individual
in a very fundamental way.
GENERAL VERRILLI: I don't think so, Justice
Kennedy, because it is predicated on the participation
of these individuals in the market for health care
services. Now, it happens to be that this is a market
in which, aside from the groups that the statute
excludes, virtually everybody participates. But it is a
regulation of their participation in that market.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but it's
critical how you define the market. If I understand the
law, the policies that you're requiring people to
purchase involve -- must contain provision for maternity
and newborn care, pediatric services, and substance use
treatment. It seems to me that you cannot say that
everybody is going to need substance use treatment --
substance use treatment or pediatric services; and yet,
that is part of what you require them to purchase.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, it's part of what
the statute requires the insurers to offer. And I think
the reason is because it's trying to define minimum
essential coverage because the problem --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, but your theory
is that there is a market in which everyone participates
because everybody might need a certain range of health
care services. And yet, the -- you're requiring people
who are not -- never going to need pediatric or
maternity services to participate in that market.
GENERAL VERRILLI: The -- with respect to
what insurance has to cover, Your Honor, I think
Congress is entitled the latitude of making the
judgments of what the appropriate scope of coverage is.
And the problem here in this market is that for -- you
may think you're perfectly healthy and you may think
that you're not -- that you're being forced to subsidize
somebody else, but this is not a market in which you can
say that there is a immutable class of healthy people
who are being forced to subsidize the unhealthy. This
is a market in which you may be healthy one day, and you
may be a very unhealthy participant in that market the
next day. And that is a fundamental difference, and
you're not going to know in which --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think you're
posing the question I was posing, which is that doesn't
apply to a lot of what you're requiring people to
purchase. Pediatric services, maternity services. You
cannot say that everybody is going to participate in the
substance use treatment market. And yet, you require
people to purchase insurance coverage for that.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Congress has got --
Congress is enacting economic regulation here. It has
latitude to define essential -- the attributes of
essential coverage. That doesn't -- that doesn't seem
to me to implicate the question of whether Congress is
engaging in economic regulation and solving an economic
problem here --
JUSTICE ALITO: Are you --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- and that's what
Congress is doing.
JUSTICE ALITO: Are you denying this? If
you took the group of people who are subject to the
mandate and you calculated the amount of health care
services this whole group would consume and figured out
the cost of an insurance policy to cover the services
that group would consume, the cost of that policy would
be much, much less than the kind of policy that these
people are now going to be required to purchase under
the Affordable Care Act.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, while they're young
and healthy, that would be true, but they're not going
to be young and healthy forever. They're going to be on
the other side of that actuarial equation at some point.
And, of course, you don't know which among that group is
the person who's going to be hit by the bus or get the
definitive diagnosis. And that --
JUSTICE ALITO: That’s not -- the point is --
no, you take into account that some people in that group
are going to be hit by a bus, some people in that group
are going to unexpectedly contract or be diagnosed with
a disease that -- that is very expensive to treat. But
if you take their costs and you calculate that, that's a
lot less than the amount that they're going to be
required to pay.
So that you can't just justify this on the
basis of their trying to shift their costs off to other
people, can you?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, no, the people in
that class get benefits, too, Justice Alito. They get
the guaranteed-issue benefit that they would not
otherwise have, which is an enormously valuable benefit.
And in terms of the -- the subsidy
rationale, I don't think -- I think it's -- it would be
unusual to say that it's an illegitimate exercise of the
commerce power for some people to subsidize others.
Telephone rates in this country for a century were set
via the exercise of the commerce power in a way in which
some people paid rates that were much higher than their
costs in order to subsidize --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Only if you make phone
calls.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, right. But -- but
everybody -- to live in the modern world, everybody
needs a telephone. And the same thing with respect to
the -- you know, the dairy price supports that -- that
the Court upheld in Wrightwood Dairy and Rock Royal.
You can look at those as disadvantageous contracts, as
forced transfers, that -- you know, I suppose it's
theoretically true that you could raise your kids
without milk, but the reality is you've got to go to the
store and buy milk. And the commerce power -- as a
result of the exercise of the commerce power, you're
subsidizing somebody else --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And this is especially true,
isn't it --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- because that's a
judgment Congress has made.
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- General Verrilli, because
in this context, the subsidizers eventually become the
subsidized?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, that was the point
I was trying to make, Justice Kagan, that you're young
and healthy one day, but you don't stay that way, and
the system works over time. And so, I just don't think
it's a fair characterization of it. And it does get
back to, I think, a problem I think is important to
understand --
JUSTICE SCALIA: These people not stupid.
They're going to buy insurance later. They're young and
need the money now.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: When they think they have a
substantial risk of incurring high medical bills,
they'll buy insurance, like the rest of us.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But that's -- that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't know why you think
they're never going to buy it.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That's the problem,
Justice Scalia. That's -- and that's exactly the
experience that the States had that made the imposition
of guaranteed issue and community rating not only be
ineffectual but be highly counterproductive. Rates, for
example, in New Jersey doubled or tripled, went from
0,000 people covered in this market down to 80,000
people covered in this market. In Kentucky, virtually
every insurer left the market.
And the reason for that is because when
people have that guarantee of -- that they can get
insurance, they're going to make that calculation that
they won't get it until they're sick and they need it.
And so, the pool of people in the insurance market gets
smaller and smaller. The rates you have to charge to
cover them get higher and higher. It helps fewer and
fewer -- insurance covers fewer and fewer people until
the system ends.
This is not a situation in which you're
conscripting -- you're forcing insurance companies to
cover very large numbers of unhealthy people --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You could solve that
problem by simply not requiring the insurance company to
sell it to somebody who has a condition that is going to
require medical treatment, or at least not -- not
require them to sell it to him at a rate that he sells
it to healthy people.
But you don't want to do that.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But that seems to me to
say, Justice Scalia, that Congress -- that's the problem
here. And that seems to me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It's a self-created
problem.
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- to say that Congress
cannot solve the problem through standard economic
regulation, and that -- and I do not think that can be
the premise of our understanding of the Commerce Clause.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whatever --
GENERAL VERRILLI: This is an economic
problem.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- problems Congress's
economic regulation produces, whatever they are --
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- Congress can do
something to counteract them. Here, requiring somebody
to enter -- to enter the insurance market.
GENERAL VERRILLI: This is not a -- it's not
a problem of Congress's creation. The problem is that
you have 40 million people who cannot get affordable
insurance through the means that the rest of us get
affordable insurance. Congress, after long study and
careful deliberation, and viewing the experiences of the
States and the way they tried to handle this problem,
adopted a package of reforms. Guaranteed issue and
community rating and subsidies and the minimum coverage
provision are a package of reforms that solve that
problem.
I don't -- I think it's highly artificial to
view this as a problem of Congress's own creation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is your argument
limited to insurance or means of paying for health care?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. It's limited to
insurance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, now, why is
that? Congress could -- once you -- once you establish
that you have a market for health care, I would suppose
Congress's power under the Commerce Clause meant they
had a broad scope in terms of how they regulate that
market. And it would be -- it would be going back to
Lochner if we were put in a position of saying, no,
you can use your commerce power to regulate insurance,
but you can't use your commerce power to regulate this
market in other ways. I think that would be a very
significant intrusion by the Court into Congress's
power.
So, I don't see how we can accept your --
it's good for you in this case to say, oh, it's just
insurance. But once we say that there is a market and
Congress can require people to participate in it, as
some would say, or as you would say, that people are
already participating in it, it seems to me that we
can't say there are limitations on what Congress can do
under its commerce power. Just like in any other
area -- given significant deference that we accord to
Congress in this area, all bets are off, and you could
regulate that market in any rational way.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But this is insurance as
a method of payment for health care services. And
that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Exactly. You're
worried --
GENERAL VERRILLI: And that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's the area that
Congress has chosen to regulate. There's this health
care market. Everybody's in it. So, we can regulate
it, and we're going to look at a particular serious
problem, which is how people pay for it. But next year,
they can decide everybody's in this market; we're going
to look at a different problem now, and this is how
we're going to regulate it. And we can compel people to
do things -- purchase insurance, in this case; something
else in the next case -- because you've -- we've
accepted the argument that this is a market in which
everybody participates.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Mr. Chief Justice, let me
answer that, and then if I may, I'd like to move to the
tax power argument.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can I tell you what the
something else is so -- while you're answering it?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: The something else is
everybody has to exercise, because there's no doubt that
lack of exercise cause -- causes illness, and that
causes health care costs to go up. So, the Federal
Government says everybody has to join a -- an exercise
club. That's the something else.
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. The position we're
taking here would not justify that rule, Justice Scalia,
because health club membership is not a means of payment
for -- for consumption of anything in a market. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. Right.
That's exactly right, but it doesn't seem responsive to
my concern that there's no reason -- once we say this is
within Congress's commerce power, there's no reason
other than our own arbitrary judgment to say all they
can regulate is the method of payment. They can
regulate other things that affect this now-conceded
interstate market in health care in which everybody
participates.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But I think it's common
ground between us and the Respondents that this is an
interstate market in which everybody participates.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And they agree that
Congress could impose the insurance requirement at the
point of sale. And this is just a question of timing
and whether Congress's -- whether the necessary and
proper authority gives Congress, because of the
particular features of this market, the ability to
impose the -- the insurance, the need for insurance, the
maintenance of insurance before you show up to get
health care, rather than at the moment you get up to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. No, I think
you're just --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- show up to get health
care. And that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Unless I'm missing
something, I think you're just repeating the idea that
this is the regulation of the method of payment. And I
understand that argument. And it may be --
GENERAL VERRILLI: And it is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It may be a good
one. But what I'm concerned about is, once we accept
the principle that everybody is in this market, I don't
see why Congress's power is limited to regulating the
method of payment and doesn't include as it does in any
other area.
What other area have we said Congress can
regulate this market but only with respect to prices,
but only with respect to means of travel? No. Once
you're -- once you're in the interstate commerce and can
regulate it, pretty much all bets are off.
GENERAL VERRILLI: But we agree Congress can
regulate this market. ERISA regulates this market.
HIPAA regulates this market. The market is regulated at
the Federal level in very significant ways already. So,
I don't think that's the question, Mr. Chief Justice.
The question is, is there a limit to the authority that
we're advocating here under the commerce power? And the
answer is yes, because we are not advocating for a power
that would allow Congress to compel purchases.
JUSTICE ALITO: Could you just say--
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: Before you move on, could
you express your limiting principle as succinctly as you
possibly can? Congress can force people to purchase a
product where the failure to purchase the product has a
substantial effect on interstate commerce, if what? If
this is part of a larger regulatory scheme?
GENERAL VERRILLI: We've got --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is that it?
GENERAL VERRILLI: We've got --
JUSTICE ALITO: Is there anything more?
GENERAL VERRILLI: We got two and they're --
they're different. Let me state them. First, with
respect to the comprehensive scheme. When Congress is
regulating -- is enacting a comprehensive scheme that it
has the authority to enact, that the Necessary and
Proper Clause gives it the authority to include
regulation, including a regulation of this kind, if it
is necessary to counteract risks attributable to the
scheme itself that people engage in economic activity
that would undercut the scheme. It's like -- it's very
much like Wickard in that respect. Very much like Raich
in that respect.
With respect to the -- with respect to
the -- considering the Commerce Clause alone and not
embedded in the comprehensive scheme, our position is
that Congress can regulate the method of payment by
imposing an insurance requirement in advance of the time
in which the -- the service is consumed when the class
to which that requirement applies either is, or virtually
most certain to be, in that market, when the timing of
one's entry into that market and what you will need when
you enter that market is uncertain, and when -- when you
will get the care in that market, whether you can afford
to pay for it or not and shift costs to other market
participants.
So, those -- those are our views as to --
those are the principles we're advocating for, and it's,
in fact, the conjunction of the two of them here that
makes this, we think, a strong case under the Commerce
Clause.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, could you turn
to the tax clause?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Yes. Thank you,so --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I have looked for a case
that involves the issue of whether something denominated
by Congress as a penalty was nevertheless treated as a
tax, except in those situations where the code itself or
the statute itself said treat the penalty as a tax.
Do you know of any case where we've done
that?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I think I would
point the Court to the license tax case, where it was --
was denominated a fee, a nontax, and the Court upheld it
as an exercise of the taxing power, in a situation in
which the structure of the law was very much like the
structure of this law, in that there was a separate
stand-alone provision that set the predicate and then a
separate provision imposing the fee.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, fees -- you know,
license fees, fees for a hunting license -- everybody
knows those are taxes. I mean, I don't think there's as
much of a difference between a fee and a tax as there is
between a penalty and a tax.
GENERAL VERRILLI: And that -- and I think
in terms of the tax power, I think it's useful to
separate this into two questions. One is a question of
characterization. Can this be characterized as a tax?
And, second, is it a constitutional exercise of the
power?
With respect to the question of
characterization, the -- this is in the Internal Revenue
Code. It is administered by the IRS. It is paid on
your Form 1040 on April 15th. I think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But yesterday you told
me -- you listed a number of penalties that are enforced
through the tax code that are not taxes, and they're not
penalties related to taxes.
GENERAL VERRILLI: They may still be
exercise of the tax -- exercises of the taxing power,
Justice Ginsburg, as this is, and I think there isn't a
case in which the Court has, to my mind, suggested
anything that bears this many indicia of a tax can't be
considered as an exercise of the taxing power.
In fact, it seems to me the license tax
cases point you in the opposite direction. And beyond
that, your -- the -- it seems to me the right way to
think about this question is whether it is capable of
being understood as an exercise of the tax power.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The President said it
wasn't a tax, didn't he?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, Justice Scalia,
what the -- two things about that. First is, it seems
to me, what matters is what power Congress was
exercising. And they were -- and I think it's clear
that the -- they were exercising the tax power as well
as the commerce power.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You're making two
arguments. Number one, it's a tax. And, number two,
even if it isn't a tax, it's within the taxing power.
I'm just addressing the first.
GENERAL VERRILLI: What the President
said --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it a tax or not a tax?
The President didn't think it was.
GENERAL VERRILLI: The President said it
wasn't a tax increase because it ought to be understood
as an incentive to get people to have insurance. I
don't think it's fair to infer from that anything about
whether that is an exercise of the tax power or not.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, isn't -- a tax is
to raise revenue. A tax is a revenue-raising device,
and the purpose of this exaction is to get people into
the health care risk pool before they need medical care.
And so, it will be successful if it doesn't raise any
revenue, if it gets people to buy the insurance.
That's -- that's what this penalty is -- this penalty is
designed to affect conduct.
The conduct is buy health protection, buy
health insurance before you have a need for medical
care. That's what the penalty is designed to do, not to
raise revenue.
GENERAL VERRILLI: That -- that is true,
Justice Ginsburg. That is also true of the marijuana
tax that was upheld in Sanchez. That's commonly true of
penalties under the code. They do -- if they raise
revenue, they are exercises of the taxing power. But
their purpose is not to raise revenue; their purpose is
to discourage behavior.
The mortgage deduction works that
way. When the mortgage deduction is -- it's clearly an
exercise of the taxing power. When it's successful, it
raises less revenue for the Federal Government. It's
still an exercise of the taxing power. So, I don't --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I suppose, though, General,
one question is whether the determined efforts of
Congress not to refer to this as a tax make a
difference. I mean, you're suggesting we should just
look to the practical operation. We shouldn't look at
labels. And that seems right, except that here we have
a case in which Congress determinedly said this is not a
tax. And the question is why should that be irrelevant?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I don't think that that's
a fair characterization of the actions of Congress here,
Justice Kagan. On the -- December 23rd, a point of
constitutional order was called, too, in fact, with
respect to this law. The floor sponsor, Senator Baucus,
defended it as an exercise of the taxing power. In his
response to the point of order, the Senate voted 60 to
on that proposition.
The legislative history is replete with
members of Congress explaining that this law is
constitutional as an exercise of the taxing power. It
was attacked as a tax by its opponents. So, I don't
think this is a situation where you can say that
Congress was avoiding any mention of the tax power.
It would be one thing if Congress explicitly
disavowed an exercise of the tax power. But given that
it hasn't done so, it seems to me that it's -- not only
is it fair to read this as an exercise of the tax power,
but this Court has got an obligation to construe it as
an exercise of the tax power, if it can be upheld on
that basis.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why didn't
Congress call it a tax, then?
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You're telling me
they thought of it as a tax, they defended it on the tax
power. Why didn't they say it was a tax?
GENERAL VERRILLI: They might have thought,
Your Honor, that calling it a penalty as they did would
make it more effective in accomplishing its objectives.
But it is in the Internal Revenue Code. It is collected
by the IRS on April 15th. I don't think this is a
situation in which you can say --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, that's the
reason. They thought it might be more effective if they
called it a penalty.
GENERAL VERRILLI: Well, I -- you know, I
don't -- there's nothing that I know of that illuminates
that. Certainly --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: General, the problem
goes back to the limiting principle. Is this simply
anything that raises revenue, Congress can do?
GENERAL VERRILLI: No. There are certain
limiting principles under the taxing power, and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, there has to be a
limiting principle as to when --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- and they -- and I
think, of course, the Constitution imposes some: Got to
be uniform; can't be a tax on exports; if it's a direct
tax, it's got to be apportioned. Beyond that, the
limiting principle, as the Court has identified from
Drexel Furniture to Kurth Ranch, is that it can't be
punishment, punitive in the guise of a tax.
And there are three factors the Court has
identified to look at that. The first is the sanction
and how disproportionate it is to the conduct; the
second is whether there is scienter; and the third is
whether there is an administrative apparatus out there
to enforce the tax.
Now, in Bailey v. Drexel Furniture, for
example, the tax was 10 percent of the company's
profits, even if they had only one child laborer for one
day. There was a scienter requirement. And it was
enforced by the Department of Labor. It wasn't just
collected by the Internal Revenue Service.
Here you don't have any of those things.
This -- the penalty is calculated to be no more than, at
most, the equivalent of what one would have paid for
insurance that you've forgone. There is no scienter
requirement. There's no enforcement apparatus out
there. So, it's certainly --
JUSTICE ALITO: Can the --
GENERAL VERRILLI: -- consistent with those
limits.
JUSTICE ALITO: Can the mandate be viewed as
a tax if it does impose a requirement on people who are
not subject to the penalty or the tax?
GENERAL VERRILLI: I think it could, for the
reasons I -- I discussed yesterday. I don't think it
can or should be read that way. But if there's any
doubt about that, Your Honor, if there is -- if it is
the view of the Court that it can't be, then I think
the right way to handle this case is by analogy to New
York v. United States, in which the -- the Court read
the "shall" provision, shall handle low-level
radioactive waste, as setting the predicate, and then
the other provisions were merely incentives to get the
predicate met, and so --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're saying that all
the discussion we had earlier about how this is one big
uniform scheme and the Commerce Clause, blah, blah,
blah, it really doesn't matter. This is a tax, and the
Federal Government could simply have said, without all
of the rest of this legislation, could simply have said
everybody who doesn't buy health insurance at a certain
age will be taxed so much money, right?
GENERAL VERRILLI: It -- it used its powers
together to solve the problem of the market not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but you didn't need
that.
GENERAL VERRILLI -- providing affordable
coverage for --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You didn't need that. If
it's a tax, it's only to --
GENERAL VERRILLI: It used its --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Raising money is enough.
GENERAL VERRILLI: It used its -- it is
justifiable under its tax power.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay. Extraordinary.
GENERAL VERRILLI: If I may reserve the
balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
We'll take a pause for a minute or so,
Mr. Clement.
(Pause.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: All right. Why
don't we get started -- again.
Mr. Clement.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL D. CLEMENT
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS FLORIDA, ET AL.
MR. CLEMENT: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The mandate represents an unprecedented
effort by Congress to compel individuals to enter
commerce in order to better regulate commerce. The
Commerce Clause gives Congress the power to regulate
existing commerce. It does not give Congress the far
greater power to compel people to enter commerce, to
create commerce essentially in the first place.
Now, Congress when it passed the statute did
make findings about why it thought it could regulate the
commerce here, and it justified the mandate as a
regulation of the economic decision to forgo the
purchase of health insurance. That is a theory without
any limiting principle.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do you accept here the
General's position that you have conceded that Congress
could say, if you're going to consume health services,
you have to pay by way of insurance?
MR. CLEMENT: That's right,
Justice Sotomayor. We say, consistent with 220 years of
this Court's jurisprudence, that if you regulate the
point of sale, you regulate commerce, that's within
Congress's commerce power.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So, what do
you do with the impossibility of buying insurance at the
point of consumption? Virtually, you force insurance
companies to sell it to you?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice, I think there's
two points to make on that. One is a lot of the
discussion this morning so far has proceeded on the
assumption that the only thing that's at issue here is
emergency room visits, and the only thing that's being
imposed is catastrophic care coverage. But, as the
Chief Justice indicated earlier, a lot of the insurance
that's being covered is for ordinary preventive care,
ordinary office visits, and those are the kind of things
that one can predict.
So, there's a big part of the market that's
regulated here that wouldn't pose the problem that
you're suggesting; but, even as to emergency room
visits, it certainly would be possible to regulate at
that point. You could simply say, through some sort of
mandate on the insurance companies, you have to provide
people that come in -- this will be a high-risk pool,
and maybe you'll have to share it amongst yourself or
something, but people simply have to sign up at that
point, and that would be regulating at the point of
sale.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Clement, now it
seems as though you're just talking about a matter of
timing, that Congress can regulate the transaction. And
the question is when does it make best sense to regulate
that transaction?
And Congress surely has it within its
authority to decide, rather than at the point of sale,
given an insurance-based mechanism, it makes sense to
regulate it earlier. It's just a matter of timing.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Kagan, we don't
think it's a matter of timing alone, and we think it has
very significant substantive effects, because if
Congress tried to regulate at the point of sale, the one
group that it wouldn't capture at all are the people who
don't want to purchase health insurance and also have no
plans of using health care services in the near term.
And Congress very much wanted to capture those people.
I mean, those people are essentially the golden geese
that pay for the entire lowering of the premium --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is the government's
argument this -- and maybe I won't state it accurately.
It is true that the noninsured young adult is, in fact,
an actuarial reality insofar as our allocation of health
services, insofar as the way health insurance companies
figure risk. That person who is sitting at home in his
or her living room doing nothing is an actuarial reality
that can and must be measured for health service
purposes; is that their argument?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, I don't know,
Justice Kennedy, but, if it is, I think there's at least
two problems with it.
One is, as Justice Alito's question
suggested earlier -- I mean, somebody who is not in the
insurance market is sort of irrelevant as an actuarial
risk. I mean, we could look at the people not in the
insurance market, and what we'd find is that they're
relatively young, relatively healthy, and they would
have a certain pool of actuarial risks that would
actually lead to lower premiums.
The people that would be captured by
guaranteed rating and community issue -- guaranteed
issue and community rating would presumably have a
higher risk profile, and there would be higher premiums.
And one of the things, one of the things,
Congress sought to accomplish here was to force
individuals into the insurance market to subsidize those
that are already in it to lower the rates. And that's
just not my speculation, that's Finding (I) at 43a of
the Government's brief that -- it has the statute. And
that's one of the clear findings.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Clement, doesn't that
work -- that work the way Social Security does?
Let me put it this way: Congress, in the
'30s, saw a real problem of people needing to have old
age and survivor's insurance. And, yes, they did it
through a tax, but they said everybody has got to be in
it because if we don't have the healthy in it, there's
not going to be the money to pay for the ones who become
old or disabled or widowed. So, they required everyone
to contribute.
There was a big fuss about that in the
beginning because a lot of people said -- maybe some
people still do today -- I could do much better if the
government left me alone. I'd go into the private
market, I'd buy an annuity, I'd make a great investment,
and they're forcing me to pay for this Social
Security that I don't want.
But that's constitutional. So, if Congress
could see this as a problem where we need to have a
group that will subsidize the ones who are going to get
the benefits, it seems to me you're saying the only way
that could be done is if the government does it itself;
it can't involve the private market, it can't involve
the private insurers. If it wants to do this, Social
Security is its model. The government has to do --
has to be government takeover. We can't have the
insurance industry in it. Is that your position?
MR. CLEMENT: No. I don't think it is,
Justice Ginsburg. I think there are other options that
are available.
The most straightforward one would be to
figure out what amount of subsidy to the insurance
industry is necessary to pay for guaranteed issue and
community rating. And once we calculate the amount of
that subsidy, we could have a tax that's spread
generally through everybody to raise the revenue to pay
for that subsidy. That's the way we pay for most
subsidies.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could we have an
exemption? Could the government say everybody pays a
shared health care responsibility payment to offset all
the money that we're forced to spend on health care, we
the government; but anybody who has an insurance policy
is exempt from that tax? Could the government do that?
MR. CLEMENT: The government might be able
to do that. I think it might raise some issues about
whether or not that would be a valid exercise of the
taxing power.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Under what theory
wouldn't it be?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, I do think that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We get tax credits for
having solar-powered homes. We get tax credits for
using fuel-efficient cars. Why couldn't we get a tax
credit for having health insurance and saving the
government from caring for us?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, I think it would depend
a little bit on how it was formulated, but my concern
would be -- the constitutional concern would be that it
would just be a disguised impermissible direct tax. And
I do think -- you know, I mean, I don't want to suggest
we get to the taxing power too soon, but I do think it's
worth realizing that the taxing power is limited in the
ability to impose direct taxes.
And the one thing I think the Framers would
have clearly identified as a direct tax is a tax on not
having something. I mean, the framing generation was
divided over whether a tax on carriages was a direct tax
or not. Hamilton thought that was a indirect tax;
Madison thought it was a direct tax. I have little
doubt that both of them would have agreed that a tax on
not having a carriage would have clearly been a direct
tax. I also think they would have thought it clearly
wasn't a valid regulation of the market in carriages.
And, you know, I mean, if you look at
Hylton v. The United States, that's this Court's first
direct tax case.
JUSTICE BREYER: Let me ask -- can I go back
for a step? Because I don't want to get into a
discussion of whether this is a good bill or not. Some
people think it's going to save a lot of money. Some
people think it won't.
So, I'm focusing just on the Commerce
Clause; not on the Due Process Clause, the Commerce
Clause. And I look back into history, and I think if we
look back into history, we see sometimes Congress can
create commerce out of nothing. That's the national
bank, which was created out of nothing to create other
commerce out of nothing.
I look back into history, and I see it seems
pretty clear that if there are substantial effects on
interstate commerce, Congress can act. And I look at
the person who's growing marijuana in her house, or I
look at the farmer who is growing wheat for home
consumption. This seems to have more substantial
effects.
Is this commerce? Well, it seems to me more
commerce than marijuana. I mean, is it, in fact, a
regulation? Well, why not? If creating the bank is, why
isn't this?
And then you say, ah, but one thing here out
of all those things is different, and that is you're
making somebody do something.
I say, hey, can't Congress make people drive
faster than 45 -- 40 miles an hour on a road? Didn't
they make that man growing his own wheat go out into the
market and buy other wheat for his -- for his cows?
Didn't they make Mrs. -- if she married somebody who had
marijuana in her basement, wouldn't she have to go and
get rid of it? Affirmative action?
I mean, where does this distinction come
from? It sounds like sometimes you can, and sometimes
you can't.
So, what is argued here is there is a large
group of -- what about a person that we discover that
there are -- a disease is sweeping the United States,
and 40 million people are susceptible, of whom 10
million will die; can't the Federal Government say all
million get inoculation?
So, here, we have a group of 40 million, and
percent of those people visit emergency care or other
care, which we're paying for. And 22 percent of those
pay more than $100,000 for that. And Congress says
they're in the midst of this big thing. We just want to
rationalize the system they're already in.
So, there, you got the whole argument, and I
would like you to tell me, looking back --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Answer those questions in
inverse order.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, no, it's one
question. It's looking back at that -- looking back at
that history. The thing I concede, that you say to some
people go buy -- why does that make a difference in
terms of the Commerce Clause?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Breyer, let me
start at the beginning of your question with McCulloch.
McCulloch was not a commerce power case.
JUSTICE BREYER: It was both?
MR. CLEMENT: It was not -- no, the bank was not
justified and the corporation was not justified as an
exercise of commerce power. So that is not a case that
says that it's okay to conjure up the bank as an
exercise of the commerce power.
And what, of course, the Court didn't say,
and I think the Court would have had a very different
reaction to, is, you know, we're not just going to have
the bank, because that would be necessary and proper;
we're going to force the citizenry to put all of their
money in the bank, because, if we do that, then we know
the Bank of the United States will be secure.
I think the Framers would have identified
the difference between those two scenarios, and I don't
think that the great Chief Justice would have said that
forcing people to put their deposits in the Bank of the
United States was necessary and proper.
Now, if you look through all the cases you
mentioned, I do not think you will find a case like
this. And I think it's telling that you won't. I mean,
the regulation of the wheat market in Wickard v.
Filburn, all this effort to address the supply side and
what producers could do, what Congress was trying to do
was support the price of wheat. It would have been much
more efficient to just make everybody in America buy 10
loaves of bread. That would have had a much more direct
effect on the price of wheat in the prevailing market.
But we didn't do that. We didn't say, when
we had problems in the automobile industry, that we're
not just going to give you incentives, not just cash for
clunkers; we're going to actually have everybody over
0,000 dollars has to buy a new car --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, Mr. Clement,
the key to the Government's argument to the contrary is
that everybody is in this market. It's all right to
regulate Wickard -- in Wickard v. Filburn, because
that's a particular market in which the farmer had been
participating.
Everybody is in this market. So, that makes
it very different than the market for cars or the other
hypotheticals that you came up with, and all they're
regulating is how you pay for it.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, with respect, Mr. Chief
Justice, I suppose the first thing you have to say is
what market are we talking about? Because the
government -- this statute undeniably operates in the
health care insurance market. And the government can't
say that everybody is in that market. The whole problem
is that everybody is not in that market, and they want
to make everybody get into that market.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, doesn't that seem a
little bit, Mr. Clement, cutting the baloney thin? I
mean, health insurance exists only for the purpose of
financing health care. The two are inextricably
interlinked. We don't get insurance so that we can
stare at our insurance certificate. We get it so that
we can go and access health care.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Kagan, I'm not
sure that's right. I think what health insurance does
and what all insurance does is it allows you to
diversify risk. And so, it's not just a matter of I'm
paying now instead of paying later. That's credit.
Insurance is different than credit. Insurance
guarantees you an up-front, locked-in payment, and you
won't have to pay any more than that even if you incur
much greater expenses.
And in every other market that I know of for
insurance, we let people basically make the decision
whether they're relatively risk averse, whether they're
relatively non-risk averse, and they can make the
judgment based on --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But we don't in car
insurance, meaning we tell people buy car -- not we, the
States do, although you're going to -- I'll ask you the
question: Do you think that if some States decided not
to impose an insurance requirement, that the Federal
Government would be without power to legislate and
require every individual to buy car insurance?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Sotomayor, let
me say this, which is to say -- you're right in the
first point to say that it's the States that do it,
which makes it different right there. But it's also --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, that goes back to
the substantive due process question. Is this a
Lochner-era argument that only the States can do this,
even though it affects commerce? Cars indisputably
affect commerce. So, are you arguing that because the
States have done it all along, the Federal Government is
no longer permitted to legislate in this area?
MR. CLEMENT: No. I think you might make a
different argument about cars than you would make about
health insurance, unless you tried to say -- but, you
know, we're --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But health insurance --
I mean, I've never gotten into an accident, thankfully,
and I hope never. The vast majority of people have
never gotten into an accident where they've injured
others; yet, we pay for it dutifully every year on the
possibility that at some point, we might get into that
accident.
MR. CLEMENT: But, Justice Sotomayor, what I
think is different is there's lots of people in
Manhattan, for example, that don't have car insurance
because they don't have cars. And so, they have the
option of withdrawing from that market. It's not a
direct imposition from the government.
So, even the car market is different from
this market, where there's no way to get outside of the
regulatory web. And that's, I think, one of the real
problems with this because, I mean, we take as a
given --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But you're -- but the
given is that virtually everyone, absent some
intervention from above, meaning that someone's life
will be cut short in a fatal way, virtually everyone
will use health care.
MR. CLEMENT: At some point, that's right,
but all sorts of people will not, say, use health care
in the next year, which is the relevant period for the
insurance.
JUSTICE BREYER: But do you think you can,
better than the actuaries or better than the members of
Congress who worked on it, look at the 40 million people
who are not insured and say which ones next year will or
will not use, say, emergency care?
Can you do that any better than if we knew
that 40 million people were suffering, about to suffer a
contagious disease, and only 10 million would get sick?
MR. CLEMENT: Of course not --
JUSTICE BREYER: We don't know which?
MR. CLEMENT: Of course not, Justice Breyer,
but the point is that once Congress decides it's going
to regulate extant commerce, it is going to get all
sorts of latitude to make the right judgments about
actuarial predictions, which actuarial to rely on, which
one not to rely on.
The question that's a proper question for
this Court, though, is whether or not, for the first
time ever in our history, Congress also has the power to
compel people into commerce, because, it turns out, that
would be a very efficient thing for purposes of
Congress's optimal regulation of that market. And I --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But, Mr. Clement, this goes
back to the Chief Justice's question. But, of course,
the theory behind, not just the Government's case, but
the theory behind this law is that people are in this
market right now, and they're in this market because
people do get sick, and because when people get sick, we
provide them with care without making them pay.
And it would be different, you know, if you
were up here saying, I represent a class of Christian
Scientists, then you might be able to say, look, you
know, why are they bothering me? But absent that,
you're in this market. You're an economic actor.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Kagan, once
again, it depends on which market we're talking about.
If we're talking about the health care insurance
market --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, we're talking about
the health insurance market, which is designed to access
the health care market.
MR. CLEMENT: And with respect to the health
insurance market that's designed to have payment in the
health care market, everybody's not in the market. And
that's the premise of the statute, and that's the
problem Congress is trying to solve.
And if it tried to solve it through
incentives, we wouldn't be here; but it's trying to
solve it in a way that nobody has ever tried to solve an
economic problem before, which is saying, you know, it
would be so much more efficient if you were just in this
-- the market.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But they're in the market
in the sense that they're creating a risk that the
market must account for.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Kennedy, I don't
think that's right, certainly in any way that
distinguishes this from any other context. When I'm
sitting in my house deciding I'm not going to buy a car,
I am causing the labor market in Detroit to go south.
am causing maybe somebody to lose their job, and for
everybody to have to pay for it under welfare. So, the
cost shifting that the government tries to uniquely
associate with this market -- it's everywhere.
And even more to the point, the rationale
that they think ultimately supports this legislation,
that, look, it's an economic decision; once you make the
economic decision, we aggregate the decision; there's
your substantial effect on commerce -- that argument
works here. It works in every single industry.
JUSTICE BREYER: Of course, we do know that
there are a few people, more in New York City than there
are in Wyoming, who never will buy a car. But we also
know here, and we don't like to admit it, that because
we are human beings, we all suffer from the risk of
getting sick, and we also all know that we'll get
seriously sick. And we also know that we can't predict
when. And we also know that when we do, there will be
our fellow taxpayers through the Federal Government who
will pay for this. If we do not buy insurance, we will
pay nothing. And that happens with a large number of
people in this group of 40 million, none of whom can be
picked out in advance.
Now, that's quite different from the car
situation, and it's different in only this respect: It
shows there is a national problem, and it shows there is
a national problem that involves money, cost, insurance.
So, if Congress could do this, should there be a disease
that strikes the United States and they want every one
inoculated even though 10 million will be hurt, it's
hard for me to decide why that isn't interstate
commerce, even more so where we know it affects
everybody.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Breyer, there
are other markets that affect every one --
transportation, food, burial services -- though we don't
like to talk about that either. There also are
situations where there are many economic effects from
somebody's failure to purchase a product.
And if I could -- if I could talk about the
difference between the health insurance market and the
health care market, I mean, ultimately I don't want you
to leave here with the impression that anything turns on
that. Because if the government decided tomorrow that
they've come up with a great -- somebody -- some private
company has come up with a great new wonder drug that
would be great for everybody to take, it would have huge
health benefits for everybody; and by the way, also, if
everybody had to buy it, it would facilitate economies
of scale, and the production would be great, and the
price would be cheaper -- and force everybody in the
health care market, the actual health care market, to
buy the wonder drug, I'd be up here making the same
argument.
I'd be saying that's not a power that's
within the commerce power of the Federal Government. It
is something much greater. And it would have been much
more controversial. That's one of the important things.
In Federalist 45, Madison says the commerce power --
that's a new power, but it's not one anyone has any
apprehension about.
The reason they didn't have any apprehension
about it is because it's a power that only operated once
people were already in commerce. You see that from the
text of the clause. The first kind of commerce Congress
gets to regulate is commerce with foreign nations. Did
anybody think the fledgling Republic had the power to
compel some other nation into commerce with us? Of
course not.
And in the same way, I think if the Framers
had understood the commerce power to include the power
to compel people to engage in commerce --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, once again, though,
who's in commerce and when are they in commerce?
If the effect of all these uninsured people
is to raise everybody's premiums, not just when they get
sick, if they get sick, but right now in the aggregate,
and Wickard and Raich tell us we should look at the
aggregate, and the aggregate of all these uninsured
people are increasing the normal family premium,
Congress says, by a thousand dollars a year -- those
people are in commerce. They're making decisions that
are affecting the price that everybody pays for this
service.
MR. CLEMENT: Justice Kagan, again, with all
due respect, I don't think that's a limiting principle.
My unwillingness to buy an electric car is forcing up
the price of an electric car. If only more people
demanded an electric car, there would be economies of
scale, and the price would go down.
JUSTICE KAGAN: No, this is very different,
Mr. Clement, and it's different because of the nature of
the health care service, that you are entitled to health
care when you go to an emergency room, when you go to a
doctor, even if you can't pay for it. So, the
difference between your hypotheticals and the real case
is the problem of uncompensated care, which --
MR. CLEMENT: Justice Kagan, first of all, I
do think there -- this is not the only place where
there's uncompensated care. If some -- if I don't buy a
car and somebody goes on welfare, I'm going to end up
paying for that as well.
But let me also say that there's a real
disconnect then between that focus on what makes this
different and the statute that Congress passed. If all
we were concerned about is the cost sharing that took
place because of uncompensated care in emergency rooms,
presumably we'd have before us a statute that only
addressed emergency care and catastrophic insurance
coverage. But it covers everything, soup to nuts, and
all sorts of other things.
And that gets at the idea that there's two
kinds of cost shifting that are going on here. One is
the concern about emergency care and that somehow
somebody who gets sick is going to shift costs back to
other policy areas -- holders. But there's a much
bigger cost shifting going on here, and that's the cost
shifting that goes on when you force healthy people into
an insurance market precisely because they're healthy,
precisely because they're not likely to go to the
emergency room, precisely because they're not likely to
use the insurance they're forced to buy in the health
care insurance. That creates a huge windfall. It
lowers the price of premiums.
And, again, this isn't just some lawyer up
here telling you that's what it does and trying to
second-guess the congressional economic decisions. This
is Congress's findings, Findings (I) on page 43a of the
appendix to the Government's brief.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right. But all that
sounds like you're debating the merits of the bill. You
asked really for limiting principles so we don't get
into a matter that I think has nothing to do with this
case: broccoli. Okay?
And the limiting principles -- you've heard
three. First, the Solicitor General came up with a
couple joined, very narrow ones. You've seen in Lopez
this Court say that we cannot -- Congress cannot get
into purely local affairs, particularly where they're
noncommercial. And, of course, the greatest limiting
principle of all, which not too many accept -- so, I'm
not going to emphasize that -- is the limiting principle
derived from the fact that members of Congress are
elected from States and that 95 percent of the law of
the United States is State law. That is a principle,
though enforced by the legislature. The other two are
principles, one written into Lopez and one you just
heard.
It seems to me all of those eliminate the
broccoli possibility, and none of them eliminates the
possibility that we're trying to take the 40 million
people who do have the medical cost, who do affect
interstate commerce, and provide a system that you may
like or not like.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Breyer, let me
take them in --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's where we are in
limiting principles.
MR. CLEMENT: Let me take them in turn.
would encourage this Court not to Garcia-ize the
Commerce Clause and just simply say it's up to Congress
to police the Commerce Clause. So, I don't think that
is a limiting principle.
Second of all --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's exactly what
Justice Marshall said in Gibbons. He said that it is
the power to regulate; the power like all others vested
in Congress is complete in itself, may be exercised to
its utmost extent, and acknowledges no limitations other
than those prescribed in the Constitution.
But there is no conscription in the -- set
forth in the Constitution --
MR. CLEMENT: I agree --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- with respect to
regulating commerce.
MR. CLEMENT: I agree 100 percent, and I
think that was the Chief Justice's point, which was once
you open the door to compelling people into commerce
based on the narrow rationales that exist in this
industry, you are not going to be able to stop that
process.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, see, that's the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would like hear you
address Justice Breyer's other two principles.
MR. CLEMENT: Well, the other two principles
are Lopez -- and this case really is not -- I mean, you
know, Lopez is a limit on the affirmative exercise of
people who are already in commerce. The question is, is
there any other limit to people who aren't in commerce?
And so, I think this is the case that really asks that
question.
And then the first point, which was -- I
take it to be the Solicitor General's point, is, with
all due respect, simply a description of the insurance
market. It's not a limiting principle, because the
justification for why this is a valid regulation of
commerce is in no way limited to this market. It simply
says these are economic decisions; they have effect on
other people; my failure to purchase in this market has
a direct effect on others who are already in the market.
That's true of virtually every other market under the
sun.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And now maybe return
to Justice Sotomayor's question.
MR. CLEMENT: I'd be delighted to, which is
-- I mean, I -- you're absolutely right. Once you're in
the commerce power, there -- this Court is not going to
police that subject maybe to the Lopez limit. And
that's exactly why I think it's very important for this
Court to think seriously about taking an unprecedented
step of saying that the commerce power not only includes
the power to regulate, prescribe the rule by which
commerce is governed, the rule of Gibbons v. Ogden; but
to go further and say it's not just prescribing the rule
for commerce that exists, but it is the power to compel
people to enter into commerce in the first place.
I'd like to say two very brief things about
the taxing power, if I could. There are lots of reasons
why this isn't a tax. It wasn't denominated a tax.
It's not structured as a tax. If it's any tax at all,
though, it is a direct tax. Article I, section 9,
clause 4 -- the Framers would have had no doubt that a
tax on not having something is not an excise tax but a
forbidden direct tax. That's one more reason why this
is not proper legislation, because it -- it violates
that.
The second thing is I would urge you to read
the license tax case, which the Solicitor General says
is his best case for why you ignore the fact that a tax
is denominated into something other. Because that's a
case where the argument was that because the Federal
Government had passed a license, not a tax, that somehow
that allowed people to take actions that would have been
unlawful under State law, that this was some special
Federal license to do something that was forbidden by
State law. This Court looked beyond the label in order
to preserve federalism there.
What the Solicitor General and the
government ask you to do here is exactly the opposite,
which is to look past labels in order to up-end our
basic federalist system. And this --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me, do
you think the States could pass this mandate?
MR. CLEMENT: I represent 26 States. I do
think the States could pass this mandate, but I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is there any other area
of commerce, business, where we have held that there
isn't concurrent power between the State and the Federal
Government to protect the welfare of commerce?
MR. CLEMENT: Well, Justice Sotomayor, I
have to resist your premise, because I didn't answer,
yes, the States can do it because it would be a valid
regulation of intrastate commerce. I said, yes, the
States can do it because they have a police power, and
that is the fundamental difference between the States on
the one hand and the limited, enumerated Federal
Government on the other.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Clement.
Mr. Carvin.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL A. CARVIN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS NFIB, ET AL.
MR. CARVIN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
May it please the Court:
I'd like to begin with the Solicitor
General's main premise, which is that they can compel
the purchase of health insurance in order to promote
commerce in the health market because it will reduce
uncompensated care. If you accept that argument, you
have to fundamentally alter the text of the Constitution
and give Congress plenary power.
It simply doesn't matter whether or not this
regulation will promote health care commerce by reducing
uncompensated care. All that matters is whether the
activity actually being regulated by the Act negatively
affects commerce or negatively affects commerce
regulation, so that it's within the commerce power. If
you agree with us that this is -- exceeds commerce
power, the law doesn't somehow become redeemed because
it has beneficial policy effects in the health care
market.
In other words, Congress does not have the
power to promote commerce. Commerce has -- Congress has
the power to regulate commerce. And if the power
exceeds their permissible regulatory authority, then the
law is invalid.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought you --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, surely --
MR. CARVIN: I'm sorry.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, surely,
regulation includes the power to promote. Since the New
Deal, we've said there's regulation in -- there's a
market in agricultural products, and Congress has the
power to subsidize, to limit production, all sorts of
things.
MR. CARVIN: Absolutely, Chief Justice, and
that's the distinction I'm trying to draw. When they're
acting within their enumerated power, then obviously
they're promoting commerce.
But the Solicitor General wants to turn it
into a different power. He wants to say we have the
power to promote commerce, to regulate anything to
promote commerce. And if they have the power to promote
commerce, then they have the power to regulate
everything, right? Because --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't -- I don't
think you're addressing their main point, which is that
they're not creating commerce in -- in health care.
It's already there, and we're all going to need some
kind of health care; most of us will at some point.
MR. CARVIN: I'd -- I'd like to address that
in two ways, if I could, Mr. Chief Justice. In the
first place, they keep playing mix and match with the
statistics. They say 95 percent of us are in the health
care market, okay? But that's not the relevant
statistic, even as the Government frames the issue. No
one in Congress or the Solicitor General is arguing that
going to the doctor and fully paying him creates a
problem. The problem is uncompensated care, and they
say the uncompensated care arises if you have some kind
of catastrophe -- hit by a bus, have some prolonged
illness. Well, what is the percentage of the uninsured
that have those sorts of catastrophes? We know it has
got to be a relatively small fraction. So, in other
words, the relevant --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yet, we don't know
who they are.
MR. CARVIN: We don't, no, and we don't know
in advance, and -- but that doesn't change the basic
principle, that you are nonetheless forcing people for
paternalistic reasons to go into the insurance market to
insure against risks that they have made the voluntary
decision that they are not -- have decided not to.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But the problem is --
MR. CARVIN: But even if --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The problem is that they
are making the rest of us pay for it, because as much as
they say, well, we're not in the market, we don't know
when they -- the timing when they will be.
MR. CARVIN: With --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the -- the figures of
how much more families are paying for insurance because
people get sick, they may have intended to self-insure,
they haven't been able to meet the bills for -- for
cancer, and the rest of us end up paying because the --
people are getting cost-free health care. And the only
way to prevent that is to have them pay sooner rather
than later, pay up front.
MR. CARVIN: Yes, but my point is this:
That, with respect, Justice Ginsburg, conflates the
people who do result in uncompensated care, the free
riders. Those are people who default on their health
care payments. That is an entirely different group of
people, an entirely different activity than being
uninsured.
So, the question is whether or not you can
regulate activity because it has a statistical
connection to an activity that harms commerce. And my
basic point to you is this: The Constitution only gives
Congress the power to regulate things that negatively
affect commerce or commerce regulation. It doesn't give
them the power to regulate things that are statistically
connected to things that negatively affect the
commerce --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Carvin --
MR. CARVIN: -- because -- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Please.
MR. CARVIN: I was just going to say,
because if they have that power, then they obviously
have the power to regulate everything, because
everything in the aggregate is statistically connected
to something that negatively affects commerce, and every
compelled purchase promotes commerce.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, in your view, right
there -- in your view -- in your view right there --
MR. CARVIN: Justice Breyer --
JUSTICE BREYER: Can I just --
MR. CARVIN: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm just picking on
something. I'd like to just -- if it turned out there
was some terrible epidemic sweeping the United States,
and we couldn't say that more than 40 or 50 percent -- I
can make the number as high as I want -- but the -- the
-- you'd say the Federal Government doesn't have the
power to get people inoculated, to require them to be
inoculated, because that's just statistical.
MR. CARVIN: Well, in all candor, I think
Morrison must have decided that issue, right? Because
people who commit violence against --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is your answer to that yes
or no?
MR. CARVIN: Oh, I'm sorry. My answer is,
no, they couldn't do it, because Morrison --
JUSTICE BREYER: No, they could not do it?
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: They cannot require people,
even if this disease is sweeping the country, to be
inoculated. The Federal Government has no power, and if
there's -- okay, fine. Go ahead.
MR. CARVIN: May --
JUSTICE BREYER: Please turn to Justice
Kagan.
MR. CARVIN: May I just please explain why?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes.
MR. CARVIN: Violence against women as
obviously creates the same negative impression on fellow
citizens as this communicable disease, but the -- and it
has huge effects on the health care of our country.
Congress found that it increased health care costs by --
JUSTICE BREYER: I agree with you --
MR. CARVIN: Well, but --
JUSTICE BREYER: -- that it had big effects,
but the majority thought that was a local matter.
MR. CARVIN: Now --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I think that's his point.
(Laughter.)
MR. CARVIN: I -- I don't know why having a
disease is any more local than -- than beating up a
woman. But -- but my basic point is that
notwithstanding its very profound effect on the health
care market, this Court said the activity being
regulated, i.e., violence against women, is outside the
Commerce Clause power. So, regardless of whether it has
beneficial downstream effects, we must say no, Congress
doesn't have that power. Why not? Because everything
has downstream effects on commerce and every compelled
purchase promotes commerce. It by definition helps the
sellers and existing customers.
JUSTICE ALITO: Mr. Carvin, isn't there this
difference between Justice Breyer's hypothetical and the
law that we have before us here? In his hypothetical,
the harm to other people from the communicable disease
is the result of the disease. It is not the result of
something that the government has done, whereas here the
reason why there's cost-shifting is because the
government has mandated that. It has required hospitals
to provide emergency treatment; and, instead of paying
for that through a tax which would be borne by
everybody, it has required -- it has set up a system in
which the cost is surreptitiously shifted to people who
have health insurance and who pay their bills when they
go to the hospital.
MR. CLEMENT: Justice Alito, that is exactly
the Government's argument. It's an extraordinarily
illogical argument.
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine. Then if that's so,
is it -- let me just change my example under pressure --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: -- and say that in fact it
turns out that 90 percent of all automobiles driving
interstate without certain equipment put out pollution,
which travels interstate -- not 100 percent, maybe only
percent. Does the EPA have the power then to say
you've got to have an antipollution device? It's
statistical.
MR. CARVIN: What they can't do -- yes, if
you have a car, they can require you to have an
anti-pollution --
JUSTICE BREYER: Then you're -- then you're
not going on statistics; you're going on something else,
which is what I'd like to know what it is.
MR. CARVIN: It's this: They can't require
you to buy a car with an anti-pollution device. Once
you've entered the market and made a decision, they can
regulate the terms and conditions of the car that you
do, and they can do it for all sorts of reasons. What
they can't do it compel you to enter the market.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now we -- now you've
changed the ground of argument, which I accept as
totally legitimate. And then the question is when you
are born and you don't have insurance and you will in
fact get sick and you will in fact impose costs, have
you perhaps involuntarily -- perhaps simply because you
are a human being -- entered this particular market,
which is a market for health care?
MR. CARVIN: If being born is entering the
market, then I can't think of a more plenary power
Congress can have, because that literally means they can
regulate every human activity from cradle to grave.
thought that's what distinguished the plenary police
power from the very limited commerce power.
I don't disagree that giving the Congress
plenary power to mandate property transfers from A to B
would be a very efficient way of helping B and of
accomplishing Congress's objectives. But the Framers --
JUSTICE BREYER: I see the point. You can
go back to -- go back to Justice Kagan. Don't forget
her question.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I've forgotten my question.
(Laughter.)
MR. CARVIN: I was facing the same dilemma,
Justice Kagan. I --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, let me -- let me
ask a question that I asked Mr. Clement. It just seems --
JUSTICE KAGAN: See what it means to be the
junior Justice?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It just seems very
strange to me that there's no question we can have a
Social Security system -- besides all the people who say
I am being forced to pay for something I don't want --
and this, which seems to me, to try to get care for the
ones who need it by having everyone in the pool, but is
also trying to preserve a role for the private sector,
for the private insurers. There's something very odd
about that, that the government can take over the whole
thing and we all say, oh, yes, that's fine. But if the
government wants to get -- to preserve private insurers,
it can't do that.
MR. CARVIN: Well, I don't think the test of
a law's constitutionality is whether it more adheres to
the libertarian principles of the Cato Institute or the
statist principles of someone else. I think the test of
the law is -- constitutionally is not those policy
questions; it's whether or not the law is regulating
things that negatively affect commerce or don't.
And since obviously the failure to purchase
an item doesn't create the kind of effects on supply and
demand that the market participants in Wickard and Raich
did and doesn't in any way interfere with regulation of
the insurance companies, I don't think it can pass the
basic --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought -- I thought
that Wickard was you must buy; we're not going to let
you use the home-grown wheat. You've got to go out in
the market and buy that wheat that you don't want.
MR. CARVIN: Oh, but let's be careful about
what they were regulating in Wickard, Justice Ginsburg.
What they were regulating was the supply of wheat. It
didn't in any way imply that they could require every
American to go out and buy wheat. And the -- yes, one
of the consequences of regulating local market
participants is it'll affect the supply and the demand
for the product. That's why you can regulate them,
because those local market participants have the same
effect on the interstate market that a black market has
on a legal market.
But none of that is true -- in other words,
you can regulate local bootleggers, but that doesn't
suggest you can regulate teetotalers, people who stay
out of the liquor market, because they don't have any
negative effect on the existing market participants or
on regulation of those market participants.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well that's why I suggested, Mr.
Carvin, that it might be different if you were raising
an as-applied challenge and presenting a class of people
whom you could say clearly would not be in the health
care market. But you're raising a facial challenge, and
we can't really know which of the -- which of the many,
many people that this law addresses in fact will not
participate in the health care market and in fact will
not impose costs on all the rest of us.
So, the question is, can Congress respond to
those facts, that we have no crystal ball, that we can't
tell who is and isn't going to be in the health
insurance market, and say most of these people will be
and most of these people will thereby impose costs on
the rest of us and that's a problem that we can deal
with on a class-wide basis?
MR. CARVIN: No again. The people who
impose the costs on the rest of us are people who engage
in a different activity at a different time, which is
defaulting on their health care payments. It's not the
uninsured. Under your theory, you could regulate
anybody if they've got a statistical connection to a
problem. You could say, since we could regulate people
who enter into the mortgage market and impose mortgage
insurance on them, we can simply impose the requirement
to buy private mortgage insurance on everybody before
they have entered the market, because we're doing it in
this prophylactic way before it develops. And that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: No, no, that's not
-- I don't think that's fair, because not everybody is
going to enter the mortgage market. The Government's
position is that almost everybody is going to enter the
health care market.
MR. CARVIN: Two points, one of which
Mr. Clement's already made, which is the health
insurance market is different than the health care
market. But let me take it on full-stride. I think
everybody is in the milk market. I think everybody is
in the wheat product market. But that doesn't suggest
that the government compel you to buy five gallons of
meat or five bushels of wheat, because they are not
regulating commerce.
Whether you're a market participant or not,
they are still requiring you to make a purchase that you
don't want to do.
And to get back to your facial example --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But then that's true of
almost every product.
MR. CARVIN: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It's true of almost
every product, directly or indirectly by government
regulation. The government says -- borrowing my
colleague's example -- you can't buy a car without
emission control. I don't want a car with emission
control. It's less efficient in terms of the
horsepower. But I'm forced to do something I don't want
to do by government regulation.
MR. CARVIN: You are not forced to buy a
product you don't want. And I agree with you that since
the government regulates all markets, there is no
limiting principle on their compelled purchase. When
they put these environmental controls on the car --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They force me to buy --
MR. CARVIN: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They force me to buy if
I need --
MR. CARVIN: No. I'm sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: --unpasteurized goods,
goods that don't have certain pesticides but have
others. There is government compulsion in almost every
economic decision because the government regulates so
much. It's a condition of life that some may rail
against, but --
MR. CARVIN: Let's think about it this way:
Yes, when you've entered the marketplace, they can
impose all sorts of restrictions on you, and they can
impose, for example, all kinds of restrictions on States
after they've enacted laws. They can wipe out the laws.
They can condition them.
But what can't they do? They can't compel
States to enact laws. They can't compel States to carry
out Federal law. And I am arguing for precisely the
same distinction, because everyone intuitively
understands that regulating participants after A and B
have entered into a contract is fundamentally less
intrusive --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But wait a minute. We
let --
MR. CARVIN: -- than requiring A to
contract --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We let the government
regulate the manufacturing process whether or not the
goods will enter into interstate commerce, merely
because they might statistically. We let -- there's all
sorts of government regulation of manufacturing plants,
of agricultural farms, of all sorts of -- of activity
that will be purely intrastate because it might affect
interstate activity.
MR. CARVIN: I fully agree with you, Justice
Sotomayor. And I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, how is that
different from saying you are self-insuring today,
you're forgoing insurance? Why isn't that a predecessor
to the need that you're eventually going to have?
MR. CARVIN: The cases you referred to I
think effectively eliminated the distinction between
participants in the intrastate market vis-à-vis
participants in the interstate market. None of those
cases suggest that you can regulate people who are
outside of the market on both an intrastate and
interstate level by compelling them to enter into the
market. And that --
JUSTICE BREYER: But what about -- you know,
the simplest counter-example for me to suggest is you've
undoubtedly read Judge Sutton's concurring opinion. He
has about two pages, it seemed to me, of examples where
everyone accepts the fact that under these kinds of
regulations the government can compel people to buy
things they don't otherwise want to buy.
For example, he gives -- even in that farm
case, the farmer was being forced to go out and buy
grain to feed to his animals because he couldn't raise
it at home. You know, and he goes through one example
after another. So, what is your response to that, which
you've read?
MR. CARVIN: Judge Sutton is wrong in each
and every example. There was no -- there was no
compulsion in Raich for him to buy wheat. He could have
gotten wheat substitutes, or he could have not sold
wheat, which is actually what he was doing. There is a
huge difference between conditioning regulation, i.e.,
conditioning access to the health care market and saying
you must buy a product, and forcing you to buy a
product.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that it --
MR. CARVIN: And that -- that -- I'm sorry.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: It was common ground that
the requirement that the insurers -- what was it -- the
community-based one, and you -- they have to insure you
despite your health status; they can't refuse because of
pre-existing conditions. The Government tells us and
Congress determined that those two won't work unless
you have a pool that will include the people who are now
healthy. But -- so -- well, first, do you agree with
your colleague that the community-based -- and what's
the name that they give to the other?
MR. CARVIN: The guaranteed issue.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes. That that is
legitimate Commerce Clause legislation?
MR. CARVIN: Oh, sure. And that's why --
but we didn't –- don’t in any way impede that sort of
regulation. These nondiscrimination regulations will
apply to every insurance company just as Congress
intended whether or not we buy insurance. We're not --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well then, what about the
determination that they can't possibly work if people
don't have to buy insurance until they are -- their
health status is such that the insurance company just
dealt with them on its -- as it will? They'd say, I
won't insure you because you're -- you're already sick.
MR. CARVIN: It depends what you mean by
"work." It'll work just fine in ensuring that no sick
people are discriminated against. What -- but when you
do that, Congress --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But how about the sick
people? Why would they insure early if they were going to
be protected if they get insurance late?
MR. CARVIN: Yes. Well, that's -- see, this
is the Government's very illogical argument. They seem
to be saying, look, we couldn't just force people to buy
insurance to lower health insurance premiums. That
would be no good. But we can do it because we've
created the problem. We, Congress, have driven up the
health insurance premiums, and since we've created that
problem, this somehow gives us authority that we
wouldn't otherwise have. That can't possibly be right.
That would --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do you think that there
is -- what percentage of the American people who took
their son or daughter to an emergency room and that
child was turned away because the parent didn't have
insurance -- do you think there's a large percentage of
the American population who would stand for the death of
that child --
MR. CARVIN: One of the most --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- if they had an
allergic reaction and a simple shot would have saved the
child?
MR. CARVIN: One of the more pernicious,
misleading impressions that the government has made is
that we are somehow advocating that people could get
thrown out of emergency rooms or that this alternative
that they've hypothesized is going to be enforced by
throwing people out of emergency rooms. This
alternative, i.e., you condition access to health care
on buying health insurance, is enforced in precisely the
same way that the Act does. You either buy health
insurance or you pay a penalty of $695. You don't have
doctors throwing people out on the street. And -- so,
the only --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. Did you say
the penalty's okay but not the mandate? I'm sorry.
Maybe I've misheard you.
MR. CARVIN: No. No, no. I was -- they
create this straw man that says, look, the only
alternative to doing it the way we've done it, if we
condition access to health care on buying health
insurance, the only way you can enforce that is making
sick people not get care. I'm saying no, no. There's a
perfectly legitimate way they could enforce their
alternative, i.e., requiring you to buy health insurance
when you access health care, which is the same penalty
structure that's in the Act.
There is no moral dilemma between having
people have insurance and denying them emergency
service. Congress has made a perfectly legitimate value
judgment that they want to make sure that people get
emergency care. Since the founding, whenever Congress
has imposed that public responsibility on private
actors, it has subsidized it from the Federal Treasury.
It has not conscripted a subset of the citizenry and
made them subsidize the actors who are being hurt, which
is what they're doing here.
They're making young, healthy people
subsidize insurance premiums --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, we all --
MR. CARVIN: -- for the cost that the
nondiscrimination provisions have put on insurance
premiums --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, the --
MR. CARVIN: -- and insurance companies.
And that is the fundamental problem here.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, the -- I want to
understand the choices you're saying Congress has.
Congress can tax everybody and set up a public health
care system.
MR. CARVIN: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That would be okay?
MR. CARVIN: Yes. Tax power is -- unharmed.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Okay. Congress can --
MR. CARVIN: A way to correct that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you taking the same
position as your -- as your colleague? Congress can't
say we're going to set up a public health system, but
you can get a tax credit if you have private health
insurance because you won't access the public system.
Are you taking the same position as your colleague?
MR. CARVIN: There may have been some
confusion in your prior colloquy. I fully agree with my
brother Clement that a direct tax would be
unconstitutional. I don't think he means to suggest,
nor do I, that a tax credit that incentivizes you to buy
insurance creates a problem. Congress incentivizes all
kinds of activities. If they gave us a tax credit for
buying insurance, then it would be our choice whether or
not that makes economic sense, even though --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, how is that
different than this Act, which says if a taxpayer fails
to meet the requirement of having minimum coverage, then
they are responsible for paying the shared
responsibility payment?
MR. CARVIN: The difference is that the
taxpayer is not given a choice. It's the difference
between banning cigarettes and saying I'm going to
enforce that legal ban through a $5 a pack penalty, and
saying, look, if you want to sell cigarettes, fine; I'm
going to charge you a tax of $5 a pack. And that's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I think -- I think
that's what's happening, isn't it?
MR. CARVIN: No. Not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: We're paying -- I
thought that everybody was paying, what is it, $10 a
pack now? I don't even know the price. It's pretty
high.
MR. CARVIN: Right. And everywhere that
it's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I think everybody
recognizes that it's all taxation for the purposes of
dissuading you to buy it.
MR. CARVIN: That's precisely my point. And
everyone intuitively understands that that system is
dramatically different than saying cigarettes tomorrow
are illegal.
JUSTICE BREYER: It is different. It is
different. It is different. I agree with that. But
you pointed out, and I agree with you on this, that the
government set up these emergency room laws. The
government set up Medicaid. The government set up
Medicare. The government set up CHIP, and there are 40
million people who don't have the private insurance.
In that world, the government has set up
commerce. It's all over the United States. And in that
world, of course, the decision by the 40 million not to
buy the insurance affects that commerce and
substantially so.
So, I thought the issue here is not whether
it's a violation of some basic right or something to
make people buy things they don't want, but simply
whether those decisions of that group of 40 million
people substantially affect the interstate commerce that
has been set up in part through these other programs.
MR. CARVIN: That's the --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, that's the part of your
argument I'm not hearing.
MR. CARVIN: Oh, let me, please. It is
clear that the failure to buy health insurance doesn't
affect anyone. Defaulting on your payments to your
health care provider does. Congress chose, for whatever
reason, not to regulate the harmful activity of
defaulting on your health care provider. They used the
percent or whoever among the uninsured as a leverage
to regulate the 100 percent of the uninsured at the
risk --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I agree -- I agree that
that's what's happening here.
MR. CARVIN: Okay.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And the Government tells
us that's because the insurance market is unique. And
in the next case, it'll say the next market is unique.
But I think it is true that if most questions in life
are matters of degree, in the insurance and health care
world, both markets -- stipulate two markets -- the
young person who is uninsured is uniquely proximately
very close to affecting the rates of insurance and the
costs of providing medical care in a way that is not
true in other industries.
That's my concern in the case.
MR. CARVIN: And your -- I may be
misunderstanding you, Justice Kennedy, and I hope I'm
not.
Sure, it would be perfectly fine if they
allowed -- you do actuarial risk for young people on the
basis of their risk for disease, just like you judge
flood insurance on the homeowner's risk of flood. One
of the issues here is not only that they're compelling
us to enter into the marketplace, they're not -- they're
prohibiting us from buying the only economically
sensible product that we would want, catastrophic
insurance.
Everyone agrees the only potential problem
of the 30-year-old is he goes from the healthy 70
percent of the population to the unhealthy 5 percent.
And yet, Congress prohibits anyone over 30 from buying
any kind of catastrophic health insurance. And the
reason they do that is because they need this massive
subsidy.
Justice Alito, it's not our numbers. CBO
said that injecting my clients into the risk pool lowers
premiums by 15 to 20 percent.
So, Justice Kennedy, even if we were going
to create exceptions for people that are outside of
commerce and inside of commerce, surely we'd make
Congress do a closer nexus and say, look, we're really
addressing this problem; we want these 30-year-olds to
get catastrophic health insurance. And not only did
they -- they deprived them of that option.
And I think that illustrates the dangers of
giving Congress these plenary powers, because they can
always leverage them. They can always come up with some
public policy rationale that converts the power to
regulate commerce into the power to promote commerce,
which, as I was saying before, is the one that I think
is plenary.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Carvin, a large part of
this argument has concerned the question of whether
certain kinds of people are active participants in a
market or not active participants in a market. And your
test, which is a test that focuses on this
activity/inactivity distinction, would force one to
confront that problem all the time.
Now, if you look over the history of the
Commerce Clause, what you see is that there were sort of
unhappy periods when the Court used tests like this,
direct versus indirect, commerce versus manufacturing.
I think most people would say that those things didn't
really work. And the question is why should this test,
inactive versus active, work any better?
MR. CARVIN: The problem you identify is
exactly the problem you would create if you bought the
government's bogus limiting principles. You'd have to
draw distinctions between the insurance industry and the
car industry and all of that, returning to the Commerce
Clause jurisprudence that bedeviled the Court before the
30s, where they were drawing all these kinds of
distinctions among industries; whereas our test is
really very simple. Are you buying the product, or is
Congress compelling you to buy the product? I can't
think of a brighter line.
And, again, if Congress has the power to
compel you to buy this product, then obviously they've
got the power to provide you -- to compel you to buy any
product, because any purchase is going to benefit
commerce. And this Court is never going to second-guess
Congress's policy judgments on how important it is, this
product versus that product.
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think that drawing a
line between commerce and everything else that is not
commerce is drawing an artificial line, like drawing a
line between commerce and manufacturing?
MR. CARVIN: The words "inactivity" and
"activity" are not in the Constitution. The words
"commerce" and "non-commerce" are. And, again, it's a
distinction that comes, Justice Kagan, directly from the
text of the Constitution.
The Framers consciously gave Congress the
ability to regulate commerce, because that's not a
particularly threatening activity that deprives you of
individual freedom.
If you were required -- if you were
authorized to require A to transfer property to B, you
have, as the early cases put it, a monster in
legislation which is against all reason and justice,
because everyone intuitively understands that regulating
people who voluntarily enter into contracts in setting
terms and conditions does not create the possibility of
Congress compelling wealth transfers among the
citizenry. And that is precisely why the Framers denied
them the power to compel commerce and precisely why they
didn't give them plenary power.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Carvin.
General Verrilli, you have 4 minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
GENERAL VERRILLI: Thank you,
Mr. Chief Justice.
Congress confronted a grave problem when it
enacted the Affordable Care Act: the 40 million
Americans who can't get health insurance and suffered
often very terrible consequences. Now, we agree, I
think, everyone arguing this case agrees, that Congress
could remedy that problem by imposing an insurance
requirement at the point of sale.
That won't work. The reason it won't work
is because people will still show up at the hospital or
at their physician's office seeking care without
insurance, causing the cost-shifting problem. And
Mr. Clement's suggestion that they can be signed up for
a high risk pool at that point is utterly unrealistic.
Think about how much it would cost to get
the insurance when you are at the hospital or at the
doctor. It would be -- it would be unfathomably high.
That will never work. Congress understood that. It
chose the means that will work, the means that it saw
worked in the States and -- in the State of
Massachusetts, and that -- and that it had every reason
to think would work on a national basis.
That is the kind of choice of means that
McCulloch says that the Constitution leaves to the
democratically accountable branches of government.
There is no temporal limitation in the
Commerce Clause. Everyone subject to this regulation is
in or will be in the health care market. They are just
being regulated in advance. That's exactly the kind of
thing that ought to be left to the judgment of Congress
and the democratically accountable branches of
government.
And I think this is actually a paradigm
example of the kind of situation that Chief Justice
Marshall envisioned in McCulloch itself, that the
provisions of the Constitution needed to be interpreted
in a manner that would allow them to be effective in
addressing the great crises of human affairs that the
Framers could not even envision.
But if there's any doubt about that under
the Commerce Clause, then I urge this Court to uphold
the -- the minimum coverage provision as an exercise of
the taxing power.
Under New York v. United States, this is
precisely a parallel situation. If the Court thinks
there's any doubt about the ability of Congress to
impose the requirement in 5000A(a), it can be treated as
simply the predicate to which the tax incentive of
00A(b) seeks accomplishment.
And the Court, as the Court said in New
York, has a solemn obligation to respect the judgments
of the democratically accountable branches of
government, and because this statute can be construed in
a manner that allows it to be upheld in that way, I
respectfully submit that it is this Court's duty to do
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General.
Counsel, we'll see you tomorrow.
(Whereupon, at 12:02 p.m., the case in the
