IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MICHAEL B. ELGIN, ET AL., :
Petitioners : No. 11-45
v. :
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY, ET AL.:
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, February 27, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
HARVEY A. SCHWARTZ, ESQ., Boston, Massachusetts; for
Petitioners.
ERIC J. FEIGIN, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
HARVEY A. SCHWARTZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ERIC J. FEIGIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
HARVEY A. SCHWARTZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners 58
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 11-45, Elgin v. Department of
the Treasury.
Mr. Schwartz.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF HARVEY A. SCHWARTZ
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SCHWARTZ: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The question in this case is whether it is
fairly discernible from the Civil Service Reform Act
that Congress revoked the district court jurisdiction to
declare acts of Congress unconstitutional in actions
brought by Federal employees. The answer is no, for
several reasons.
First, the Civil Service Reform Act doesn't
say that it precludes section 1331 jurisdiction.
Congress could have said so. Congress didn't say so.
And there's no inference of preclusion of the
Petitioners' claims that's fairly discernible from the
scheme itself. And that's because challenges to
constitutionality of statutes are just not the type of
claims that are reviewed through the CSRA scheme.
Because of this, the Merit Systems
Protection Board dismisses challenge -- challenges to
constitutionality of a statute routinely as outside of
its authority.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Schwartz --
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN: -- suppose an employee is
fired and he has a variety of different kinds of claims,
constitutional and statutory. What would you think
happens then? Does he bring the constitutional claims
in one court but the statutory claims in another
court -- excuse me -- in the -- in the commission?
MR. SCHWARTZ: No, Your Honor. I believe
that, because of normal rules against splitting of
claims, the employee would have to make a decision.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, that seems just as
bad. In other words, that then, you -- it's not
inefficient necessarily, but your scheme would force the
employee to choose between her constitutional claims and
her statutory claims.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That is correct.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Why would we do that?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Because of the importance of
making the constitutional claims available in -- in a --
for judicial review. That is -- that's just one of the
options that the employee would have to weigh.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why would you make
that concession? Why wouldn't it be possible in that --
for an employee to choose? If the employee had both
constitutional and nonconstitutional claims, perhaps
that employee could take advantage of the review scheme
that's outlined by the Government. But in the situation
where there's purely a challenge to a statute, the
employee would have the option of bringing the claim in
one of the district courts.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That -- that certainly is a
possibility, Your Honor. And -- and it is a possibility
that the employee could bring his constitutional claim
in the district court and still pursue his statutory
claim before the Merit Systems Protection Board.
However, I'd like to point out that, while this is an
interesting hypothetical, we don't have to look at
hypotheticals in this situation because we have in the
Third Circuit since 1986 and in the District of Columbia
Circuit since 1995 -- those two circuits permit Federal
employees to bring their constitutional claims in the
circuit court.
We were unable to find a single instance in
which there has been one of these mixed claims of a -- a
constitutional claim and a statutory claim brought in
those circuits.
JUSTICE SCALIA: In -- in those cases, did
the -- did the plaintiffs also have nonconstitutional
claims which they were pursuing in the Federal Circuit?
MR. SCHWARTZ: We -- we were unable to -- to
find any example of -- of that happening.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, well, that's -- that's
the problem here. I mean, yes, if all you have is a
constitutional claim, I suppose the system you propose
would work. You go to the district court. But where --
where you have both, it's a problem.
MR. SCHWARTZ: I -- and I -- I agree that
that is a more difficult situation. But it's not the
situation presented by the facts of this case at least.
JUSTICE KAGAN: You suggested that it's a
situation that doesn't often arise, and I guess that
puzzles me. Why wouldn't it often arise?
MR. SCHWARTZ: I don't know why it doesn't
often arise. It -- it might be that -- that people
prefer to leave their claims in the Merit Systems
Protection Board. And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, do you --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- what would happen if --
if the employee is fired because of his or her religion
and he goes to MSPB?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And this is a First
Amendment claim. MSPB has to say, well, this is not
adequate cause, and -- and then they find something else
in the statute? It can't look at the constitutional
aspect of the claim?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Your Honor, if -- if an
employee is fired because of his religion, there's --
there's a -- a separate procedure for discrimination
claims such as could be brought under Title VII -- and,
in fact, those claims do go directly to the district
court.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, because -- well,
let's -- then I have to do a new hypothetical.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Because he gave a -- a
speech --
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- saying there's no
global warming or something.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. That claim now could be
brought before the Merit Systems Protection Board, and I
agree that -- that it can be brought before the Merit
Systems Protection Board, and I'm not urging this Court
to say that that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But the MSPB says we can't
look at the First Amendment?
MR. SCHWARTZ: No. No.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Are you -- you're
talking --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I'm sorry, just to
clarify: No, they wouldn't say that? Or -- I'm -- I
lost this, which way your "no" was going.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Okay. I'll -- I'll retract
my "no" then.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Schwartz, I thought
you're talking about the constitutionality of a statute.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That's it exactly, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not any constitutional
claim that there has been unconstitutional action by an
official. I thought that your point was when you're
challenging the constitutionality of a statute, then you
have a right to go to the district court.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That is my point exactly,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But could I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What I'm asking --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could I please
verify your answer to Justice Kennedy before you move
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. I am drawing a
distinction between a challenge to the constitutionality
of a statute, as the Petitioners are doing here, and
that is beyond the -- the authority of the Merit
Systems --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Are you talking about a
facial challenge to the statute as -- and am I
understanding you right? A facial challenge goes to the
district court and a constitutional as-applied challenge
goes to the commission?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. And -- and that --
that's the procedure. The as-applied challenge -- those
cases are bread-and-butter cases at the Merit Systems
Protection Board now. If somebody says I was fired
because I wrote a letter to the editor that my boss
didn't like, he's not challenging the constitutional --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But I -- I was leading up
to the fact, why should there be a difference? If the
MSPB has this expertise in as-applied, why doesn't it
have it for facial? I mean, the expertise question
is -- it can't be a matter of expertise; or am I wrong
about that?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, I would -- with due
respect, I -- I disagree with you, Your Honor. The
expertise required to decide the present Petitioners'
claim and the letter to the editor claim is totally
different. In the letter to the editor claim, the facts
concern the facts of the workplace, what was my boss's
motivation, what were his actual reasons for firing me.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, and whether that
reason was justifiable. And isn't it the case that
whenever the reason is an unconstitutional reason, you
would have an as-applied challenge, right?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So, why do you need a
facial challenge in addition? I thought that we always
try to do as-applied first and facial second. So, why
isn't it enough that you can go to the Merit Systems
Protection Board and then to the Federal Circuit saying
that this action was wrong and not allowed under the
statute? And -- and if -- if the reason it was wrong
was that it was unconstitutional, what's -- what's the
problem?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Justice Scalia, I -- I agree
that in the as-applied challenge where somebody says my
rights were violated, that case now goes and should go
to the Merit Systems Protection Board. In the present
case, there's no challenge to the application of a
statute. There's no challenge to any decision that was
made by -- by managers. The challenge is to the
decision made by Congress --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So, that is the
rule --
MR. SCHWARTZ: -- in enacting the Civil --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: That's the rule that
you would apply across the board so long -- only in the
case of a facial challenge do you get to go to the
district court? If it's an as-applied -- this law was
unconstitutional as applied to me -- that's still before
the MSPB?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. And -- and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you tell me how --
MR. SCHWARTZ: And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- how -- how this is
any different than the administrative system and review
system that was reviewed in Thunder Basin and Illinois
Long-Term Care? In both those statutes, the agencies
weren't permitted to consider facial challenges,
constitutional challenges; and we said that's okay, they
can't, but the reviewing court can. So, how's that any
different from the situation you're proposing here?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. There are several
significant differences. I'd like to -- I'd like to go
through them.
First of all, in the Thunder Basin case,
the -- the constitutional challenge was -- was to the
procedures that were being applied. The agency, the
Mine Safety Commission, was -- was an expert in those
procedures. The facts that were involved in making that
determination were the very facts that this Mine Safety
Commission had expertise in.
In the present case, the challenge is to the
Selective Service laws. The Merit Systems Protection
Board --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But please deal with the
language of both cases. Both cases said even if the
agency can't review a constitutional challenge, there's
still review within the Federal Circuit -- within the --
within the circuit courts, and that's okay.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So, why isn't that okay
here? I think that was Justice Scalia's question to
you. I know that you say, well, the Federal Circuit
won't have a record. But the Government says if it
wants a record, it can remand and ask the agency to
develop it. So, what's wrong with that procedure?
MR. SCHWARTZ: The first thing that's
wrong -- that's wrong with that procedure as it would be
applied to this case is that it's -- it's a vast
departure from the Civil Service Reform Act scheme as it
was created by Congress; and -- and -- because that
scheme involves the Merit Systems Protection Board
acting as a trial court; and -- and giving the first
level of review and in effect substituting for the --
for a district court. And then --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Isn't one of the
challenges here by one of the Petitioners that he was
constructively discharged? Isn't that an issue that the
board is better suited to determine in the first
instance, whether there was at all a constructive
discharge?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, in fact, it's -- it's
just the reverse of that, where that one Petitioner
would be taking the position that he was not
constructively discharged. If he was constructively
discharged, the Merit Systems Protection Board arguably
would have jurisdiction. If he voluntarily resigned,
under the Government's theory, he would be among the
class of Federal employees -- constitutes about a third
of Federal employees -- who have no appellate rights to
the Merit Systems Protection Board.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought your position
was that the Merit Systems Protection Board has said we
have no authority to adjudicate constitutional
questions, period.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, I thought that the
court was saying this claim is dismissed because we
don't have jurisdiction to deal with that kind of
question. And then your next -- the Federal Circuit --
well, how can the Federal Circuit exercise jurisdiction
over a claim where the first-instance decisionmaker said
it didn't have authority to render the decision?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that that's
what your position was.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That is what our position is,
and -- and it leaves open the question of just what the
Federal Circuit is going to do after the Merit Systems
Protection Board has dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But that's not your
position, as I understood it, in your response to my
earlier question. You said that the -- it is all right
to have as-applied constitutional challenges presented
to the MSPB or not presented but then reviewed in the
Federal Circuit.
MR. SCHWARTZ: My position is that if the
MSPB has jurisdiction to find a statute -- that since
the MSPB does not have jurisdiction to find a statute
unconstitutional, any claim in which the employee is
asking for them to find a statute unconstitutional is
one that is outside of the CSRA scheme.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay, but -- but
within the statutory scheme, are you saying that a claim
that this statute is, while not facially
unconstitutional, unconstitutional as applied to me --
Where does that go?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, Mr. Chief Justice, I
apologize for my confusion about --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I think it's
probably mine.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, I would defer to you,
Your Honor.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where does -- where
does -- where does that claim go?
MR. SCHWARTZ: My confusion is about the use
of the term "as applied." And I -- rather than using
terms such as "facial" or "as applied" where the
dividing line can be somewhat blurry, I propose drawing
the dividing line between a case where the employee is
saying this statute is unconstitutional; I'm saying
Congress made a mistake --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, why wouldn't the
dividing line be -- and I think that this is consistent
with your argument. The dividing line should be where
the MSPB itself could decide the claim.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN: If the MSPB can decide the
claim, then it goes to the MSPB. If the MSPB can't
decide the claim, I think is what you're saying, then
it has to go to the district court.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And you're saying that the
MSPB has said that, although it can decide, can decide,
cases where he says, you know, my -- my supervisor fired
me for a discriminatory reason, that that's within the
scope of the MSPB's authority, a claim like this, which
is that the Selective Service Act is unconstitutional
full stop, is not within the scope of the MSPB's
authority. Is that right?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes, that's absolutely
correct. And -- and the cases that would not be within
the MSPB's authority would include cases where the
employee says the statute is unconstitutional and would
also include the million or so Federal employees who, as
the Government says, have no appellate rights to the
MSPB, all -- all of those persons, career -- those
persons would include summer interns, FBI employees.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes, what type --
summer interns and FBI employees?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. The --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I assume that's for
very different reasons -- one because they are summer
interns, and, you know, if they are impermissibly
treated, it's kind of -- they're summer interns.
There's no reason to get --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't -- I
don't mean that facetiously. I mean, what they're
saying is that there's some level of de minimis
personnel actions when you're talking about the vast
Federal bureaucracy that we don't have to really give,
you know, the whole panoply of rights. And FBI agents,
I assume, because it's the sensitive nature of what they
deal with.
So, I guess what I'm saying is, do you want
us to focus on the millions of employees who would now
be going to district court or do you want us to focus on
the small number that have facial constitutional
challenges?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, actually, Your Honor,
it's the Government that is taking the position that the
summer interns, the FBI agents, all the government
attorneys, Federal Government chaplains, who have no
right to appeal to the MSPB -- all of those persons, the
Government says. Can bring their constitutional claims
to the district court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And why is that wrong? It
seems to me that's what the -- what the Administrative
Procedure Act says, that if there is no other effective
means of judicial review, you get judicial review under
the APA.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: These people have no
effective right because they can't go to the MSPB and
can't go to the Federal Circuit. So, they have -- they
have rights in the district court. That's not a
problem.
The problem is the people who do have rights
to go to the Merit Systems Protection Board, right, who
have constitutional claims based on -- on the
unconstitutionality of a statute?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, I -- I disagree with
that, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Because the -- the summer
intern, the FBI agent, the nonpreference employee, the
excepted service employees, unless they -- they have a
claim that they can take to the Merit Systems Protection
Board, they're precluded from going to any other court.
They're precluded under the Administrative Procedures
Act. That's this Court's Fausto decision. And in this
Court's Fausto decision, a Federal employee who could
not bring a case -- his appeal to the Merit Systems
Protection Board tried to bring a Back Pay Act claim in
the Court of Claims and this court said, no, that is
precluded.
And what the Government is doing is saying
you got a right in Fausto, but for constitutional
claims, Mr. Fausto had it right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but that's -- that's
entirely logical. Fausto in effect said that the
statutory structure simply provides no cause of action
for these people, okay?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: They're not entitled to
anything. But I don't think that there's anything in
the -- in the civil service laws that say these people
are not entitled to constitutional protections. So, I
don't think that -- that Fausto rules this out.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, and I -- I agree with you
completely that -- that constitutional claims are
different from statutory claims --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly.
MR. SCHWARTZ: -- or damages.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And it's those that I say
that people not covered by appeals to the Merit Systems
Protection Board -- they can bring those constitutional
claims, even though they can't bring statutory claims.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. And that's -- that's
the position I'm taking. I'm taking it a step beyond
the Government, however.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. You're taking -- I'm
saying that's true only with respect to those people who
have no right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection
Board. You're going further.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And you're saying even the
people who can appeal to the Merit Systems Protection
Board, right, can go directly to the district court?
That's a different question.
MR. SCHWARTZ: But I -- I'm limiting that to
those people who can appeal to the Merit Systems
Protection Board, but the Merit Systems Protection Board
has no authority to grant them relief.
JUSTICE ALITO: There are at least -- at
least three different kinds of constitutional claims,
and I'm not sure where you're drawing the line with
respect to your argument. There's a claim that -- that
the agency acted in an unconstitutional manner, not that
any statute is unconstitutional --
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- but there's
unconstitutional executive action. There's an as-
applied claim. Let's say that a plaintiff says that the
registration requirement is unconstitutional as applied
to me, not to other people, but to me because I'm a
conscientious objector or I have religious objections to
military action that the United States is taking at this
particular time. And then there's this -- there's a
claim that this statute is unconstitutional on its face.
Now, where do you -- which of those can the
Merit Systems Protection Review Board decide? Just the
first category?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Just the first category.
JUSTICE ALITO: So, it's not a distinction
between as-applied and facial?
MR. SCHWARTZ: No. No, no. And that's --
that's -- that's why -- that's why I'm specifically not
trying to say where the line is between as-applied and
facial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought your position
was that whatever the MSPB cannot hear, then you can go
to the district court.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That is absolutely correct.
And --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Now, in your original briefs,
Mr. Schwartz, you suggested that if the MSPB can't hear
a claim, neither can the Federal Circuit. And as I
understood the Government's brief, the Government comes
back and said that's not the case. Even when the MSPB
can't hear a claim, the Federal Circuit could hear it.
Now, then there's a question of, if there's a necessity
for a record, how does the record get developed?
But do you now concede that the Federal
Circuit could hear the claim as a matter -- you know, on
the -- at the -- at the first level?
MR. SCHWARTZ: I agree that a system can be
proposed to get these claims to the Federal Circuit.
However, it's not the system of the -- that Congress
created in the Civil Service Reform Act. And the
significance of the contortions that have to be gone
through to get these claims to the Federal Circuit
demonstrates that it's not fairly discernible from the
Civil Service Reform Act as written by Congress that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you take the position
that the MSPB, having no jurisdiction and saying it has
no jurisdiction, it can't adjudicate this matter, well,
then, a reviewing court has no jurisdiction to -- to
review? There's nothing to review because the MSPB said
we have no jurisdiction.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That's how it would work in
the real world. I mean, what is -- what is the Federal
Circuit supposed to do? It has an order from the MSPB
that says we dismiss for lack of jurisdiction. The
Federal Circuit -- and the Government doesn't say that
that is wrong. The Federal Circuit says we affirm your
dismissal, and now we'll move on to the merits. That --
it's possible we could have a system like that, but that
isn't the system of the Civil Service Reform Act, and
that's not the way that appellate courts normally
function.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is it really a
question of jurisdiction of the MSPB?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: "Jurisdiction" is a
word with many meanings.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. And -- and -- and
there's a general rule with that -- there have been
exceptions to -- that administrative agencies do not
have authority to rule on constitutionality of statutes.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, what's the problem? He
says -- the employee says I was dismissed. MSPB says
that's right, you were, and it's lawful. The employee
says but you didn't consider my argument that the
relevant statute was unconstitutional. MSPB says, no,
we can't. The Federal Circuit says but we can; so, make
your argument. What's the problem? And then I'll
decide it. And if they decide it's unconstitutional,
then the action of the MSPB is wrong.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That's a system that -- that
could come up. It's not the system of the Civil Service
Reform Act in -- because --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't know -- I'm just
saying, is there any practical problem with that?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Oh, it presents immense
practical problems.
JUSTICE BREYER: Which is?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Which is that the Merit
Systems Protection Board is not going to say we affirm
your dismissal or that -- it's not going to reach the
merits. It's going to -- it's going to get the
paperwork. The government is going to --
JUSTICE BREYER: Fine, fine. What they say
is you have one argument here, that the statute that led
to your dismissal was unconstitutional.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: We do not have jurisdiction
over that; therefore, we say you were rightly dismissed.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Now, they appeal that, and
they say they're right that they didn't, but you do; so,
will you please decide that this statute is
unconstitutional? What's the problem?
MR. SCHWARTZ: Well, that's -- that's an
unusual form of --
JUSTICE BREYER: Ah. It may be unusual. I
just want to know what's the problem. I'm not saying
there isn't one. I want to know what's the problem with
that.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Okay. The problem, if that
is the system that's going to be in place, is that it's
not quite that straightforward. It's -- at first, the
employee has to file his claim in the MSPB with
everybody knowing it's going to be dismissed. He then
appeals that dismissal to the Federal Circuit, which
affirms the dismissal, says, yes, MSPB has no
jurisdiction.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, it doesn't affirm the
dismissal. It says the dismissal was unconstitutional;
go reinstate him.
MR. SCHWARTZ: And then, in a case such as
this one, where -- the raison d'être of this challenge
to Rostker is that the facts have changed. There was
extensive factual discovery in Rostker. So --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought that your point was
and hasn't the Federal Circuit said that the MSPB has no
jurisdiction to decide we have no jurisdiction to
review.
MR. SCHWARTZ: That's what the Federal
Circuit had said.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And that an appellate
court is reviewing a court of first instance. The
scheme that has been proposed would turn the Federal
Circuit into a court of first instance, rather than an
appellate court.
MR. SCHWARTZ: And that is why what's
proposed by the Government is such a departure from the
CSRA scheme as written by Congress, in which MSPB has
first-instance jurisdiction; the Federal Circuit has
appellate jurisdiction.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, isn't your basic
answer to Justice Breyer -- I mean, correct me if I'm
wrong -- you think that the problem is that there's no
record that the Federal Circuit can use to evaluate this
constitutional claim?
MR. SCHWARTZ: That is correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, every day of the week
we get constitutional claims, and people submit all
their arguments in the briefs. Now, occasionally,
there's one you have to have factual development, and I
grant you on that one maybe they could appoint a special
master or, if not, send it back. But they have plenty
of authority to get them to argue the facts. But I
doubt -- I don't know if there are such claims. But I
don't see why that would be a problem. Now, I'm not --
again, I'm not giving you an answer. I'm giving you a
question.
MR. SCHWARTZ: The problem is that that's
not the scheme written by Congress --
JUSTICE BREYER: That's your conclusion, and
I want to know what -- what is the practical reason that
that wouldn't work or why is that such a big problem to
have it work that way? I'm asking for your answer on
that.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Okay. I mean, that's -- that
system could work in some cases. I agree with that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Give me one where it
wouldn't.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Excuse me?
JUSTICE BREYER: Give me one where it
wouldn't. But I don't want to cut into your time. Your
time is up.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, you have to be thinking
about it if you want to respond.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Okay.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought you said this
one.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: This one, because you
want to make a record of all the changes that have
occurred in the service, and you need much more than
briefs. You need to have maybe testimony from people
who have -- who have been working with the changes in
the -- in the opportunities for women in service.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Yes. That's correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought your whole
point was --
MR. SCHWARTZ: This -- this case would be
the example.
If there are no further questions, I'd like
to reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Feigin.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ERIC J. FEIGIN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. FEIGIN: Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
I'd like to begin if I could by addressing the
question asked by Justice Kagan, which is why shouldn't
the scope of the MSPB's authority be the test for
determining whether a claim can be filed in district
court?
And I think using that as the test would
lead to unclear and easily manipulated jurisdictional
rules. Among other things, it often won't be clear up
front whether the MSPB can resolve an employee's claim
or not. A claim that appears at first blush to
challenge a statute's constitutionality might be
resolved, for instance, by interpreting the statute to
avoid the constitutional question, which is something
that the MSPB could do.
JUSTICE KAGAN: We could just ask the
MSPB, Mr. Feigin. If you bring the claim to the MSPB,
and then the MSPB says, no, we have no authority to
adjudicate this claim, then you know that you're in a
world in which the MSPB doesn't have authority, so that
you can go to the district court.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, I don't think that's
consistent with the CSRA, Your Honor, because the way
the CSRA works is that you go to the MSPB first, and
then you go to the Federal Circuit. And I think
everyone agrees that the Federal --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, but the CSRA is
presuming that the MSPB actually can decide something.
MR. FEIGIN: I don't think it's presuming
that any more than 42 U.S.C. 405(g) was presuming that
in Illinois Council or the Mine Act was presuming that
in Thunder Basin Coal. That is, that it's often useful
to have constitutional claims presented to an agency in
the first instance, even if the agency can't resolve
those claims, because it allows the agency to figure
out -- for example, in the case that this Court was
discussing with Mr. Schwartz about circumstances where
there might be nonconstitutional claims and
constitutional claims, the agency might be able to moot
out the case on nonconstitutional grounds. The
constitutional --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Feigin, those --
those statutes to which you refer said that no action on
the claim -- well, this was Social Security benefits --
no action shall be brought under 1331. There is no such
provision here.
MR. FEIGIN: That was true in Illinois
Council and some of the other cases we cite. But in --
in Thunder Basin, the Court was very clear that the
statute was facially silent as to the preclusion of
pre-enforcement claims like the sort that were at issue
in Thunder Basin. The Court nevertheless held that the
claim in Thunder Basin was precluded, and it held that
even though it acknowledged that it might be possible
that the constitutional claim that was raised by the
plaintiff in that case couldn't be addressed in first
instance by the Mine Commission.
Now, the MSPB here is very analogous to the
Mine Commission.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, could you help me with
something? Because I agree with you, Thunder Basin is a
very strong case for you, but McNary is a very strong
case for Mr. Schwartz. And I read those two opinions,
and, frankly, I have a tough time reconciling them. So,
could you tell me how you do?
MR. FEIGIN: We prefer Thunder Basin, Your
Honor.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KAGAN: Yes, I imagine so.
MR. FEIGIN: Your Honor, I think, as we
suggest in our brief, McNary actually presented a very
specialized circumstance in several respects. First of
all, there was a special statutory provision in that
case that limited judicial review of -- in that case, to
the record that had already been developed, and that's
not true here.
Second, the Court was very concerned in
McNary that if the plaintiffs weren't allowed to bring
their claims in district court, they wouldn't be able to
receive any meaningful judicial review at all.
Now, here, the plaintiffs in this case can
get meaningful judicial review from the Federal Circuit,
which everyone agrees has the authority to resolve a
constitutional challenge to a statute.
Now, if I could, I'd like to address I think
some confusion, as the Chief Justice was noting, over
the meaning of the term "jurisdiction" and exactly what
would happen if the Petitioners had brought this case in
the first instance to the MSPB.
Now, before getting into this, I'd like to
acknowledge that when Petitioner Elgin did bring this
case to the MSPB, the government argued that the MSPB
had no jurisdiction. We have conceded below and we
concede here that we were wrong about that. We do not
think Elgin should be prejudiced by the government's
position. If he were to file a motion now to reopen his
case with the MSPB, the Government would support that.
Here's how it should have worked if the
government --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is that your -- is that
your answer for that's why it's an out for their failure
to have gone to the Federal Circuit?
MR. FEIGIN: Our answer -- our answer --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Will they be able -- if
the -- if the commission says, no, we won't reopen, do
they have any avenue now to go to the Federal Circuit?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, they can appeal that
decision to the Federal Circuit, and the Government will
again support the fact that the case ought to be
reopened.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Please finish with your
answer.
MR. FEIGIN: And let me now address what
should have happened when the case went to the MSPB.
The MSPB would have had jurisdiction over the case in
the sense that the challenge to the adverse action is
properly before the MSPB. I think that's very clear
under 5 U.S.C. 7513(d) and 5 U.S.C. 7701(a), which grant
the MSPB jurisdiction over adverse actions under the
CSRA.
Now, the MSPB would not be able to
adjudicate the constitutionality, would not be able to
issue an order striking down a Federal statute. And to
determine that that would be what would be necessary
here in order to grant the plaintiffs relief, what it
would have done is, first of all, it could have accepted
any evidence that the plaintiffs or the government
wished to submit on the constitutional issue in order to
build up the administrative record for review --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Could I ask you to
pause --
MR. FEIGIN: Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- briefly on that
question? So, the government -- if Mr. Schwartz comes
in before the MSPB and says we have three witnesses who
are going to testify only on the constitutional issue; I
have this volume of evidence about what's happening in
the military; it's only relevant in the constitutional
issue; and, you know, it's going to take us 2 days to
present this -- the government is going to say it's okay
with us, right?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: They're not going to
object that that's beyond the jurisdiction of the agency
to decide.
MR. FEIGIN: We will not object that it's
not beyond the jurisdiction of the agency to decide --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I will object. What
is the agency -- taking evidence on an issue that it has
no jurisdiction to decide? That is absolutely weird.
(Laughter.)
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, I think this
is fairly analogous, although not perfectly analogous,
to the fairly common circumstance where, for example, a
district court reserves to itself a decision on the
merits of an action and then delegates to a magistrate
judge decisions on discovery. Now, the only
limitation --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But they're very different
because the magistrate can come back to the district
court judge and say we have a tough one, Your Honor; why
don't you decide it?
I mean, here you're stipulating that the
board has no power to decide this question. Call it
jurisdiction; call it something else. The board cannot
decide the question, but the board is going to now
become the arbiter of discovery disputes? The
factfinder? I mean, "weird" is a good word for it.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, first of all, Your Honor,
the only thing that we think the MSPB lacks authority to
do, the only thing, is to issue an order on the merits
declaring a Federal statute unconstitutional. It is
competent to resolve discovery disputes --
JUSTICE ALITO: How can it -- how can it
deal with discovery without knowing -- without going
into the merits of the constitutional claim? In other
words, the parties can just put in any evidence they
want?
MR. FEIGIN: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: Any evidence they think
might be possibly be relevant to the case, they can put
that in. It can be discovery of anything.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, there may be disputes as
to the scope of discovery. And those -- resolution of
those disputes may touch on the merits. We think the
MSPB can do all of that. The only thing the MSPB lacks
authority to do, according to the MSPB, is to issue an
order striking down a Federal statute as
unconstitutional.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Do you think the MSPB should
find facts with regard to this claim?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, first of all, Your Honor,
I think this case isn't going to require any factfinding
because I think it's worth noting that both judges that
have addressed Petitioners' arguments on the merits, the
district court judge and the concurring judge in the
court of appeals --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, maybe it will and
maybe it won't.
MR. FEIGIN: -- were able to resolve the
claim without factfinding.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I would think, Mr. Feigin,
it would depend on how it's litigated. But in a case in
which there is some factfinding to be made, would the
MSPB have authority to find facts?
MR. FEIGIN: Yes, it would, Your Honor.
Now, I'd like to add that in many cases --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can you go back and tell
me when the government changed its position? It was my
understanding that up until, well, certainly this case
was litigated, the government was taking the position
MSPB has no jurisdiction to pass on the
constitutionality of a statute.
When did the government back away from that
position? When did it say, no, we were wrong; they do
have jurisdiction?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, I need to
separate out two things. First, it is still our
position that the MSPB has no authority to declare a
Federal statute unconstitutional. Now, the government
was taking the position that in cases where an employee
had been removed pursuant to a statutory bar, that the
MSPB lacked jurisdiction to hear an appeal of -- of a
case like that.
And the reason the government argued was not
because the MSPB lacked authority to decide the
constitutionality of a statute, although we believe
that, too, but because the government was arguing
erroneously that an employee who is removed based on a
statutory bar that should have prevented his hiring in
the first place wasn't an employee within the meaning of
U.S.C. 7511. Now the government no longer takes that
U.S.C. 7511 position. We've been consistent on that
in the court of appeals and in this Court, and,
therefore, we believe that the MSPB did properly have
jurisdiction over the action in this case.
Now, when it goes up to the MSPB, the MS --
and after -- the MSPB would then deny relief on the
merits because it would lack the authority to declare a
Federal statute unconstitutional.
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't want to delay you;
so, don't pause too long. But I've just been curious --
where did this rule -- is there a statute or something
that says an agency can't say that this action would be
unconstitutional? Where does that idea come from?
MR. FEIGIN: So, there is not a statute,
Your Honor. This Court has said in several cases that
administrative agencies generally lack the authority to
declare a statute unconstitutional. It's clear from
Thunder Basin that that isn't a constitutional
limitation on the authority of Federal agencies. That
is to say, if Congress wanted to give an agency the
authority to adjudicate the constitutionality of a
statute, it could. And the Court noted that the Mine
Commission in Thunder Basin believed it did have the
authority to adjudicate the constitutionality of
statutes, although the Court didn't reach whether the
Mine Commission was correct about that.
And in this case, the MSPB believes,
consistent with this Court's repeated statements, that
it lacks authority to adjudicate the constitutionality
of statutes.
Now, if the Court decides that the best way
to reconcile this scheme would simply be to say that the
MSPB does have the authority to adjudicate the
constitutionality of statutes, I think that would make
much more sense than the position the Petitioners are
urging. And here's an example, I think, that
illustrates why the position the Petitioners are urging
will lead to confusion of jurisdictional rules and
manipulation of jurisdictional rules.
So, if you imagine two employees who were
fired by an employing agency for leaking information to
the press, confidential information to the press, they
both challenge their removals, but they raise slightly
different arguments. The first one says, well, I don't
think the employment statute should be construed to
allow me to be fired for this reason because I think the
employment statute should be construed with First
Amendment principles in mind and shouldn't reach this
case.
The second one says I concede that the
employment statutes allow my firing for this reason, but
I think those -- I think that statute is
unconstitutional as applied.
Now, those are really the same claim and --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, Mr. Feigin, they might
well be the same claim, but if the MSPB can decide the
one and cannot decide the other, that's a relevant
distinction. Now, you might be right in what you said.
Well, maybe one answer is that the MSPB can decide both.
But as long as the MSPB can decide the one or the other,
it seems -- I mean, that's -- it seems like a sensible
dividing line.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, even if the
MSPB lacks the authority to strike down a Federal
statute, I still think it might be able to adjudicate
the claim of the employee, the second employee, who
brings it as an as-applied challenge because the Court
would -- I'm sorry; not the Court -- the MSPB could
decide that case on the same constitutional avoidance
grounds that are -- that are urged by the first
employee.
That is, they really are the same case.
Before striking down a statute as constitutional, this
Court all the time, it instructs lower courts, and this
would be true of agencies, too, should interpret the
statute to avoid any significant constitutional
question.
JUSTICE ALITO: But they're not at all the
same claim. They're related, but one says the statute
means something; and insofar as it's applied to a
particular situation, it's unconstitutional. The other
one says it doesn't mean that.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, I think they
are the same in the respect that, as I was just saying
to Justice Kagan, if the MSPB --
JUSTICE ALITO: When we -- just let me rephrase
that. If -- if this Court adopts a certain
interpretation based on the principle of constitutional
avoidance, do you think the Court is rewriting the
statute?
MR. FEIGIN: No, Your Honor, but there may
be ambiguity in a statute that the Court interprets to
avoid a significant constitutional question. So, maybe
I can give another example that might flesh this out a
little bit.
There's a statute, 5 U.S.C. 7311, that bars
from Federal employment people who have participated in
strikes. Now, it's easy to think of an employee who
raises a factual or statutory challenge to that claim.
He says that what he did wasn't participating in a
strike, either factually or shouldn't be considered
participating in a strike within the scope of the
statute. And he also challenges the statute on
constitutional grounds.
And the most common case brought to the
MSPB, in our experience, that raises a constitutional
claim also raises the sort of factual and statutory
claims I was just suggesting. Now, the MSPB might
resolve that first question -- those first set of
questions in such a way as to avoid the constitutional
question by saying that the statute doesn't reach the
conduct that the particular employee engaged in.
And if we imagine instead that the employee
had only brought the constitutional claim, which would
be kind of a strange way to litigate because he'd be
giving up arguments on which he might win, I still think
that the MSPB could decide, look, before we send this
off to the Federal Circuit and decide that the only way
we can grant you relief is to say that a Federal statute
is unconstitutional, which is something we don't think
we can do, we should at least take a look at the statute
to see whether these somewhat ambiguous terms,
"participate" and "strike," actually do apply to your
conduct.
And by failing to give the MSPB the first
crack at doing that, what --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is there any such
possibility in this case? I mean, the statute says men
must register for the draft. There's no way to avoid --
to reread that statute to say anything other than that.
So, I don't -- I don't see any constitutional avoidance.
MR. FEIGIN: I agree with that, Justice
Ginsburg. In this case, we don't think the
constitutional question can be avoided, and we don't
think the MSPB could have granted relief. But I don't
think the Court should essentially throw everything out
just because of this case. Their position is going to
make for unclear jurisdictional rules, and employees
aren't going to know where they're entitled to go or
where they're supposed to go, because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: To go back to your
interesting suggestion that the board should decide the
constitutional issue, I've just been spending a little
bit of time going through the Act, and you're
certainly -- it doesn't appear that there's anything in
the Act that precludes them from granting any
appropriate relief with respect to an unlawful
discharge. Am I correct?
MR. FEIGIN: That's correct, Your Honor.
The statute does not, as we explain in our brief, draw
any distinction between the types of arguments that
would be made in seeking to set aside an unlawful
discharge --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Although, that's weird in
another way, isn't it, Mr. Feigin, because, can we
really imagine in the real world the MSPB deciding that
the Selective Service Act is unconstitutional? I mean,
what do they know about that question?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, as everyone agrees and as
Mr. Schwartz was discussing with the Court, the MSPB
does have expertise on -- in constitutional claims. The
MSPB are a set of -- a set of persons that are appointed
by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, but this is a
question, and -- and you can -- I take the point that
I'm just talking about this case. But this is a
question about whether women should have to register for
the draft in the same way as men should. That goes to
defense policy. It goes to equal protection law. It
doesn't seem to have anything to do with -- with
workplace issues of the kind that the MSPB is expert on.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, I think that's right,
Justice Kagan, but the CSRA doesn't draw distinctions
between the types of arguments that are being made. It
draws distinctions, as Justice Sotomayor was just
suggesting, about what sorts of personnel actions it
covers. And I think --
JUSTICE ALITO: Congress is -- Congress is
unhappy when this Court holds a statute
unconstitutional.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE ALITO: Do you think it's -- it's
really likely that they intended for the MS -- MSPRB to
have the authority to declare its acts unconstitutional?
MR. FEIGIN: I don't, Your Honor. And
that's why our primary position is that the MSPB does
not have that authority. However --
JUSTICE BREYER: Why? I mean, it sounds --
really what the argument boils down to is -- is if we
accept your position, there's a kind of procedural
complexity and anomaly. And your argument is that his
position's worse. And, yours is also fairly bad.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: So, that's his point. So,
I mean, that's -- but that's why I wondered. I mean,
U.S. magistrates, all -- tax courts, all kinds of people
as a preliminary matter have jobs where they say we
think a statute is unconstitutional. I suppose
millions. I don't know how many. So, is this coming
that they can't do it from some kind of lore from
Kenneth Davis or something or -- what's -- what's the
basis of this? And wouldn't it be simpler if you just
said it says they can take appropriate relief? They can
take appropriate relief, period. End of the matter.
MR. FEIGIN: It's coming from statements by
this Court and also statements by Kenneth Davis --
JUSTICE BREYER: Are there --
MR. FEIGIN: -- in 1958 his administrative
law treatise.
JUSTICE BREYER: So, somebody quoted Kenneth
Davis in 1958 and wrote it into an opinion in a holding?
MR. FEIGIN: No. The Court usually just
sort of says this in passing. And the Court made very
clear --
JUSTICE BREYER: So, Kenneth Davis said this
in 1958?
MR. FEIGIN: The Court made very clear in
Thunder Basin this is just a general presumption --
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. FEIGIN: -- about the authority of
administrative agencies. It doesn't have to be --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Johnson v. Robison is one
such case. I don't recall in that case anybody
referring to any administrative law treatise.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, that treatise is cited,
for example, by -- the Court cites the Mine Commission
cases that themselves cite the treatise. But the point
is, Justice Breyer, even if our rule does have a couple
of hiccups with it, we do think it is much superior to
the rule that Petitioners are urging because there are
clear jurisdictional rules.
If I could follow up --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: If I could just
focus there. In your brief, you're quite careful, and
you have been today, to talk to even if the MSPB lacked
this authority. It's your position that the MSPB does
lack this authority in fact; right? It's not just the
MSPB's position.
MR. FEIGIN: Yes, we agree with the MSPB's
position that it lacks the authority to strike down a
statute as constitutional. However, if it is a
difference between adopting Petitioners' position or
holding that the MSPB has the authority to declare a
statute unconstitutional, we think Congress would have
greatly preferred the latter because that preserves
the -- the basic idea of the CSRA, which was to
consolidate and streamline judicial review.
As this Court recognized in Fausto, Congress
specifically did not want challenges to adverse actions
to go through district court into the court of appeals
and get a duplicative and wasteful two-layer judicial
review. Instead --
JUSTICE ALITO: If anybody who drafted or
voted for the Civil Service Reform Act had thought about
a case like this, where it's a pure question of law, a
facial challenge to the constitutionality of a statute,
do you think they would have said, well, the way we
think that this should be handled is this scheme that
you have proposed?
MR. FEIGIN: I think they would have
preferred it to a scheme where, first of all, the claims
go to district court, which is precisely what the CSRA
was trying to eliminate; and, second of all, to a scheme
where it becomes confusing and dependent on precisely
how a plaintiff frames his argument which court winds up
entertaining the claim.
Now --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you know of any
other -- any other case where an appellate court has
authority to decide a question that the court of first
instance lacked authority to decide? I mean, you say
MSPB says it has no authority, and you agree with that.
I couldn't think of another case where a
court of appeals, which is a court of review, not first
view, substitutes itself for an incompetent court of
first instance.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, first of all,
we cite several examples of courts of appeals deciding
constitutional questions in the first instance, at pages
to 38 in our brief. Another example would be this
Court's decision in INS v. Chadha, the legislative veto
case, which came up from the Board of Immigration
Appeals. The Board of Immigration Appeals said it
didn't have authority to adjudicate the separation of
powers question. It was reviewed by the Ninth Circuit
and then reviewed by this Court.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Feigin, could I go back
to the Chief Justice's question about what actually
would happen in the MSPB? Presumably in this case, what
the plaintiffs seek to do is to develop an extensive
factual record showing how much has changed in the
military in terms of the -- the -- the role that women
play in the military. And that it's almost impossible
to litigate this kind of claim without having such a
record. That's the entire basis for -- for arguing that
Rostker is outmoded, given current military operations.
So, how could the -- the plaintiff develop that record
that is needed to litigate this claim?
MR. FEIGIN: You would develop it in the
MSPB, either in the first instance on the initial
appeal, or the MSPB could let it go to the Federal
Circuit without having developed an administrative
record. And the Federal Circuit if, unlike either of
the judges to address the merits in this case, believed
that a factual record was necessary, it could remand to
the MSPB with instructions that the MSPB take evidence
and develop an administrative record.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't like that at all.
That's ridiculous. Send it back to an agency that has
no jurisdiction over the question, you know, make
factfindings on this -- on this question over which you
have no jurisdiction.
Can you give any example where -- where that
occurs elsewhere? Why wouldn't the -- the preferable
course be to appoint a master, have the Federal Circuit
appoint a master to do it?
MR. FEIGIN: Your Honor, if the Court
believes that that is a better way to reconcile the
scheme, we wouldn't oppose that either, but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I don't like
that.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I mean, the idea
of -- the special masters floating around freely every
time you get one of these cases -- I mean, what --
inevitably what's going to happen is that you're going
to have a more or less permanent special master who gets
all these things. You're not going to appoint 85
special masters if there are 85 of these sorts of
claims. It seems to me you've got an agency there
that's expert in the interrelation between the different
provisions in the statute. And, you know, why don't --
why don't -- they make factfindings all the time in
areas within their authority to decide. It seems to me
it's ready-made for sending these things back.
MR. FEIGIN: That was our position, Your
Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but -- but this is not
an area that's within their expertise to decide. What
do they know about -- about the military? And when is
that ever -- ever relevant to anything that they decide?
It's utterly irrelevant to their work. And you're
telling them to take --
MR. FEIGIN: Well, first of all, Your Honor,
I think it's actually going to be a fairly rare case in
which a challenge to a legislative act of passing a
statute is really going to turn on some sort of factual
finding -- like a credibility --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, but this is that case.
MR. FEIGIN: -- like a credibility
determination or something that's uniquely within the
competence of a trial court or an agency with trial
court-like powers.
I think what might be more common, Justice
Kagan, is that you might need to develop some sort of
administrative record. But once the evidence is
submitted, the conclusions one would draw from that
evidence will be fairly obvious. For example, in
Rostker v. Goldberg, there was discovery, there was
evidence submitted, and then the parties were able to
stipulate to the facts that would set forth review.
So, in this case, for example, I don't think
there's really going to be a dispute that the MSPB is
going to have to resolve about what sorts of positions
women can serve in, in the military. I think the
government is going to be willing to stipulate to that.
JUSTICE ALITO: I suspect that if this were
litigated in district court, the government would move
to dismiss and would take the position that it doesn't
matter; even if women can now do 99 percent of the --
the things that are done in the military, the
Registration Act is still constitutional. Wouldn't you
take that position?
MR. FEIGIN: Your Honor, I don't --
JUSTICE ALITO: Would you say that if -- if
it can be proven that they've -- that women are now --
that the percentage is now high enough, the statute may
be unconstitutional?
Anyway, assuming that you might take that
position, then -- and you might win on that -- then what
would be the point of having all of this discovery that
you're talking about?
MR. FEIGIN: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: All of this -- all of this
development of the factual record? What -- what sense
does it make to develop a big factual record before you
know whether it's even -- whether it even makes any
difference?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, the way to
deal with that would be to just have a very quick stop
in the MSPB which assures itself, yes, this is a
constitutional challenge to a statute. As the Court
recognized in Weinberger v. Salfi, for example, it is
useful to have -- at least exhaust the claim with the
agency for that purpose. Yes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is there any rule of the
board that stops a litigant from making a proffer -- an
offer of proof?
MR. FEIGIN: There is not, Your Honor, and,
in fact, it would be --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Wouldn't that be the
proper way of doing it, if you're going to go up on a
constitutional claim? Make your offer of proof, and
then the Federal Circuit can decide if it needs more
evidence or not.
MR. FEIGIN: That's where I was going with
this, Your Honor. In fact, the MSPB has a special
rule -- I believe it's 5 C.S.R. 1201.61; it's cited in
our brief -- where even if the MSPB decided not to
accept evidence for some reason, a description of the
evidence would go in the record and, therefore, be
available for the Federal Circuit.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if -- I guess
that the party doesn't -- doesn't even have to raise its
constitutional claim before the MSPB, does it?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, the Federal --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I mean, it's pretty
odd to say that you've somehow waived a claim you
couldn't pursue.
MR. FEIGIN: Well, the Federal Circuit has
in analogous cases decided constitutional claims that
weren't raised in front of an agency when the agency
couldn't decide them. In the Government's view, it
would make sense to exhaust, for the reasons I was
explaining earlier and to Justice Ginsburg, which is
that it may be that the MSPB finds that the statute
doesn't really cover the situation. Now, I acknowledge
that's not going to happen in this case; it is clear
that section 3328 required these people's removals.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. You're -- you're
actually proposing that you have to exhaust questions
that the agency has no authority to decide?
MR. FEIGIN: Yes, Your Honor. I think the
Court has recognized --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Curiouser and curiouser.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA: If you don't bring before
the agency a question that the agency says it has no
authority to decide, you have forfeited your ability?
MR. FEIGIN: Well, Your Honor, I don't think
what should happen in this -- in a case like this is
that the employee appeals to the MSPB and says nothing
at all. The employee should appeal to the MSPB and at
least say what his constitutional claim is. And the
benefit of that, as the Court has recognized in, for
example, Weinberger v. Salfi, is that the agency can
assure itself, yes, it's a constitutional claim that is
beyond my authority to resolve, and there's no other way
for me to resolve it.
Another benefit of presenting these claims
to the agency is the MSPB hasn't been crystal clear
about exactly where its authority begins and ends; and
neither the Federal Circuit nor this Court has addressed
that question at all. And allowing the agency in the
first instance to determine whether it has the authority
to grant the plaintiff the relief he is seeking has a
great benefit of clarifying what the scope of the MSPB's
authority is. It makes a lot more sense for the MSPB
and the Federal Circuit to be deciding what the scope of
the MSPB's authority is than it is to file a claim in
the District of Massachusetts and have that district
court and then the First Circuit debating about what the
proper scope of the MSPB's authority is.
I think the CSRA expresses a clear
preference that appeals of adverse actions like this go
through the MSPB and to the Federal Circuit, so that
they can decide those kinds of questions. Again --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Where did -- where did
Salfi go? The agency couldn't decide the constitutional
question. So, what's the next stop? Was it a court of
appeals or the district court?
MR. FEIGIN: In Salfi, Your Honor?
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes.
MR. FEIGIN: That would have been in
district court. However, under 42 U.S.C. 405(g), which
was at issue in Salfi and Illinois Council, the district
court is performing essentially appellate-style review
of the agency's findings. That is, any -- the preferred
course is that any additional factfindings that would be
necessary would be made on remand and not taken by the
district court.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Not on the constitutional
question.
MR. FEIGIN: I think it would still be the
preferred course that the agency would do any further
factfinding that would be necessary in the first
instance.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Why? The district court
is -- that's what it's equipped to do. That's what it
does all the time. And --
MR. FEIGIN: Well, under 405(g), rather than
31, the preferred form of factfinding is in the agency
and remands to the agency for further factfinding,
rather than development of the facts in the district
court in the first instance.
In any event, the Court has recognized that
in Thunder Basin, for example, where review in the first
instance was in the court of appeals, that the court of
appeals had adequate authority to give meaningful
judicial review to a constitutional claim that an
agency, in that case the Mine Commission, by hypothesis
could not decide.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you,
Mr. Feigin.
Mr. Schwartz, you have 2 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF HARVEY A. SCHWARTZ
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
MR. SCHWARTZ: Thank you. We're not here
for an exercise in which side can best rewrite the Civil
Service Reform Act so that the Petitioners' claims can
fit in it. What we're here for is to determine whether
the background rule that Federal courts have Federal
question jurisdiction, under the common law and under
section 1331, to rule on claims challenging the
constitutionality of an act of Congress.
Now, the fall-back position is that that
jurisdiction remains. What this Court is -- is tasked
to do is to see whether it's fairly discernible from the
Civil Service Reform Act as it was written by Congress,
not as it's twisted or amended or bent to fit these
claims in it, but whether the Civil Service Reform Act
as written by Congress revokes that background Federal
court jurisdiction.
And I suggest that the gyrations that have
been discussed about, well, we could do this, we could
go up, we could go down, we could do these odd
procedures, show that it is not fairly discernible that
Congress intended to somehow try to shoehorn these
claims within the CSRA framework. And for that reason,
not because the Government's system is better, not
because the system that I'm proposing works better or is
faster, but because there is no fairly discernible
evidence from the Civil Service Reform Act, as written
by Congress, that Congress intended to revoke this very
fundamental jurisdiction of the district courts.
This is a Marbury case, not a Bivens case.
This is fundamental jurisdiction, the power of the
Federal court to say that Congress, not some Federal
agency, but that Congress acted in violation of the
Constitution. And I suggest that it -- the Court should
act carefully before deciding that Congress took that
fundamental jurisdiction away from the district courts,
and that is not fairly discernible that Congress did
that through the wording of the Civil Service Reform
Act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. SCHWARTZ: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The case is
submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:03 a.m., the case in the
