IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
LOS ANGELES COUNTY FLOOD :
CONTROL DISTRICT, :
Petitioner : No. 11-460
v. :
NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE :
COUNCIL, INC., ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 4, 2012
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:11 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
TIMOTHY T. COATES, ESQ., Los Angeles, California; on
behalf of Petitioner.
PRATIK A. SHAH, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
for United States, as amicus curiae.
AARON COLANGELO, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
TIMOTHY T. COATES, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PRATIK A. SHAH, ESQ.
For United States, as amicus curiae 24
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
AARON COLANGELO, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 35
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
TIMOTHY T. COATES, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 59
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:11 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next in Case 11-460, Los Angeles Flood Control District
v. The Natural Resources Defense Council.
Mr. Coates.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF TIMOTHY T. COATES
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. COATES: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In this case, the Ninth Circuit held that a
discharge from a point source under the Clean Water Act
occurred in the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers,
based upon the fact that water moved from channelized
portions of the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers into
what it termed, quote, "naturally occurring portions of
those rivers."
The court emphasized, in fact, that the
discharge occurred because it moved through the concrete
portions. And in the words of the court itself, found
at the cert appendix at 44, it was, "again discharged to
the rivers," and the "again" meaning that it was
prior -- at prior time, it was in the rivers.
This is completely contrary to the Court's
decision in Miccosukee Tribe, where the Court held that
there cannot be a discharge for purposes of the NPDES
permit program and the Clean Water Act, based upon the
mere transfer of water within a single body of water.
All the parties to this case agree that is
the correct rule. Virtually all the amici agree that is
the correct rule. And it's our view that that is
dispositive of this case. It is the only live issue
before this Court from the Ninth Circuit, and it
dictates --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why don't we just
remand and let it sort it out under the right
understanding of the legal rule? Which is basically
what the government is saying, with an added twist
because it thinks there is another legal question that I
think the Ninth Circuit has answered, but we could go
back and forth on it.
MR. COATES: Correct. At minimum, a
reversal is -- is warranted, without a doubt, but I
think given the record in this case is abundantly clear
about what the claims were before the Ninth Circuit and
what's going on with these monitoring stations.
I mean, these monitoring stations are
clearly within the rivers themselves. There is just no
dispute about that. Even the Ninth Circuit's opinion,
like I said, the language of the opinion
suggests that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Everybody agrees.
MR. COATES: Correct. And the reason why I
don't think there is an open remand is because there is
nothing further in the record, really, to argue about.
At minimum, of course, we would prefer
reversal, and it would take an open remand. But I
think, given the record in this case, the only live
claim before the Ninth Circuit was this discharge theory
when they found it in the middle of rivers; and, that
being resolved against the Respondents, there is no
other live issue.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it seems to me
that they present a very direct syllogism. You have a
permit that sets these monitoring stations where they
are. The monitoring stations show exceedances, you have
violated your permit. What -- what's wrong with that?
MR. COATES: Well, because the nature of the
monitoring here -- for example, when you look at the
permitting question, it doesn't say the monitoring of
any permittee. If you look at the permit where it talks
about the mass emissions monitoring stations, it talks
about measuring discharges and compliance from the MS4,
not any individual permittee's MS4.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Right. But I
understand the argument to be that that's the problem
that your permit imposes on you; in other words, that
this is where the monitoring station is supposed to be.
What is it monitoring, if not discharges from the MS4,
for which you're responsible?
The government suggests that there could be
different rules about whether you have to show the
allocation or if that's your responsibility.
MR. COATES: But it’s the -- Well, I think,
again, the -- the rules say that you look at the permit's
terms to interpret it.
And the Ninth Circuit did look at the
permit's terms. I mean, it -- it dealt with this
argument, and it noted that there are several factors in
the permit that suggest that it didn't relieve the
Respondents of the obligation of having to show an
actual discharge of water --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, you don't --
you don't question that there was an actual discharge.
The storm sewer system in Los Angeles hasn't been shut
down, right?
MR. COATES: Correct. But, again --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So there are
discharges, right?
MR. COATES: But not discharges of
pollutants, and that's what's reported.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You don't dispute
that there was at least some small amount of pollutant,
even below the -- the permit level, from your point
sources, do you?
MR. COATES: Well, we don't know that. But
the -- but the point I want to make --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I'm asking you
whether -- I mean, isn't it -- doesn't common sense
suggest -- you have asked in your permit for a limit on
how much of a --
MR. COATES: Sure.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: -- particular
pollutant you can discharge.
MR. COATES: But, again --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You wouldn't do
that, unless you expected to discharge some.
MR. COATES: You might -- You might do it
sometimes, you might do it others, you might do it in
concentrations that would cause or contribute to the
exceedances; but you still have to have a discharge that
causes or contributes to the exceedances.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, why did you
put the monitoring sources where they are, if that
wasn't what was going to measure your compliance with
the permit?
MR. COATES: Because you're required, in
a -- in a system-wide permit like this, to suggest -- to
propose monitoring which is subject to the approval of
the regulatory agency. And it's a question of
monitoring of what? Not monitoring of any individual
permittee's discharge. In fact, it's not designed for
that. We even presented evidence in the district court
to that effect.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, the government
says that that question -- you're saying, I understand,
there are other discharges -- well, you're by far the
dominant discharger, but I understand there are others,
and they may contribute as well to what the monitoring
station says.
But the government's position is that, well,
that's how you wrote the permit without any allocation;
and that whatever allocation issues you have may be
between you and the other dischargers, but that doesn't
affect the showing of liability.
MR. COATES: Well, except for the fact that
the permit terms themselves say that each permittee is
only responsible for its own discharge. If you read the
permit in the general fashion that the Respondents wish,
then -- then you're not responsible only for your own
discharge.
It's essentially you're in immediately and
responsible for all of them, until you prove otherwise.
And that's just not how the permit reads.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where is that? I
know we've got the permit. Where does it read that way?
MR. COATES: Let's see. At the Joint
Appendix, page 93, G, 4.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What page again?
MR. COATES: Volume I of the Joint Appendix,
page 93, and it's the fourth paragraph. And it's at the
very bottom of the fourth paragraph. "Each permittee is
responsible only for discharge for which it is the
operator."
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose that the district
has 85 percent of the water by volume that's put into
this river, and then you have this high pollution index.
Does that make it an easier case for the challengers?
Or is that just irrelevant?
MR. COATES: It's just irrelevant, unless
you show that, in that bulk of water, there is a higher
concentration of pollutants.
You could have a major discharger that
undertakes more vigorous pollution controls than other
smaller discharges. It doesn't necessarily show that
you're adding more pollutants, necessarily, or how those
pollutants contribute to exceedances measured at the
mass emissions monitoring stations.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I have one different
question. This is hypothetical. It's not in the case.
It's just for me to understand that.
Suppose you have the river, and part of it
is a concrete bank, and then there's a more natural
bedding and then another concrete bank.
And when the -- in the dry season, they fix
the concrete bank, but they use bad concrete. And a lot
of pollutants are coming out of the concrete, but it is
in the river. Is that a discharge under this statute?
MR. COATES: I don't believe so. Although,
I could --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Would there be any --
MR. COATES: -- imagine circumstances where
you create an outfall unintentionally by -- by
funneling. I mean, I think you're talking about just
natural erosion of turbidity or whatever into the river.
I don't believe that would necessarily be a point
source.
It might be a non-point source pollution,
but I don't believe that would necessarily be a point
source if it's just inadvertently -- you know,
deteriorating in the river.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And that's -- that's a
separate provision of the statute, nonpoint source
pollutions.
MR. COATES: Well, it doesn't sound like --
you know, the -- the way it's defined under 1362 is a --
you know, like, enclosed conveyance that -- that
discharges --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, that's not in this
case.
MR. COATES: Yes, that's not in this case.
But I --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: It was just a background,
background question for you.
MR. COATES: Yes, but I think that that --
that probably wouldn't be a discharge from a point
source.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Coates, I am -- I am
still perplexed.
MR. COATES: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You say -- and it seems to
be correct, that each -- each alleged polluter is only
responsible for his own pollution. But you also say
that these monitors are so situated that it is
impossible to tell from the monitor who is responsible
for the pollution; is that right?
MR. COATES: I think that -- I think that is
right, but you look for the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So whose fault is that?
MR. COATES: Well, the reason why -- the
reason why that that's there is to measure, essentially,
the health of these rivers so that you can fine-tune the
MS4 permit -- the systemwide permit, and so that you can
gauge general water quality standards, and if necessary,
you can fine-tune it to try and measure individual
permittees.
And we note that there is a renewed permit.
It still has the monitoring stations in it, so under the
Ninth Circuit's decision, we would still be discharging
at those monitoring stations. But it does provide for
outfall monitoring at representative outfalls for
individual permittees to do precisely that kind of
correlation that we are talking about.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What -- what it is -- what
is it that provides for that?
MR. COATES: There is a renewed permit. The
permits are renewed every 5 years. This is -- we are on
the third permit now; this is the fourth; it's gone 10
years. The renewed permit continues the mass emission
station. So, as I mentioned, we are still discharging
in middle of the river, as far as the Ninth Circuit is
concerned.
But it does have provisions for additional
monitoring near outfalls, along the banks of the rivers,
for various permittees, so that, in the future, you
could look at that testing and go, boy, your outfall is
producing X, Y, and Z.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So this was a regulatory
void?
MR. COATES: This was a --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: A regulatory void that
these -- that there was no requirement previously that
you monitor the outfalls?
MR. COATES: Monitoring, correct, that there
be specific outfall monitoring. It's a regulatory --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So how do you -- how do
you envision this permit was -- by the way, just one
side question and then on to this one.
I thought the Ninth Circuit basically
endorsed your view that, under the permit, you're not --
you're only responsible for your own pollution.
MR. COATES: That is correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So it has resolved this
issue?
MR. COATES: It has resolved this issue.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So that's
why I ask why remand and why you're saying why remand.
MR. COATES: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But putting that aside,
how do you think the system was supposed to work before?
MR. COATES: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Did you have any
obligation, once you saw the excess pollutants, to start
the reiteration process, to try to figure out who was
the cause of this?
MR. COATES: Well, if they attribute a -- a
violation to a particular permittee -- for example, the
district court noted and the Ninth Circuit re-emphasized
it that you could at least, if you wanted to try and hook
it to a single permittee, you could at least try and
sample at an outfall for that permittee and then provide
evidence that that contributed to exceedances.
They didn't do that here, in the lower
court.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You mean the Respondents
could have done that here?
MR. COATES: The Respondents could have done
that here. They did not argue that they did that in the
Ninth Circuit. They abandoned that -- that contention.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So what -- what
percentage of discharges come from you, as opposed to
the other members of the MS4 --
MR. COATES: We have -- we have the most
infrastructure. I don't know the specific percentage,
but bear in mind that there are 1,400 other entities
upstairs --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Give me an estimate.
MR. COATES: You know, I can't in terms of
total water volume. But we are -- we are the largest
player in that portion of the system. I'm not going to
downplay that.
What I'm saying is that there is no
necessary correlation between that and, ipso facto,
you're the one causing the exceedances at the monitoring
stations; that, again, there has to be something
traceable to our discharge that contributes to those
exceedances.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What -- what goes
into these discharges, besides the rainwater runoff?
MR. COATES: Here, it's just stormwater.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Okay.
MR. COATES: I mean, a municipal separate
storm sewer system --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So your -- your
hypothesis is, in some of these minority dischargers,
that, for some reason, their rainwater would have a
different amount of pollutants than your rainwater?
MR. COATES: Well, they could -- they could
very well have storm discharge different -- Yes, there
are other discharges upstream from -- there are
industrial sites that discharge water into the L.A.
River, so -- no, absolutely. Absolutely. And again --
you know, a large jurisdiction, we may be more proactive
in terms of doing pollution control as well.
There is just no automatic correlation to
that. And I think, as the district court said -- you
know, it's not so much to ask to at least sample at one
outfall to try and show that kind of correlation, so you
can show exceedances at the margin.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry, you mean --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Circuit's error -- was the
Ninth Circuit's error here a factual one, because it was
based on the location of the stations? Or was it a legal
one because it misinterpreted our Miccosukee case?
MR. COATES: It -- it's a legal one. I
don't believe it's a factual mistake, for a couple of
reasons. One, the language that -- that I cited, that's
in the cert appendix at 44, where it talks about the
water, again, discharged to the river, suggests that
that water was in the river, and now, it's moving
through our concrete channels and it's, again,
discharged into the river. Its distinction that it
draws is that there is something different because the
MS4 is an intrastate manmade construction, as opposed to
a naturally occurring river, which talks about the
distinction being made in that regard.
And finally, the record is just abundantly
clear on where these monitoring stations are. The
opinion itself at cert appendix, page 18, footnote 4,
cites our website as the location of the monitoring --
for the location of the monitoring stations. And that
website clearly says they are within the Los Angeles and
San Gabriel Rivers. And, in fact, appellant's brief --
the Respondents' brief in the lower court, specifically
said the same thing.
And the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You just said there were
polluters upstream. Are those industrial polluters
upstream --
MR. COATES: There are -- there are --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- or industrial
facilities, are they within your MS4?
MR. COATES: They are not. They have
separate NPDES permits.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But what you're saying
is that there are outfalls from different people into
the same river.
MR. COATES: Correct. Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So we don't
know whether the outfall is from your MS4 or from some
other source?
MR. COATES: Correct, because they are all
upstream of -- of the monitoring station.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So you say they have
two remedies, that the NRDC, if they think you are
polluting, could have done -- could do two things. One,
they could go and get some expert to try to get a sample
or to make an estimate, based on what he knows about the
industrial sites that it's actually your storm drains
that are polluting. That's one thing they could do; you
say they didn't do it.
Okay. The second thing they could do is
they go to the permitting authority, and they could say,
will you please ask the L.A. County to monitor the
actual storm drains when they come in, a sample thereof.
And you're saying they could have done that, but they
don't have to now because, now, that is a requirement.
And we are doing it.
MR. COATES: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay.
MR. COATES: That's correct. That's
correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where -- where is
that requirement?
MR. COATES: Excuse me?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where is that
requirement that you're now doing?
MR. COATES: We -- in our reply brief, we
cite the fact that a -- a -- the permit has just been
renewed. We are waiting for the final version to go
online and to see it. I think what we cite to the Court
is the last one that was before the regional board. It
lines -- it lines out.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So you are not doing
it now?
MR. COATES: We are not doing it now. I
mean, there's -- the new permit is technically
effective. It could be stayed if someone challenges it.
I think it's open until it's challenged until December
11th. But under the renewed permit, there is outfall
monitoring -- specific outfall monitoring. Now, the
mass emission station is still there, and under the
Ninth Circuit's opinion, we are still discharging there
and responsible for the exceedances.
So -- but that's the type of monitoring that
plaintiffs want, and that's in the new permit. If they
want it in the last permit, they could have disputed it;
they could have contested the last permit. But they
didn't do so. This is a fine-tuning program. I mean,
municipal stormwater is a complex issue. Congress
didn't treat it the same way it did industrial
stormwater.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is it your position that
the rivers -- the two rivers in question are outside the
MS4? I thought there was a suggestion in the
government's brief that you could have both the river
and the MS4 that could cover the same area.
MR. COATES: We have -- in the lower courts,
the district personnel refer to the channelized portion
as part of our MS4 because it's all flood control to us.
However, we have never said it's all the same for
purposes of a discharge. We've been very careful about
that, that, for a discharge from a point source, an
outfall, not the monitoring stations -- in fact, in the
district court, plaintiff somewhat argued that theory,
the monitoring stations, when you're MS4, they're
exceedances; ergo, exceedances in your MS4.
And we pointed out, under Miccosukee, there
is no discharge of water. There's no discharge because
it's merely transferring water as water moves past the
monitoring stations. And then --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What was the purpose of
having the monitoring station if nothing can be done?
And are -- the monitoring shows, yes, there is a lot of
pollutants in there, and we know that at least some of
them have to be ascribed to the district. But you say,
unless you -- you show the outflow, that it comes from
there, no liability.
Why shouldn't it be that, given there is
going to be a contribution that the district is making,
that the district should have the burden of showing, no,
there are all these other ones out there, so our
percentage is X, not the whole thing?
MR. COATES: Well, again, the -- the Water
Act makes you responsible for a discharge in violation
of permit terms, so you have to have a discharge by the
permittee.
The permit terms itself are not written in
that fashion. Again, it says we are only responsible
for our own discharge. Could you write a permit that
way? Perhaps. But this permit was not written that
way.
And, in fact, the Ninth Circuit agreed with
us on that. The permit language is not tricky on that.
You could have permittee monitoring. You could. And
that's what the renewed permit does. But that is not
this permit.
The regional board -- as I said, it's part
of a process. There have been three permits over the
last -- since 1990. And we have a fourth permit, and it
has some new provisions to fine tune it for precisely
this reason.
I note that -- the biggest dispute we seem
to have on this monitoring issue -- and -- and it's one
that I think the discussion we are having bears out, is
that it is not a straightforward issue; that when you
look at the statute itself, the Statute 1342(p)(3)
distinguishes between industrial stormwater dischargers
and municipal stormwater discharges.
Now, I think it is worth looking at that
provision because, if you look at (a), and that talks
about industrial dischargers, it says they have to meet
every requirement of this provision. And if you go to
42(a), it includes everything, including the
monitoring requirements of 33 U.S.C. 1318.
But if you look at 1342(p)(3), subdivision
(B), which talks about municipal stormwater, you do not
see that language. You do not see that "must comply"
with every other provision of this section. It doesn't
say that.
It only has, essentially, three
requirements, which is these permits can be granted on a
system-wide or jurisdiction-wide basis, you have to only
allow stormwater, and that the -- must provide to try
and manage pollutants to the maximum extent practicable.
And that's the sum total of it.
So I don't think you can assume that these
are identical monitoring requirements. It's, at the
very least, a complex question. I think it's one that
would have behooved the Court to be able to obtain more
amicus assistance on. And part of it is the way that
this was raised to this Court, that this was a proper
issue for a cross-petition.
And the only justification I've seen for
this is I saw a letter come to the Court advising it of
two cases, I think, LeTulle v. Scofield -- I don't know
if it's LeTulle or LeTulle -- and Ryerson v. United
States. And neither of one of those suggest that this
is an appropriate issue for the Court.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is -- is your description
of the statute meant to conclude, or does it -- does it
conclude, that these outsource monitoring stations which
exist under the new permit are not really required?
MR. COATES: Well, not necessarily
statutorily required, but they are part of the -- the
permit, yes. They're in there. They're in there.
We're not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, I understood that.
Yes.
MR. COATES: We've agreed -- we've agreed --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Can you put in the permit
stuff that the statute does not require?
MR. COATES: Well, you can -- I think you
can agree to terms in a permit, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. COATES: Yeah.
And with that, I would reserve the balance
of my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Shah.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PRATIK A. SHAH,
FOR UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE
MR. SHAH: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The answer to the question presented in this
case is both straightforward and undisputed. Under this
Court's decision in Miccosukee, no addition, and thus,
no discharge of pollutant occurs, when water flows from
a channelized portion of a river to a downstream portion
of that same river.
Because the monitoring stations at issue are
actually located within the rivers themselves, the court
of appeals erred in concluding that a discharge of
pollutants occurred when, quote, "the still-polluted
stormwater flowed out of the concrete channels where the
monitoring stations are located, through an outfall and
into the navigable waterways."
And because the court of appeals rested its
liability determination on that erroneous premise, the
judgment should be vacated and the case remanded to the
court of appeals.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Shah, what about the
problem that one of the amici brought up concerning
dredged material? Said that if we just say Miccosukee
applies, then when there's a dredging operation and the
material is redeposited back into the same water, then
that would also -- there would be no responsibility
based on that.
MR. SHAH: Right. Your Honor, I think -- I
think the one amicus that does raise that issue raises
it limited to -- the biggest counterexample they raise
is the one that you raise about Section 404 permits for
dredged and fill material. Those permits are just very
different in kind.
Section 404 applies to dredged and fill
material, which almost, by definition, is going to be
coming from the source itself. And so we think that the
Miccosukee line of decision just doesn't apply to that
permitting regime, which -- which is a very different
sort of permitting regime than we have at issue here.
And in any event, I think it's far beyond
the question presented in this case, the Miccosukee
rule.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, tell me why
remand? I thought -- and correct me at whatever step
I'm wrong, okay -- that the district court rejected
Respondents' argument that the mere monitoring excesses
created liability. What it said is you have to follow
the terms of the permit and make the permittee
responsible only for their excess discharges, and you
haven't shown us any evidence that does that.
The Ninth Circuit agreed that the permittee
is only liable for its own discharges. It held the
permittee liable because it believed that the discharges
were within their source -- within their outflow. So
what are we remanding for? The legal question of
whether the -- the -- the monitoring stations
automatically create liability has been answered in the
negative by both courts.
MR. SHAH: Justice Sotomayor, I agree with
your reading of -- of both opinions below.
I think what we're asking for is the Court
to do what it normally does when it vacates an erroneous
part of a judgment and sends it back, that is, leave it
open to the court of appeals, to address any issues
consistent with this Court's opinion.
We think it's conceivable that the Ninth
Circuit might approach the permit construction issue
differently, once it's corrected of the
misimpressions --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How would it --
MR. SHAH: -- that it had before it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- what could it do
differently?
MR. SHAH: I think, in particular, the Ninth
Circuit construed this permit on the understanding that
there was a discharge of polluted water after it flowed
past the monitoring station and said that the district
could be liable, based simply on the exceedance measured
by the mass emission station alone.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How does that change the
answer to the legal question that the permittee -- both
courts have said the permittee is only liable for their
own discharges. And unless this proves that they
discharged -- they, themselves, discharged, which it
can't because it's in the river and not within the
source --
MR. SHAH: Well, it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- how can that, alone,
establish liability?
MR. SHAH: Well, again, I think the Ninth
Circuit predicated its permit interpretation on the
understanding that there would be at least some way to
hold a permittee -- in this case, the district -- liable
based on the mass emission exceedance alone, and that's
because it misapprehended that there would be a
discharge of flow of the polluted water.
It could be, and it may not be. We don't
know until it gets back to the Ninth Circuit. It may be
that the Ninth Circuit would reject the view that you
could have a permit that sets up a permitting regime
that does not allow a plaintiff to sue any particular
permittee, unless it has evidence beyond that provided
by the monitoring regime.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So -- so -- so what follows
from that; that the district is liable because it's a
lousy permit?
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, if --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I do not see how this
court -- how the -- how the court of appeals is going to
be able to do anything different, other than say there's
no liability here, unless, of course, it adopts another
fanciful interpretation of the statute, which is
something I worry about.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, we think that
this permit -- again, the terms of this permit are both
complex and ambiguous. We do not think that permits
should be written this way. We think permits that
provide for water quality -- for MS4s to adhere to water
quality standards based on ambient monitoring should be
coupled with either individual --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I agree with that, but
how can this permit possibly be interpreted in such a
way as to hold a district liable?
MR. SHAH: Well, I think the most
persuasive -- and, again, we don't take a firm position
on this, but I think the most persuasive argument on the
other side would be that, when permit writers issue a
permit, they -- they assume that the permitting regime
provided in the permit would provide a basis to seek
enforcement of that permit. If that were true --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They would assume that;
but, if it doesn't, it doesn't.
MR. SHAH: Well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So what do you do if it
doesn't?
MR. SHAH: Well, one could imagine a regime
where the permittees, that is, the municipalities who
apply for a joint permit, would agree to a shared
presumption of liability. For example, there are --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They have -- they have not
agreed.
MR. SHAH: Well, again, we don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're going to impose a
shared thing? I see no way for the court of appeals to
do this in -- in a fashion that will not bring the case
right back here, and you'll be asking us to send it back
to the same panel.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor, I don't think
it's a cert-worthy issue, how to interpret the terms of
this specific -- this is a fairly --
JUSTICE BREYER: But, anyway, you say that
the court held the same thing in two other cases
involving two other rivers, and they didn't cross-appeal
from that, and so that issue isn't really in front of
us.
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: And if they did hold what
you said, then they'd have to reopen the other two
cases.
MR. SHAH: Right. You Honor, I think in
terms of the cross-petition issue, that is a closed
question. I don't think the Court needs to get near it
because I think there are several other good reasons why
this Court should not decide the permit construction
issue itself.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. But if we decide
that they needed file a cross-petition and they didn't,
then what's the basis for our remanding, rather than
reversing?
MR. SHAH: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE BREYER: It's that issue that what
we have to decide.
MR. SHAH: Your Honor, it's established that
this Court -- even if a cross-petition were required,
it's established that this Court has the authority to
remand for disposition of any further issues once a case
comes before this Court. So the cross-petition --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why should we, in light
of the clarity of the permit? That's the question
Justice Scalia is asking.
MR. SHAH: Sure. I think the Court should
just follow its ordinary practice. We're not asking for
anything different than its ordinary practice of
vacating the judgment and remanding for further
proceedings, consistent with its opinion.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And if there -- if
there is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that is not our
ordinary practice, when -- when nothing can happen on
remand, except -- except to give judgment for the
Petitioners here.
MR. SHAH: Well, I think it would be unusual
for the Court to reverse and then instruct that judgment
be entered in favor of Petitioner. Of course, the Court
is free to do that, and it may decide to do that. We
just think that there is a possibility that the Ninth
Circuit would -- would take a different approach.
JUSTICE BREYER: Sometimes, the Court says
the bottom line in that italicized thing, which I've
never fully understood when and when we don't do it, but
it just says, "Reversed."
MR. SHAH: Right.
JUSTICE BREYER: And then, sometimes, it
says, "It is so ordered." And exactly when you write
the word "Reversed" -- but I usually just ask the Clerk,
all right.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: But the question -- the
question is when do we do the one or the other, and I
think, here, what they're saying is, just write the word
"Reversed," we'll deal with the rest of it. All right.
So that's --
MR. SHAH: Right. And, again, the Court is
well within its -- its discretion to do that. We
think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Doesn't that always
say that in the judgment of the Court?
MR. SHAH: Doesn't it always say what, Your
Honor?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Does it say, "It is
so ordered," in the judgment that we release?
MR. SHAH: Yes, yes. And I think the
typical -- I think the typical phrasing would be vacate
and -- and remand for further proceedings.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Shah, am I right
about that this other theory, if it were open to the
Ninth Circuit, would apply equally to the other rivers
that Justice Breyer mentioned, and those were out of the
case because, when it got to the Ninth Circuit, we were
talking about only the Los Angeles and the San Gabriel?
MR. SHAH: That's right, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That -- that other theory
would apply to all four.
MR. SHAH: I -- I think that is correct, and
the Ninth Circuit may decide that, therefore, it's not
going to revisit its permit interpretation. I think it
might be within the Ninth Circuit's discretion, since it
still has the case on remand, if it were to revisit its
permit construction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: The reason it would
not look at Malibu and -- what's the other one that
we're already --
MR. SHAH: The other watershed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes -- would be
because it wouldn't comply with the cross-petition rule.
MR. SHAH: No.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We're are not going
to send it back to them to --
MR. SHAH: No -- I'm sorry. I thought it
would be that the rationale that they used for those two
rivers, it would be in tension with it, and if they
agree that the rationale which led them to deny -- to
deny liability on those two rivers, that may lead them
to adhere to its current permit interpretation.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Do -- do you have a
position on the cross-petition issue?
MR. SHAH: No, Your Honor, we do not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
MR. SHAH: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Colangelo.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF AARON COLANGELO
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. COLANGELO: Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
We do not defend the judgment on the Ninth
Circuit's stated rationale, but on alternative grounds
that are properly before this Court. The compliance
monitoring included in the permit determines
Petitioner's liability for permit violations as a matter
of law, as the Clean Water Act, EPA regulations, and the
permit's own terms all require.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, where is the
permit's own terms? Your friend cited JA 93, which says
each permittee is responsible only for a discharge for
which it is the operator. So where does the permit
clearly show the opposite?
MR. COLANGELO: Your Honor, let me point you
to three provisions in the permit that, taken together,
compel this result. The first is page 195 of the Joint
Appendix, the paragraph numbered D(1). And this refers
to the individual permittees, and it says, "Each
permittee must comply with all of the terms,
requirements, and conditions of this order. Any
violation of this order constitutes a violation of the
Clean Water Act, its regulations, and the California
Water Code, and is grounds for enforcement action."
And that's the first of the three
provisions, and it is undisputed here that there are
permit violations. The monitoring included in the
permit that Petitioner and its co-permittees chose has
demonstrated, since 2003, undisputed permit violations.
The second provision is page 98 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wait. But -- but before
you go further, it says each permittee must comply. It
doesn't say that each permittee shall be responsible or
shall be liable. And it's the other provision that says
that each permittee is responsible only for a discharge
for which it is the operator.
MR. COLANGELO:
JUSTICE SCALIA:
MR. COLANGELO:
JUSTICE SCALIA:
MR. COLANGELO:
Correct.
So you got more --
Yes, You Honor.
-- more besides 195.
Well, and what 195 adds is
it says any violation is grounds for enforcement action.
Now, JA 98 talks about exactly this
circumstance, when violations are detected at the
monitoring stations. And about halfway down JA 98, it
says, if exceedances of water quality objectives or
water quality standards persist -- and that's only
measured in one place; that's at the compliance
monitoring in the rivers -- notwithstanding
implementation of control measures and other
requirements of this permit, quote, "the permittee,"
individually, "the permittee shall assure compliance
with discharge prohibitions and receiving water
limitations by complying with the following procedure."
It then sets out four steps that each
permittee must comply with to bring the MS4 within the
permit limits. Now, that is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, the very first
step is A, "Upon a determination by either the permittee
or the regional board that discharges are causing or
contributing to an exceedance of an applicable water
quality standard, the permittee shall promptly notify,"
et cetera. They cannot make such a determination
because of the nature of the monitoring -- monitoring
here.
MR. COLANGELO: That's -- that's incorrect,
Your Honor. The permit compels this result because
there is only one place in the permit that that
monitoring is required, and that is the in-stream mass
emission stations that the permittees chose. And the
permit says, explicitly, the monitoring results at those
locations are used to assess compliance and determine
whether the MS4 is contributing to violations.
JUSTICE BREYER: But as I read it, and he
explained it, I thought that, look, what they're
thinking is this: Stormwater is really a big problem,
and it's really complicated how you work it out, and we
want the agencies to work it out. So the purpose of
this monitoring thing is we first determine that there
is an exceedance.
Now, once we determine that there is an
exceedance, which is the point of this pertinent
particular requirement, then we're going to go on to
decide who. And what we're going to do is leave you
with two possible choices. One is you can try to figure
out who, which means you've got to get an expert and
monitor it; or let us now have a new permit which
will -- will -- you know, which will -- which will put
some responsibility on the individuals, because we'll
monitor higher up the river.
Now, that's a rational way for an agency to
proceed and it leaves you with pretty good remedies.
And so why -- why are we running all around, trying to
work this thing out? Why don't you just sort of try to
deal with it as they described it and say, okay, we're
going to either prove you did it before or at least we
can prove it now?
MR. COLANGELO: There are two answers to
that, Your Honor. The first is this is all sorted out
during the permitting process. This permit was adopted
by the State agency and upheld by State courts upon the
Petitioner's challenge after 5 years of litigation. The
permit was based on an 80,000 page administrative record
and the testimony of 29 witnesses. And the point of
this process is that permit terms are fixed once the
permit is finalized and approved by the courts.
Now, the reason we didn't challenge the
permit at the time is that we were defending the permit
alongside the State agency as an intervenor against
Petitioner's challenge. Petitioner in State court for
years made exactly the opposite argument that it makes
here. It said that it was entitled to a safe harbor
provision in the permit, to excuse it from liability,
because it would be held responsible based on this
in-stream monitoring.
Now, there may be, as a -- as a technical or
scientific matter, better monitoring programs, to
determine who's putting in what and where exactly it is
coming from, but that cannot be reopened upon an
enforcement proceeding.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But how do -- the
district is a big contributor, but there are other
contributors. So, on your theory, how do we determine
what is the share that the district would be liable for?
MR. COLANGELO: Your Honor, the permit
includes a blueprint that sorts that out, and it
parallels the traditional notion of several liability.
Where there are multiple contributors to a single harm,
each is responsible for its share --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But you still have to show
that there is a contributor. And I've been through
these sections, and it seems to me that a reasonable
interpretation of this section is that there is a
violation if a particular permittee violates.
And what I'm taking away from your argument
is that, once there is a violation, all the permittees
are liable, and that just can't be.
MR. COLANGELO: It can be, Your Honor, and
that's the -- that's the solution that the permit works
out and that the permittees negotiated for in advance.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What's the third section,
Mr. Colangelo? I'm waiting breathlessly for your third
section. You said there were three.
(Laughter.)
MR. COLANGELO: The third, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I've got 195. I've got 98.
Where is the third one?
MR. COLANGELO: The third, Your Honor, is JA
109.
JUSTICE SCALIA: 109.
MR. COLANGELO: And this parallels a
provision in EPA's regulations.
At the very bottom of JA 109, subsection D,
it says, "The permittee shall carry out all inspection,
surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to
determine compliance and noncompliance with permit
conditions."
So the problem with Petitioner's theory is
that they are violating this provision of the permit,
which is taken virtually verbatim from EPA regulations,
which says that the discharger has the responsibility to
measure and report its own violations.
And stepping back to talk about the Clean
Water Act program, generally, and the discharge permit
program, generally, no one is entitled to discharge
without a permit; a permit fixes terms that must be
complied with; and at the heart of the permitting
program is self-monitoring and self-reporting of
violations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well -- Looking at
9, it strikes me as a little bit circular to say – to
say they have the responsibility to carry out inspection
and surveillance and monitoring to ensure compliance with
the permit, and their point is, well, we're not -- we're
not not in compliance with the permit because you
haven't -- there hasn't been an allocation of the
discharges to them.
MR. COLANGELO: Well -- and the problem with
that, Your Honor, is that it leads to no liability ever
for the discharger, even though it concedes --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I think that
might be -- I think that might be right, but that gets
back to the question of whether the permit is -- is
poorly drafted.
MR. COLANGELO: Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And -- and I guess
the idea is they're changing the permit so to -- to cure
that problem.
MR. COLANGELO: The permit has changed. It
is not yet effective, Your Honor, but there is a new
permit that will be in effect shortly. But on the
question of whether --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, why -- why do you
need that if -- if the present permit covers it as
clearly as you say? I mean self -- self-monitoring.
MR. COLANGELO: That is absolutely --
JUSTICE SCALIA: My goodness, you're going
to go through all of this how many -- how long did it
take you to challenge this and blah, blah, blah, blah?
Why go through all that if, indeed, the present permit,
as you say, is perfectly adequate?
MR. COLANGELO: The present permit is
adequate. The State agency renewed the permit. That's
a matter of course. It changed the monitoring program.
The point is that whatever monitoring the State agency
sets and that the State courts uphold is the monitoring
that determines compliance.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, would you still
I'm not clear if you gave me an answer to how the
district share would be determined. It is not the
only polluter. Are you saying each permittee is
responsible for the whole?
MR. COLANGELO: No, Your Honor. That's
joint and several liability. And here, JA 93, which
Petitioner cites, says that each permittee is
responsible only for its discharges. That's just --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So how do we find out
what is its part -- what is its share?
MR. COLANGELO: The permit sets that out.
The permit says, once a violation is detected, each
permittee has to go back upstream, conduct enhanced
monitoring to identify the particular sources of
pollution within its jurisdiction, control those
sources, but only those within its jurisdiction, and
continue that process until the problem is resolved.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Is that the 109 language
you cite?
MR. COLANGELO: No, Your Honor. That's at
both 98, which I cited second, and page 213.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So the upshot would
be, however, as I understand it, and correct me if I'm
wrong, that since they're doing that now anyway under
the new permit -- and you can question my hypothetical
assumption there -- but if they are doing it under the
new permit, then the only result of your winning this
would be to transfer the running of the district from
the agency to the court. And I suspect the Ninth
Circuit knows less about it than you participating in
a -- some kind of negotiation with the agency.
MR. COLANGELO: No, not at all, Your Honor.
The -- the Petitioner retains the authority and, indeed,
the responsibility to identify the particular sources
within its jurisdiction that are causing the problem and
abating only those. So it is limited, in response to
Justice Ginsburg's earlier question, only to its own
share.
There is no question that there are other
contributors, but the permit doesn't impose a violation
only upon the entity who is the sole cause. There
are -- there are many polluters that discharge into
these rivers. The permit specifically says it is
unlawful to cause or contribute to a violation of water
quality standards. So prohibiting a contribution
assumes that there will be other contributors and that
the Petitioner will not be the sole cause.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, this is all
fine and good. Your -- your friend, though, says you
should have cross-petitioned because the relief you seek
expands the judgment below, and there are all these
cases saying you can't do that.
MR. COLANGELO: Your Honor, the relief we
seek would not expand the judgment below because the two
rivers on which we lost are out of the case.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I understand
that, but -- it seems reasonable, but they do cite a lot
of cases that say you can't do that. You can't just
sort of say, oh, I give up on the others because the
judgment, I guess, is one whole, and you would be
changing the judgment.
MR. COLANGELO: Accepting this argument,
Your Honor, would not change the judgment. The cases
that Petitioner cites are all examples -- except for
one, which I'll get to in a second -- where the
Respondent was seeking to change the judgment, either in
its favor or to get lesser relief, or where the result
would necessarily have changed the judgment.
Here, accepting this argument would not
change the judgment.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Why wouldn’t it
necessarily --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: That’s because you’re giving
up -- you're giving up on the two rivers, even though your
theory would work the same way with respect to them?
MR. COLANGELO: That's correct, Your Honor.
And that's consistent with the cross-petition rule. A
respondent who is satisfied with the result below and
does not seek to change the judgment does not need to
cross-petition. A cross-petition is only necessary --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But do you think that the
trial court was wrong, the district court was wrong, and
the Ninth Circuit, both times, when they said, well, you
didn't prove -- there was no -- there was no proof that
the district was responsible for a given part. So, on
your theory, both the district court and the Ninth
Circuit were wrong on that?
MR. COLANGELO: On that legal question, Your
Honor, yes. But this Court can affirm on any basis
preserved below, and this was also preserved in our
brief in opposition at the jurisdictional stage, as long
as it would not change the judgment.
And here's why it would not. Let me
distinguish the Northwest Airlines v. County of Kent
case, which Petitioner cites. That case presents, in
fact, the opposite situation of what we have here. In
that case, Respondent's argument, had it been accepted,
would have required the district court to grant further
relief in continuing proceedings on a claim that no
longer existed because the Respondent's argument was
that there was no private right of action at all.
Our case is the opposite because, if the
Court accepts our position, we simply don't get any
further relief with respect to claims that are waived to
which we would have been entitled. And the two cases
that we've cited by letter last week both represent
exactly that situation.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Colangelo, did you
raise this argument in your brief in opposition?
MR. COLANGELO: Yes, Your Honor, we did.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is it in that? I was
looking for it.
MR. COLANGELO: It's in two places in the
brief in opposition, page 4 to 5, where we set out this
compliance monitoring framework, and page 18 to 19.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But that -- That may be,
but you don't support -- and page what?
MR. COLANGELO: Page 18 to 19.
And then, again, in our supplemental brief,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But you don't --
MR. COLANGELO: At the cert stage.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you don't say that
that's the basis for supporting the decision below. I
certainly didn't interpret it.
MR. COLANGELO: We do -- let me just quote
what may be the most explicit thing, Your Honor, which
is at the very bottom of page 4 in our supplemental
brief at the cert stage. "The Court of Appeals' ruling
was both correct and equitable. Every Clean Water Act
permit must include monitoring provisions ensuring that
permit conditions are satisfied."
And we lay out the compliance monitoring.
That's 4 to 5 of our supplemental brief in opposition to
cert.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't have your
supplemental brief in front of me.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Where on 4 to 5?
MR. COLANGELO: At the very bottom of page
4, the last two lines, and the top of page 5.
Final -- now, most of our supplemental brief
and our brief in opposition were addressing why we did
not think Petitioner's question merited this Court's
review. This is the argument that we made in defense of
the judgment below, "The Court of Appeals ruling was
both correct and equitable. Every permit must include
sufficient monitoring to determine compliance."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well -- but -- but that --
that's just to say you can rely on -- on the extant
monitors.
MR. COLANGELO: Absolutely, Your Honor. And
Petitioner's saying we're not --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you say -- you know,
they were correct. You have to find some basis for
liability, and they use the monitors, and that's it. It
didn't -- it didn't say, in detail, that these people
had to go and -- and set up their own monitoring
under -- under the permit.
MR. COLANGELO: Your Honor, that was the --
that was our argument in the Ninth Circuit and at the
cert stage, and that -- we do lay out exactly how the
permit works. The point is that the permit imposes
liability on the multiple dischargers --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you told this to the
Ninth Circuit, and the Ninth Circuit said no?
MR. COLANGELO: That's correct, Your Honor.
That's correct. But we can -- we can defend the
judgment on a basis, even one that the Ninth Circuit
rejected.
To go back --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Colangelo, suppose we did
what the Solicitor General says to do and vacated
this. Can you think of any reason why the Ninth Circuit
would change its mind? I mean, is there any connection
between these two issues that you can point to, such
that our making clear to the Ninth Circuit that they
made a mistake on one actually would affect their
analysis on the other?
MR. COLANGELO: There is one reason, Your
Honor, and that is that a permit is interpreted like a
contract, and it is a cardinal rule of contract
interpretation that a contract should be read where --
where possible to be both lawful and enforceable.
So the Ninth Circuit may go back down and
say, okay, with this corrected understanding of the
universe of law and facts that apply, we see that
Petitioner's reading of the permit would render it
unenforceable because none of the permittees can be held
liable and, therefore, unlawful because the Clean Water
Act requires all permits to include within it
self-monitoring and self-reporting to demonstrate a
violation.
So the Ninth Circuit -- now, it may just --
it may just say, we say what we said before. But it
could reconsider on that basis, and that would be a
legitimate basis for it to do so.
To go back to the earlier question about
where there is a discharge, there is no question that
Petitioner discharges these pollutants to these rivers,
so the only question for this enforcement proceeding is
where to measure Petitioner's discharges for purposes of
liability.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Why is there no -- where
do I look to find out that the district is making a
discharge of polluted water, other than under the Ninth
Circuit's theory that it's in the river itself?
MR. COLANGELO: Two places, Your Honor.
First is that it's a premise for the permit itself. So
if you look at page JA 55, it says the Petitioner
discharges stormwater into these rivers. And then the
very next paragraph shows that the Petitioner has done
an assessment of the pollutants that are typically in
its discharges, and it lists the ones that are now in
violation here.
So the permit, it didn't -- it came out of
this administrative process, and one of the elements --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So is your theory that, if
the district is permitted to -- on a scale of 1 to 10,
to discharge up to 2, but that if the monitoring station
in the river shows an 8, then it is automatically liable
for the increase, even though other dischargees might
have made this?
MR. COLANGELO: Yes, yes, because --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't get that from what
you have read. I've looked at --
MR. COLANGELO: Your Honor, because --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- the text you've read and
it looks to me like it's permittee by permittee.
MR. COLANGELO: It says that the MS4 is in
violation, that's correct. But then it says each
permittee must, when an exceedance is detected, take
these steps. So here, what they have failed to do is
take the necessary steps to apportion responsibility
among the multiple contributors. The second place, just
to finish on the -- on the proof that they discharge --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Finish that. So what's the
consequence of that?
MR. COLANGELO: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE SCALIA: Therefore, each one of them
is liable for all of it?
MR. COLANGELO: No, no, Your Honor. No.
Each one is liable for what they put in and bears the
burden to demonstrate and limit what it puts in. That's
explicit in the permit.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But they haven't done so.
So what?
MR. COLANGELO: So that's a permit
violation, and result is that this pollution continues
year after year after year, when the point of the permit
and the point of the Clean Water Act was to eliminate
what everybody agrees is the biggest source of water
pollution in Southern California. And this --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So if each permittee is
allowed to put in a 2, but one permittee puts in an 8;
then both permittees are liable?
MR. COLANGELO: Correct, Your Honor,
unless -- because those facts are not known at the time
the violation is detected.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: No, no, we now know the
facts because it's the hypothetical.
MR. COLANGELO: Okay. So if the permittee
has done its own monitoring, in addition to what the
permit requires, and can demonstrate that it did not put
anything in, then it is not liable. If not, then yes.
Two dischargers into the same river who agree in advance
to be measured by a single monitoring station in the
river are liable for what's measured there, and then
they sort it out.
And what -- Congress set up a regime that
would allow for system-wide and jurisdiction-wide
permits precisely because this problem was so
complicated.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Are the
provisions -- excuse me, the provisions we've been
talking about, the three that you cited and the one that
you’re -- are they boilerplate? Do they show up in every
typical stormwater permit?
MR. COLANGELO: Well, 109 -- the fact that
the permittees must conduct all monitoring to
demonstrate compliance, if "boilerplate" means that they
are in all permits, then, yes, because that's a
requirement of EPA regulations.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes. What about the
one that says each permittee is responsible only for a
discharge for which it is the operator?
MR. COLANGELO: That's from a EPA
regulation, too, yes. That's in the definition of
"co-permittee" at 122.2; so, yes, that's also standard
in system-wide permits.
To go back to the earlier question about
where there is a discharge, the district court found,
and this is undisputed, at Petition Appendix 117, the
permit admits -- the permittee, Petitioner, admits that
it is discharging these pollutants, the ones measured in
violation, to these rivers. So what we have is no
question, no dispute that they discharged these
pollutants, a monitoring system included in the permit
that the State court upheld against Petitioner's
challenge, showing that those limits have been exceeded.
JUSTICE BREYER: Your basic argument is
this permit requires you, L.A. County, to do monitoring,
to decide if you're violating it. You chose this
system, then common sense suggests you're doing it. You
struck out twice with that argument --
MR. COLANGELO: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- in the other two rivers,
and now, you're going to go back if we permit it, and
we want to make the argument and tell the Ninth
Circuit, three times and you're out; in this case, hold
the opposite.
MR. COLANGELO: Well -- yes. I'm not sure I
would say we struck out, Your Honor; the --
JUSTICE BREYER: That’s what you want us –-
I understand it.
(Laughter.)
MR. COLANGELO: But correct, the lower court
did not -- neither lower court accepted this argument
fully. The Ninth Circuit did agree that all permits
must include compliance monitoring, but it said you need
a little more here. And we think that was improper
because you can't add terms to the permit once it's been
settled.
And there was an earlier question, Justice
Breyer, about could we sample from an individual
outfall, could we show more? The problem with that is
that it would prove nothing. The Petitioner has said,
just sample from one outfall, one of our outfalls. We
alleged 140 violations for a dozen different pollutants
over a 5-year period. So sampling from a single outfall
as an evidentiary matter would be utterly meaningless.
JUSTICE BREYER: Couldn't you get some
expert who understands --
MR. COLANGELO: Well, we did, Your Honor, in
district court as an alternative theory have an expert
who said all of this came from them. The district court
did not address that and we didn't appeal. The appeal
was limited just to this legal issue.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand why you
didn't cross-appeal on -- on this theory that -- that
the lower court rejected.
MR. COLANGELO: Because, Your Honor, we were
satisfied with the judgment; and that's the rule. A
respondent who is satisfied does not need to
cross-appeal, unless it is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I didn't say you need to.
I didn't say you needed to. But I -- I would normally
have done it, just to be sure I had that arrow in my
quiver and that it would not be argued, as it will be
here, that this would be expanding the judgment below.
MR. COLANGELO: And the reason it would not
be expanding the judgment below is that we are on the
opposite side of what happened in Kent. To rule in our
favor on this argument would just leave untouched two
claims on which we didn't prevail.
We'd get no further relief on those. It's
like two co-plaintiffs in district court who both lose
identical claims. One appeals, and the other doesn't.
The one who appeals wins a reversal. That creates an
inconsistency, two similarly situated plaintiffs, one
has a valid claim, one no longer does. But that's the
consequence of our failing to cross-petition.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Do we have -- I just
don't remember now. Do we have a circuit split on thi
issue of whether a permit in a situation like this would
impose liability on all permittees?
MR. COLANGELO: No. No. There is no – I
don't know of any other circuit court who has
addressed -- that has addressed this question.
And let me speak to -- to the issue of
additional monitoring, putting the burden on plaintiffs
to conduct additional monitoring. The problem is it
creates a complicated factual dispute for district
courts resolve -- to resolve, when that was exactly what
Congress wanted to eliminate.
When Congress adopted this permit program in
the Clean Water Act and then amended it to bring
municipal stormwater discharges under the program,
Congress said, we do not want district courts to be the
forum for sorting out all of these complicated factual
issues.
JUSTICE BREYER: I see. What do you think
of the government's point? They are telling us, just
write what you usually write, and then you can go make
all your arguments, see what they do. Does that satisfy
you?
MR. COLANGELO: Your Honor, we would be most
satisfied with an affirmance on the grounds we have
presented. If the Court vacates, we would be satisfied
with that, too, and then we would go back to the
district --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What if this panel found –
found for you on the ground that they used, they will
surely find for you on this other ground, which --
(Laughter.)
MR. COLANGELO: Yes. We expect they would.
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- which has at least an
inkling of plausibility.
MR. COLANGELO: Thank you, Your Honor.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Coates, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF TIMOTHY T. COATES
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. COATES: Thank you, Your Honor.
To the cross-appeal issue, the cases that we
cite talk about the Court's prudential limitation on
deciding questions that are not preserved by
cross-petition. And I depart from my learned opponent,
Mr. Colangelo, on that point as to what the Court's
cases say. We cite the Northwest Airlines v. County of
Kent case, and that is a case where, in fact, the
respondent was not seeking to change the judgment below.
They did not cross-petition. They were just trying to
keep what they had.
And the Court said we are not going to reach
that issue because, if we buy the fact that there is in
fact no private right of action, the effect of that is
to essentially change the underlying judgment --
JUSTICE BREYER: Let me ask a quick
question.
MR. COATES: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: Does it satisfy you if we
just write in the judgment what you -- we usually write,
and then you all can argue what it means below? What
about that? Does that satisfy? Or do you want us to
write something special?
(Laughter.)
MR. COATES: It -- it's -- it's acceptable
because a reversal is always better than an affirmance.
But talking about what the Court decides and what's left
in the case, I think it is a case where the Court
reviews what the Ninth Circuit actually decided, what is
actually before it, and what is properly remaining in
the case because we don't believe the cross-appeal issue
is here.
And that leads, I think, to reversing the
Ninth Circuit because the district is entitled to
summary judgment on these two river claims. And I think
that is all that's left in the case.
And I call the Court's attention to another
case we cited on the cross-appeal issue. It's one of
the NLRB cases, the -- the Express Publication case.
And it makes it very clear there, that the respondent
was just trying to hang on so much of what was good
about the order as he could keep and was not seeking to
change anything. And, again, the Court said no.
It basically undermines the entire basis for
the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Did we use our usual
language, and did it go back, and the -- and the court
of appeals considered --
MR. COATES: I think, in one of the cases,
the Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- considered the issue we
had refused to consider?
MR. COATES: In one of the cases, the Court
simply affirmed, and so it didn't go anywhere.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. COATES: But --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't we have two -- I
don't know that we do this all the time. When we expect
them to keep the case and do something different, don't
we usually vacate and remand, rather than reverse?
MR. COATES: Well, I do know that, in the
context of a lot of the Court's opinions, the Court will
specify that judgment be granted in terms of a party.
I know the qualified immunity cases, you
find someone's entitled to qualified immunity, and it
comes up on a summary judgment, the reversal is -- to
the Ninth Circuit. And I've seen both languages used,
but it's plain, from the text of the opinion, the
judgment is to be entered in favor of that party.
And, again, I think that's appropriate here.
My opponent suggests and the government suggests, again,
that, let's go back to the Ninth Circuit and let them
consider this monitoring argument. They considered it.
In fact, they even considered the use of contract terms
that -- that they urged them to consider again.
It's already rejected that claim with
respect to these two rivers that are in front of the
Court. It's rejected it with respect to Malibu Creek
and Santa Clara River, which is not in front of the
Court. They even accepted it with respect to an entire
different party with County of Los Angeles --
JUSTICE SCALIA: But they might change their
mind now. They might change their mind.
MR. COATES: It would be a very odd judgment
because you'd have two claims that are -- continue to be
dismissed that are not properly before any court. Those
close -- those are closed. And you have another party
out of the case on the very ground that the Ninth
Circuit rejected in the initial opinion.
A sort of remand for some consideration of
an issue that's already spoken on just doesn't seem to
make sense and invites the very sort of kind of
jurisdictional confusion that, I think, leads the Court,
for prudential reasons, not to consider these things
unless there's a cross-petition.
I think that's why this is kind of a great
example of why prudential reasons say you should not
consider it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I understand,
and you do cite a lot of cases for that, but I can't
figure out what sense it makes. I mean, if you're
willing to give up Santa Clara and Malibu, you're --
you're safe there, and that's the only thing you've won.
Why does it -- how does that make sense?
MR. COATES: Well, the Court does it for two
reasons. It does it as a prudential matter because it
does look odd to affirm on -- to make a decision in this
Court on a ground that essentially repudiates the lower
court decision. It does it for prudential reasons.
And, in fact, the case they cite, LeTulle,
which basically says the Court has the jurisdiction to
do that -- when someone abandons the piecemeal claim --
is cited only once in this context after that, and
that's in the United States v. ITT Continental Baking
case, 420 U.S. 223, footnote 2.
And the court gives it a "but-see" for the
proposition that you have the jurisdiction to do it.
But then describes this exact situation and says, for
prudential reasons, we don't do it because it undermines
our cert jurisdiction, particularly if resolution of
that issue is highly fact-specific -- the one they are
trying to bring up -- and it would really foreclose
having to even decide this cert issue because you
wouldn't get to it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the case in the
