IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JONATHAN EDWARD BOYER, :
Petitioner : No. 11-9953
v. :
LOUISIANA :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, January 14, 2013
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:00 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
RICHARD BOURKE, ESQ., New Orleans, Louisiana; on behalf
of Petitioner.
CARLA S. SIGLER, ESQ., Assistant District Attorney, Lake
Charles, Louisiana; on behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
RICHARD BOURKE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
CARLA S. SIGLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent 29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
RICHARD BOURKE, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:00 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next this morning in Case 11-9953,
Boyer v. Louisiana.
Mr. Bourke?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD BOURKE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BOURKE: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Louisiana Court of Appeal in this case
correctly found that the majority of the delay -- the
seven-year delay was caused by the lack of funding, but,
when moving to assess that cause under Barker,
incorrectly determined that it was a cause beyond the
control of the State and, adopting its earlier ruling
under the State statute, found that it was a cause
beyond the control of the State, in the sense that it
was beyond the control of the local district attorney's
office.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Bourke, was -- was it
within the control of your client?
MR. BOURKE: He was unable to fund himself,
Your Honor. That is why he asked for the appointment of
counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Was he unable to get his
Sixth Amendment right to a speedy trial?
MR. BOURKE: Yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why?
MR. BOURKE: That is -- he was unable to
move forward to trial because he was not provided with
counsel adequately funded to advance the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He had -- he had one
counsel, right? During the whole time?
MR. BOURKE: In fact, in a sense, Your
Honor, he had two counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes. For part of it, he
had two, and then there was not enough funding for the
second, okay? So he was faced with a choice.
Louisiana, as I understand it, has adopted a
provision, which the Sixth Amendment does not require.
The Sixth Amendment just requires counsel, but Louisiana
says, in capital cases, we are going to provide two
counsel, and you can't go to trial until you have two
counsel, okay?
MR. BOURKE: No, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA: No?
MR. BOURKE: -- that is not correct. That
is not the State of Louisiana law.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What is the State of
Louisiana law?
MR. BOURKE: Louisiana absolutely does not
provide a right to two counsel in capital cases. The
Louisiana Supreme Court, in Rule 31, provided that the
court should appoint two counsel, but, also, it provided
expressly that that created no procedural or substantive
right.
Similarly, there is no right --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, I don't -- I don't
understand that. That's not Louisiana law that you --
that you can't proceed without two counsel? That's not
the law in Louisiana? I thought that's --
MR. BOURKE: That is not the law in
Louisiana.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- you don't consider
supreme court rules to be law?
MR. BOURKE: It is a supreme court rule
which directs the trial judge to appoint two counsel.
However, it makes it clear --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is it the fact that, in
Louisiana, you cannot proceed to trial in a capital
case, unless there are two counsel?
MR. BOURKE: No, Your Honor. That is not
the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then -- then you don't have
a case.  You should have proceeded to trial.
MR. BOURKE: No, Your Honor. In -- in this
case, as the court of appeal correctly found, Mr. Boyer
did not have adequate funding for the case to go to
trial. The court of appeal did not predicate that on
the need for two counsel. The motion to determine
source of funds was not predicated on Rule 31.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The one -- the one
counsel who was qualified, what was his name?
MR. BOURKE: Mr. Lorenzi was lead certified
counsel.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Lorenzi, yes. He was
only one at the time who was qualified to be lead
counsel?
MR. BOURKE: Correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And the Louisiana Supreme
Court said, you don't have to do this. You're his --
you're his attorney, but you have a right to be paid,
and the State has to pay you.
So there was no obligation on the counsel's
part to do anything; and he kept asking, please have a
funding order, let me be paid, and I'll do my job.
MR. BOURKE: Yes, Mr. Lorenzi declined to
pay for Mr. Boyer's defense out of his own pocket.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Wasn't there, at all times,
one counsel who was being paid by the State?
MR. BOURKE: There was --
JUSTICE SCALIA: At all times?
MR. BOURKE: There was, at all times, one
counsel appointed as associate counsel, that is for the
purpose of assisting Mr. Lorenzi as lead counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Was that counsel qualified
enough under our constitutional Sixth Amendment
jurisprudence?
MR. BOURKE: Well, I don't understand the --
the Sixth Amendment jurisprudence to place --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well --
MR. BOURKE: -- a qualification minimum, so
I'm not sure I'm understanding your question.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, the question is would
only lead counsel under -- under the supreme court's
rule qualify as competent counsel, for purposes of
complying with the constitutional requirement? Or would
this certified second chair qualify?
MR. BOURKE: The -- there is no -- I'm
having trouble answering the question, Justice Scalia,
because the two things don't talk to each other. The
Sixth Amendment doesn't impose a certification
requirement.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Exactly. I'm just saying
can you establish that the one counsel that your client
had throughout this whole -- whole proceeding would not
satisfy the constitutional requirement?
Can you -- is there any basis for your
saying that?
MR. BOURKE: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: What?
MR. BOURKE: The court of appeal twice
found -- knowing that associate counsel had been
appointed, the court of appeal twice found that the case
could not proceed due to a lack of adequate funding, and
the State --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not because of a Federal
constitutional reason. The court found, you are not
complying with the supreme court rule. You can't
proceed without complying with the supreme court rule.
It seems to me your client was faced with a
choice: You could either demand what Louisiana, in its
generosity, has given to capital defendants, namely, the
right to two counsel -- whether it's by statute or by
supreme court rule, it doesn't matter -- you could either
demand that right; or you could demand your right to a
speedy trial. That was your choice.
And it seems to me what counsel chose was to
insist, all along, I want my right to two -- to two
counsel. You didn't have to --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Bourke, did anyone --
JUSTICE SCALIA: -- you didn't have to take
that right. You could have gone to the -- to the
supreme court and said -- you know, since it's taking so
long, I demand my constitutional right to a speedy
trial. But you didn't do that.
MR. BOURKE: Your Honor, if Mr. Boyer had
been brought into court and had been told, we've got
associate counsel here; they are qualified in the sense
that they are barred in Louisiana, and they can take
your case to trial and move it forward now.
But, if you wait, we might have funding for
another lawyer here, who will join him, is more senior
and experienced and will double your firepower. You can
choose, Mr. Boyer, do you want to go ahead now with this
guy? Or do you want to wait?
In that circumstance, there would not be an
invidious choice between the right to counsel and the
right to speedy trial. It would be, we are giving you
constitutionally adequate counsel, and you can wait for
better, if you wish to.
But that is not what occurred here. And,
Justice Scalia, the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Can you -- can you tell me
why that is not what occurred here?
MR. BOURKE: Because the funding problem did
not exist solely around Mr. Lorenzi's overhead and
expenditure. There was no money for investigation.
There was no money for experts. And the associate
counsel who had been appointed had been appointed solely
and for the limited purpose as an assistant to
Mr. Lorenzi, not to conduct the case in his own right.
If this issue had been raised in the trial
court, this would have been clearly explained into this
record. It wasn't. But the trial court and the
appellate court of -- the court of appeal -- Third
Circuit in Louisiana knew and understood that there was
no investigative funding. There was no expert funding.
There had been an assistant.
This isn't the case where there was a lawyer
appointed and they were waiting for the second lawyer.
It's a case where they'd found an assistant and were
waiting for the first lawyer.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: How much money would
be needed for investigation and experts before you would
acknowledge that that would be competent representation?
MR. BOURKE: That's a very case-specific
determination, Your Honor and, in Louisiana, at that
time, rested with a judicial determination that the
investigative or expert expenses were reasonably
necessary to ensure a fair trial within the meaning of
the Due Process Clause.
So it -- it was a funding level tagged to
the constitutional minimum of due process.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course, a finding by the
district court -- or whichever court found it, that
there was not enough money to pay counsel, to
investigate, and to -- to do whatever else -- buy
stamps -- is not a finding by the district court that
there was not enough money to investigate and to buy
stamps.
Counsel was a part of that mix. You never
had a finding that there was not enough money to pay
counsel, right? Or -- I'm sorry -- that there was not
enough money to allow the counsel that has been
appointed to investigate and buy stamps.
Was there ever any such finding?
MR. BOURKE: There was never --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The -- the big tag item
was -- was paying counsel; wasn't it?
MR. BOURKE: No, Your Honor. That was one
of the big tag items. But, in a capital case, the
investigation of both the guilt phase and the full
mitigation and life investigation, along with the use of
potential expert witnesses, particularly in the case
where there were all the indications of mental health
problems and the like, are often equal to or, in some
cases, greater than the cost of counsel.
And so, no, the big -- the big tag item
wasn't just Mr. Lorenzi's overhead and expenses. The
big tag item was providing adequate funding. And to
return to your earlier point, Justice Scalia, just to --
to make it clear, the Louisiana Supreme Court cases,
which mandate that a case cannot go forward without
counsel, do not reference Rule 31 at all, or two
counsel.
They are cases which stand for the
proposition that the case cannot go forward without
constitutionally adequate counsel, counsel who can
provide reasonably effective assistance.
This case began in 2002. At that point, the
controlling Louisiana decision on not moving forward
without effective assistance was Peart -- P-e-a-r-t --
which we cite in our brief, which said that the court
will not allow a case to proceed without reasonably
effective counsel.
During the life of this case -- sorry.
JUSTICE BREYER: Your -- your point of view
in this case --
MR. BOURKE: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE BREYER: In your point of view,
would it satisfy you if we say, the Louisiana court of
appeal found the largest part of the delay involved the
funding crisis experienced by the State of Louisiana --
that meant giving you adequate money for counsel.
Then they said, the progression of the
prosecution was out of the State's control, as
determined by this court, which I think referred to that
funding crisis. And we could -- and your view would be
that's what they said. We don't know the underlying
facts, but that's what they said.
And, insofar as they said that the State
wasn't responsible for that part of the delay that they
are talking about, they're wrong because the State is
responsible for not providing enough money, even if it's
a problem and to say they weren't responsible is wrong,
okay? That's what you want us to say?
MR. BOURKE: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Period. And send it back.
MR. BOURKE: Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You would like us to say
what Judge Cook said in -- in her opinion, that
responsibility for funding rests with the State, not
with the defendant.
Once an attorney is appointed, it is the
State's obligation to ensure that adequate funds are
available for the defense. And I take "for the defense"
to mean not simply counsel, but the witnesses, the --
the investigation.
It is certainly true that none of the delay
due to the lack of funds was, in any way, attributable
to the defense. That's, essentially, what you would
like us to say?
MR. BOURKE: That is what Judge Cook said
and --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't think it's enough
that none of the delay was attributable to the defense.
The defense has to complain, has to demand its right to
a prompt trial.
What did your client do? Frankly, I -- I am
skeptical that a capital defendant who has already
confessed to the crime wants to be tried as soon as
possible. I'm skeptical about that.
Now, what -- what did your client do to
demand his right to a prompt trial?
MR. BOURKE: Your Honor, what Mr. Boyer did
was act, at all times, in full compliance with the
procedural mechanisms set up in Louisiana for doing
that.
At arraignment -- he -- he had already
identified he was indigent and asked for counsel. At
arraignment, he requested a jury trial.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Right.
MR. BOURKE: His lawyer was appointed, and
his lawyer immediately identified the funding problem
and said, we need money, or we can't go forward.
Louisiana statute bars counsel from filing a motion for
speedy trial without an affidavit saying, you're ready
to go forward. Louisiana has said, in Article 7 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's -- surely,
that's unconstitutional. Did counsel say, I demand a
speedy trial? You can't condition my right to a speedy
trial upon my getting some affidavit or something.
MR. BOURKE: It's a procedural rule, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm still waiting for --
for anybody telling the court, I demand a speedy trial,
and, if I don't get a speedy trial, you are violating
the Constitution, and I ought to go scot-free.
MR. BOURKE: Well, Your Honor, the rule I am
referring to is a procedural rule. It does not, in any
way, limit the relief from a speedy trial, but you can't
move for a speedy trial. You can move to quash because
you have been denied one, but you can't move for one.
It's exactly what this Court referred to
in --
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't it true that you
waited three years before doing that?
MR. BOURKE: That was the first point at
which, under Louisiana procedure, he had a remedy
available, exactly as Judge Cook stated in her
abstaining opinion. That was when he could move to
quash. He could not move for a speedy trial in a valid
motion for speedy trial, without having an affidavit
saying, we are ready to go.
Louisiana has passed that rule to stop pro
forma requests for speedy trial.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Can we clarify one point?
Justice Scalia said something about a defendant facing
the death penalty going "scot-free." There was an armed
robbery charge that was added in 2007.
Do you dispute that a new clock started in
2007, the first time that the robbery charge was -- was
made?
MR. BOURKE: We do, Your Honor. That armed
robbery charge is a lesser included offense of the
first-degree murder count. Mr. Boyer was originally
indicted on first-degree murder, which, in Louisiana, is
intentional killing during the course of an armed
robbery -- there are other varieties, of course -- but
intentional killing during an armed robbery. And those
are the elements of first-degree murder.
The State unpacked those two elements -- or
two lesser included offenses, to second-degree murder,
which is intentional killing, and armed robbery. And
the State, in fact, conceded that, had the charge
remained a first-degree murder charge, then the armed
robbery charge would have created a double jeopardy
problem.
And that's at page 3703 to '4 of the record,
where counsel for the State indicated that the armed
robbery charge could be added because the primary
charge, the -- the first-degree murder, had been dropped
to second-degree murder, and specifically said,
Mr Bourke is correct, that, had we filed for
first-degree murder, there may be double jeopardy
problems.
But, because they had unpacked that charge
from murder and armed robbery down to murder and, also,
armed robbery, there was no double jeopardy problem.
That is what --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: What about -- what about
the basic problem in this case, as I understand the
question presented, is should the State be responsible
when the funding problem is at a local level?
So suppose you have a State that says -- you
know, we have had problems in funding; if we give this
to the counties, it's going to be much better, and the
counties are very, very good at raising money and
knowing who the counsel are. And so it's all handled by
the county.
Then one county has a disaster, a hurricane
in that county, particularly. Is that not a reason for
delaying? Or does the State have to immediately step in
and -- and supplement the funding? Can't the county
say, oh, we need another two years?
MR. BOURKE: Well, Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I take it that's the issue
that we're trying to decide here.
MR. BOURKE: Well, I think it starts with
the proposition that it is the State, not the
prosecutor, who has the responsibility to ensure a
speedy trial, in accordance with due process.
And then the State can make all sorts of
different arrangements, and the States around this
country make different arrangements, but it's their
responsibility to make sure that they work. And, if
they don't work, then the State is going to have to make
reasonable accommodation for that, to meet its
responsibility.
And so, by assisting the cause of delay
against the State, but within the Barker weighing
framework, the courts dealing with speedy trial claims
would be able to deal with short-term unexpected
exigencies. They would be able to weigh the
reasonableness of the response.
A valid reason for delay will justify that
delay, as this Court said in Barker, but here --
JUSTICE BREYER: The answer to the
question -- that's what I was trying to do -- this
case -- the briefing is filled with whether he asked in
time, whether he was delaying, whether he should have
done some other thing, whether he should have -- but the
question that's asked is, simply, whether the failure to
fund counsel is a factor that should be weighed against
the State.
MR. BOURKE: Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: And maybe it only gets very
little weight because maybe there was a hurricane, and
maybe it doesn't even matter because he didn't make the
right motions. But the lower court said it shouldn't be
weighed against the State, period. And do we have to do
anything other than say, if you're right, yes, it
should.
Now, how much weight it gets, well, that
depends. There was a hurricane and -- but -- but it's
something that they can't just ignore in -- in the
hearing. They have to figure out what happened and
to -- to the extent the State should have done more, it
weighs against the State.
Do you want any more than that?
MR. BOURKE: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: And what else?
MR. BOURKE: The first thing that we want is
exactly that, Your Honor, that the court below
incorrectly -- incorrectly failed to attribute this to
the State. And this Court -- I accept this Court could
stop there and remand to the Third Circuit to deal with
that in accordance with --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not -- not quite. I mean,
the question presented is not as general as that. It's
much more fact-bound.
It says whether a State's failure to fund
counsel for an indigent for five years, particularly
where failure was the direct result of the prosecution's
choice to seek the death penalty, should be weighed
against the State for speedy trial purposes.
I think this is inviting us to look into the
facts of this case and decide whether this five-year
delay, particularly since the prosecution chose the
death penalty -- you know, I don't like having to do
that and -- but it seems, to me, that's what the
question presented at least requires.
MR. BOURKE: Well, Your Honor, it -- I think
it would be open to this Court to answer the question by
saying the court got it wrong at the first step by
failing to attribute it to the State and then remand for
full consideration of weighing, in light of that.
What we have asked in our briefing for the
Court to do is to also provide some guidance on the
weight that should be given to delay resulting from the
lack of funding because in this case --
JUSTICE ALITO: If we provide -- if we
provide that guidance, what do we do about the
continuances that Mr. Lorenzi requested that relate to
the funding? "January 10, 2003, Lorenzi requests a
continuance of funding hearing, citing scheduling
problems."
"August 5, 2003, Lorenzi moves to continue
hearing on motion to designate source of funds so that
the Indigent Defender Board can consider funding Boyer's
case at an August 26 meeting." So this is -- okay.
"Lorenzi moves to continue September 12,
03. Lorenzi moves to continue hearing on motion to
designate funds in trial, so that the IDB may, again,
consider the funding defense at its next meeting.
December 15, Lorenzi moves to continue hearing on motion
to designate funds," et cetera.
There are many of these motions. What do we
do with those?
MR. BOURKE: Your Honor, I'd suggest that
this Court does exactly the same thing that the
Louisiana Court of Appeal did with them, which was to
find that it was the lack of funding, not any action by
Mr. Lorenzi, which caused the delay.
The -- the Louisiana Court of Appeal
declined to adopt the State's argument that it was Mr.
Lorenzi's fault. And the reason it did that was because
the lack of a funding hearing caused no delay at all in
the conduct of this trial.
The funding hearing, when conducted,
produced no funding, no ruling or order, and had no
influence on the date of the trial. And, of course, the
right at issue was the right to go to trial, not to --
the timing of pretrial hearings.
Furthermore, all of those continuances,
which were joined in by the State, were related to
trying to identify and find funding for this case and
for this man. None of them were for a dilatory purpose.
They were because a new procedure was
announced to submit bills in a different way to the IDB
because the Louisiana Supreme Court had accepted the
Citizen case. And ultimately --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I mean,
Justice Alito's problem seemed, to me, to get back to
Justice Scalia's point, is that he seemed more
interested in the funding than a speedy trial, the
funding that would be provided by the State under its
procedures.
MR. BOURKE: In the absence of funding,
there was no trial to be had. At the funding hearing --
or I'm sorry -- at the motion to quash hearing in
November 2006, there was a colloquy between the trial
court and the prosecutor in which the trial court said,
what are we going to do with this case? They can't have
a defense without money.
This was not -- absolutely not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And, as
Justice Alito pointed out on several occasions, what the
defense lawyer said was, let's put it off and see if we
can get funding, let's put it off until there's the
funding hearing, let's put it off and put it off, as
opposed to saying, I want a speedy trial, I'm entitled
to it now, if you don't have the money, I don't get a
speedy trial, I get off scot-free.
MR. BOURKE: Well, under Louisiana's Article
701, there was no filing a motion for speedy trial,
saying, please give me a speedy trial, set a date now.
And at the same time --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The Constitution requires
such a motion. I mean, I don't care whether they have
a -- you know, a speedy trial motion.  If -- if denying
him the right to speedy trial violates the Constitution,
surely, he is entitled to bring that to the attention of
the Louisiana court, whether there's a specific
statutory or rule provision or not.
MR. BOURKE: Your Honor, this Court, in
Barker, when dealing with this very topic under the
issue of assertion, specifically said it would allow
judges to take account of assertion in accordance with
local procedural requirements.
The local procedural requirement in a State
that already has its own statutory prescriptive period,
if you don't bring second-degree murder to trial within
two years, you're out.
The -- Louisiana does not need a defendant
to tell them that they have to bring a speedy trial, and
they don't want a defendant doing it, unless they're
ready to go to trial themselves. They don't want the
sort of pro forma assertion that was rejected.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Now, they -- they don't
even want counsel to say -- you know, Your Honor, we've
been trying to get funding, and we're -- we're just sick
and tired of waiting for this. We demand a speedy
trial, and, if we don't get funding and, therefore,
don't get a speedy trial, we think there's a
constitutional violation, and we're going to ask that
the indictment be dismissed.
MR. BOURKE: Well, in July --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Nobody ever made a
statement like that to the Court, did they?
MR. BOURKE: In July of 2005 --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What did you say?
MR. BOURKE: In July of 2005, Mr. Lorenzi
moved to quash the indictment and said exactly that,
said, it's too late, no funding, no trial, speedy trial
is up. And it was still another two years before the
funding crisis was solved.
So there was a very lengthy period, if such
notice were required -- and that is not, in our
submission, the message from Barker and the message from
Article 701, they got that notice in July 2005, when
there was the motion to quash.
And returning to your question --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But wasn't there
something about that motion was withdrawn -- the 2005
motion was withdrawn in 2006?
MR. BOURKE: If -- if I can clarify that,
Justice Ginsburg, Mr. Lorenzi was at pains to say he was
not withdrawing the motion, but dismissing the motion to
quash because he couldn't advance it in a successful way
in Louisiana without demonstrating prejudice.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Dismissing it, instead of
withdrawing it, that's the fine line he's drawing?
MR. BOURKE: He specifically --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is that a line in Louisiana
law? I don't know. Does this -- this come from French
law or something? It seems, to me, withdrawing and
dismissing sound, to me, the same thing.
MR. BOURKE: Well, the point, Your Honor,
was that he was not withdrawing his claim to a speedy
trial, but, rather, dismissing his motion to quash on
the violation of that at --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Withdrawing his motion to
quash. So it was withdrawn, right?
MR. BOURKE: No, it was dismissed. He chose
dismiss, rather than withdraw is the word, and what he
intended by that was that he wasn't saying, I don't want
one; he was saying, I can't bring the type of hearing
Louisiana courts require to get my Sixth Amendment
motion to quash granted.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I -- I think what you --
let's go back to that. It was his view that, under
Louisiana law to assert his Sixth Amendment right, he
had to follow the procedure laid out in the Louisiana
rule?
MR. BOURKE: To move for a speedy trial, he
had to do exactly that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Under the
Sixth Amendment, he had to comply with the
requirements -- the procedural requirements of
Louisiana.
MR. BOURKE: The local procedural
requirements for how one goes about doing that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. So then how
do you -- if he couldn't do it in 2002, '03, '04, or
'05, how did he end up doing it in '05?
MR. BOURKE: The -- it's the difference
between moving for a speedy trial, please give me a
trial date, I want to go to trial next week, and moving
to quash because the speedy trial right has been
violated.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why didn't he move to
quash earlier?
MR. BOURKE: He moved to quash at the first
moment that it became available under the State statute,
which was at the three-year mark. He moved one month
after that three-year mark, as soon as it became
available.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. What -- is
there a law or a regulation in -- in Louisiana that
gives it a three-year mark?
MR. BOURKE: Yes, Your Honor. Article 579
and following provides that the State must bring a
first-degree murder charge to trial within three years,
or the case is prescribed, the indictment must be
dismissed with prejudice. And so the State always knew
it had that deadline.
It didn't even set a trial date for a period
of over three years in the middle of this, didn't even
try to set a trial date for three-and-a-half years,
didn't bring Mr. Boyer into court for
three-and-a-half years to address his case at all.
And so, as soon as the remedy available
became open, as Judge Cook said in her opinion, defense
counsel filed using exactly the remedy provided for.
If there are no further questions, Your
Honor, I will reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Sigler?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CARLA S. SIGLER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. SIGLER: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This Court should affirm the holding of the
Third Circuit Court of Appeals for three separate
reasons.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How about the
reasoning -- is delay because of the lack of funding
attributable to the State or not? Or to the district
attorney as agent of the State?
MS. SIGLER: Justice Sotomayor, I don't
believe that the funding -- that we can credibly argue
that funding is completely outside the role of the
State.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what's wrong with
what's been suggested by some, to remand to tell the
court below to whatever extent this was the basis of
your decision, it was wrong. Now, redo the Barker --
the factors.
MS. SIGLER: Well, Your Honor, if you review
the Third Circuit Court of Appeals opinion, which is at
Appendix D, the other Barker factors are analyzed,
incredibly thoroughly, with a mind to this Court's
jurisprudence, and the rationale may be flawed with
regard to that one point in this Court's opinion, but
the result is not.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So is one factor
determinative always in this calculation? I thought it
was a weighing factor. And so, if it's a weighing
factor, why isn't that, in and of itself, a factor that
a court needs to weigh against the others?
MS. SIGLER: I think that this Court has
always acknowledged, in its Barker v. Wingo
jurisprudence, that there is no one talismanic factor;
all of the factors are interrelated, and all are
reviewed. And that is why, even if the Court disagrees
with that one assessment of the Third Circuit's opinion,
the result is sound.
With --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, but how do we know
that? How do we know that they would have reached the
same determination if they had gotten it right on that
single factor?
MS. SIGLER: I think, when you look at the
Third Circuit of Appeals opinion, they specifically --
and with direct quotations to Barker v. Wingo, go
through every other factor in the analysis. And they
discuss the fact of the repeated continuances of defense
counsel of his own funding motion as part of the
assertion of the right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But wait a minute. This
is a --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Whether something is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Whether something is the
State's fault is a significant factor in the analysis,
and we have made that very clear in our cases. And so,
if they got that wrong -- and -- and you, I think, quite
rightly, are saying we can't defend that part of it --
if they got that wrong, don't we at least have to say,
okay, well, get it right now, and do it again?
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Kagan, I don't
think that what I would say is they got it completely
wrong because, as this Court has acknowledged throughout
its Barker jurisprudence, there are different weights
you attribute to government action, whether it is
negligence or whether it is a deliberate attempt on
behalf of the State to evade giving a defendant his
Sixth Amendment right to counsel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I -- I would like to get
the structure of your argument. You began to say
there's three reasons. I would just like to hear those
three reasons, so that I can understand the framework
for all these questions.
MS. SIGLER: Yes, sir, Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The three reasons that we
should affirm.
MS. SIGLER: The first reason is that, as in
Vermont v. Brillon, the delay occasioned in this case
was due to Petitioner's counsel's repeated requests to
continue his own funding motion, which delayed a source
of funding when he -- the Petitioner wished to proceed
with capital-certified counsel.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Okay. And the second?
MS. SIGLER: The second reason, Your Honor,
would be, pursuant to Loud Hawk, even if this Court
determines that there was a negligence factor with
regard to the State of Louisiana in not properly funding
capital-certified counsel, there are valid public policy
interests at play here and the fact that Louisiana is
generous enough to provide specially-certified counsel
to capital indigent defendants, when there is no
constitutional requirement for it to do so.
And then our third argument, Your Honor,
would be that, based under the Barker v. Wingo
jurisprudence, the delay should not be attributed to the
State in this case because of Petitioner's failure to
meaningfully assert his right to a speedy trial. And --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Okay. Thank you.
MS. SIGLER: Yes, sir.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How -- on that, how could
it possibly be Lorenzi's fault, which is what you said
is your first point, when he said, pay me, Supreme Court
of Louisiana, you have said that my operation as counsel
for this indigent defendant doesn't become operative
till I get paid, I have a right to get paid.
All that counsel did was to say, again and
again, pay me, get the funds to pay me. I don't
understand how in the world it could be the fault of an
attorney who has not gotten one cent from the State, has
a right to be paid before he engages in
representation -- how can it be his fault?
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Ginsburg, there
are several reasons why it's Mr. Lorenzi's fault. The
first of which is he filed a motion under
State v. Wigley, and that is Appendix X of your Joint
Appendix.
In that motion, he identified
State v. Wigley, and, although he referenced wanting
expert resources as well, he primarily based that motion
on his entitlement to attorney's fees.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I -- I was going to ask you
that question. Opposing counsel said that it -- it
wasn't primarily attorney's fees that's at issue here,
but investigation costs. That makes a difference to me
because, if it's just attorney's fees, he could have
gone ahead with one attorney, as far as I'm concerned.
MS. SIGLER: I agree with you,
Justice Scalia. And, if you look at Appendix LL, which
is the hearing on the motion to quash, Mr. Lorenzi says,
point blank -- in that appendix, he says, "I was not
going to proceed to file substantive motions until I was
funded."
And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Doesn't he say, at the
same time, I couldn't do the investigation to make the
motion required by the State? So didn't that implicate
the funding for investigation?
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Sotomayor, if you
look at Appendix LL, where Mr. Lorenzi is speaking, he
says, "I have done substantial investigation on my own."
Mr. Lorenzi had the assistance, at that time, of the
LCAC, with Ms. Christine Lehmann assisting him as
associate counsel.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Were there funds for
investigation?
MS. SIGLER: There were funds available in
03 that Mr. Lorenzi did not avail himself of because
he continued his funding motion eight times.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Which funds? Which
funds?
MS. SIGLER: There were -- there was a
capital defense account that was held by the Calcasieu
Parish Public Defender's Office. Mr. Lorenzi identified
that account as a source of funding in record volume 1,
pages 193 to 194.
He says, in a letter to Judge David Painter,
then the presiding trial judge, that he has identified a
source of funds for his representation. In that same
letter, he moves to continue a funding hearing that was,
at that time, scheduled for the next month.
And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Wait a minute. I was
told -- maybe I am sort of misreading this record --
that he was ultimately told that fund wouldn't be made
available.
MS. SIGLER: That is not correct, Your
Honor. If you read Appendix LL, Chief Public Defender
Ron Ware testifies that that fund had been used to pay
other capital counsel in Calcasieu Parish. It had been
used extensively.
Now, by the time we get to the funding
hearing, which was delayed because of Mr. Lorenzi, we
are in 2006. At that time, there is a backlog in
expenses that they are paying other capital counsel
because they pay their bills on a first come, first
served basis.
Had Mr. Lorenzi proceeded to hearing in
2003, there was an identified account that would have
paid him. He did not submit any bills to the public
defender's office to be paid.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Sigler, on appeal, you
said this, the -- the State said, because the defendant
was without properly funded counsel for so long, the
State simply could not ethically or legally bring him to
trial. So what did you mean when you said that, that
the State could not ethically or legally bring him to
trial?
MS. SIGLER: Justice Kagan, what that
statement meant was that we were aware of the fact that
the Petitioner was, at all times, urging his privilege
under Rule 31 to capital-certified counsel.
We did not want to be involved in the
business of questioning a Petitioner's right to counsel.
We did not feel that, ethically, we could do so under
the Rules of Professional Conduct. For us to interfere
with that right would have been inappropriate, in our
view.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, did you ever say to
Mr. Boyer -- you know, you can go ahead, right now, with
this single counsel that you have? Was -- was that ever
a choice put to him?
Or because -- the way I read all of your
assertions below and, indeed, the entire record below,
is that everybody simply assumed that the case could not
go forward in its present circumstances.
MS. SIGLER: Justice Kagan, I think that
that assumption was made, in part, out of a desire to
recognize Mr. Boyer's decision to try to pursue Rule 31
privileges. It's certainly -- I understand that we
could have --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, a decision implies a
choice. Was a choice ever put to him?
MS. SIGLER: He had a choice that was
implicit, Your Honor, under Louisiana law; and he knew
that, and his counsel certainly knew that.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, you didn't even know
that. You said the State could not ethically or legally
bring him to trial. How was he supposed to know that?
MS. SIGLER: Justice Kagan, our response
in -- in that particular phrase that you are speaking of
has to do with our response to how the Petitioner has
phrased this issue all along. The Petitioner has
continuously phrased this issue as if he had a right to
capital-certified counsel, and, in fact, in his reply
brief, that is what he states.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I thought -- I thought the
statement meant could not ethically or legally bring him
to trial while he is insisting on his right to two
counsel.
MS. SIGLER: That's correct, Justice Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It would have been
different if he had said, the devil with the second
counsel, I want a -- I want a prompt trial.
MS. SIGLER: That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Then you would have felt
that, legally and ethically, you could proceed.
MS. SIGLER: Yes, sir. Yes, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about your
friend's argument that he couldn't ask for a speedy
trial without an affidavit saying he was ready to go to
trial?
MS. SIGLER: It's interesting that
Petitioner argued that here today because, under Article
71 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, while an affidavit
is listed in the statute as one requirement, as a matter
of course, motions for speedy trial are granted pro se
all the time that meet none of the requirements in that
statute.
In addition, Rule 31 does not say that a
defendant who is trying to avail himself of Rule 31
can't file a motion for a speedy trial. It says nothing
to that effect.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Boyer was -- had a
limited education and a low IQ. Did anyone ever counsel
him about this, no, you don't have to have two lawyers,
you can have one? Did any judge ever tell him what his
rights were?
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Ginsburg, I would
first like to address that I do not believe the
petitioner has a low IQ. In fact, that was refuted by
our Dr. Charles Robertson at a competency proceeding.
In fact, the results that was given from an
IQ test when he was 15, the person administering it
specifically stated that he was malingering, which would
cause a 10-point drop in the IQ --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: What was the level of his
education?
MS. SIGLER: I believe his level of
education was eighth grade. But I would --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And he was expected to
know all this about two counsel -- you have a right to
two counsel, but, if the State isn't going to pay them,
you can go forward with one counsel?
Did anyone ever tell this man, with an
eighth grade education, what his rights were?
MS. SIGLER: Justice Ginsburg, I don't
believe that that specific discussion was ever had --
JUSTICE SCALIA: His -- his one counsel
might have known.
MS. SIGLER: His one --
JUSTICE SCALIA: He did have one counsel.
He had one counsel because he only graduated from the
eighth grade. That's why we provide counsel. And that
counsel could have known, no?
MS. SIGLER: Absolutely. In fact,
Mr. Lorenzi was well aware of the fact that he could
have chosen -- the Petitioner could have chosen to
proceed with just one counsel.
But I'd also like to note, Justice Scalia,
that, from 2002 to 2004, he had three counsel. He had
Mr. Lorenzi, he had Mr. Steven Singer, and he had
Ms. Christine Lehman.
He didn't just have one; he had three.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And she was not -- you
know, you said that, at all times, he had at least two.
It seemed to me -- two paid counsel. Lorenzi wasn't
paid, so it was -- was it Singer?
MS. SIGLER: Yes, ma'am.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And then the woman --
Lehman, is it? But, when she started representing him,
she didn't have the qualifications to be counsel.
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Ginsburg, as has
been alluded to before, I believe, by Justice Scalia,
she absolutely had the qualifications to serve as
counsel, as required by the Sixth Amendment. And --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But she wouldn't -- she
couldn't be appointed counsel in a death case under
Louisiana's rules.
MS. SIGLER: She met the qualifications for
associate counsel. In fact, she was later certified in
a motion filed by Mr. Lorenzi to be associate counsel --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Yes, but, in the very
beginning, she wasn't even qualified to do that.
MS. SIGLER: Well, there was a provision --
there is a provision in Louisiana law -- law that allows
someone to move for the admission and the certification
of somebody as capital counsel, which was the procedure
employed in this case. That is perfectly permissible.
But Miss Lehman, at that time, was a very
experienced attorney, and we lay out her qualifications
in the brief. So, while she may not have been perfectly
qualified under Rule 31 to serve as lead counsel, she
certainly was more than qualified --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is -- is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: She was a graduate of Yale
law school; wasn't she?
MS. SIGLER: She's a very impressive
attorney.
JUSTICE SCALIA: And another of his counsel,
Mr. Singer -- of the three that he had -- he was a
graduate of Harvard law school; wasn't he?
MS. SIGLER: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Son of a gun.
MS. SIGLER: Very exceptional.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is that the minimum
constitutional --
JUSTICE THOMAS: Well, there -- see, he did
not provide good counsel.
(Laughter.)
MS. SIGLER: I would refute that,
Justice Thomas.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, is -- do you
want to define constitutionally adequate counsel? Is it
anybody who's graduated from Harvard and Yale?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Or even just passed the
bar?
MS. SIGLER: Or LSU law. I went to Harvard.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I would think -- no, no,
no. This is a very serious question which is, I don't
know that we have ever defined what the minimum
qualification is for qualified counsel.
But it is -- some of it has to be that
counsel themselves feel adequate to represent a capital
defendant.
MS. SIGLER: Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I know plenty of lawyers
who would never either volunteer or would resist being
appointed to take on that kind of case because it has
many differences to a normal case.
MS. SIGLER: I would agree with that,
Justice Sotomayor, but I would invite you to look at the
motion that moved for the certification of Ms. Lehman,
which is in the record. That motion --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: She's a very experienced
trial counsel. There's no -- no doubt of that. But was
she a capital counsel?
MS. SIGLER: She was, Your Honor. That
motion specifically refers to the seven capital cases
she had worked on and states that, while at the LCAC --
the Louisiana Capital Assistance Center -- she had
worked on other capital cases in advisory positions. So
she --
JUSTICE ALITO: Let me -- let me give you a
holding -- this is an incredibly factually complicated
case. We don't usually take cases that are so
fact-bound, but we've taken it.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE ALITO: Let me give you a rule that
we might adopt. If the failure to provide funding makes
it impossible for some period of time for a case to be
tried, then the delay is attributable to the State.
Would you agree with that?
MS. SIGLER: If the failure to provide
funding is a deliberate attempt on the State to
interfere with the Sixth Amendment right to counsel,
then I would agree with that.
JUSTICE BREYER: You also agree, right on
this subject, that the only sentence that I can find --
I haven't read it totally carefully -- but, in the lower
court opinion, that has to do with this is the sentence
I read before.
And it says, "The first three years he was
incarcerated, he was charged with first-degree murder,
and the progression of the prosecution was out of the
State's control, as determined by this Court and the
Supreme Court."
Now, when I look at those words, I am not
100 percent certain what they mean. So it would be
helpful -- but I don't want --- you're not going to do
it -- I'd like to -- are you -- would you concede that
that statement means they're saying that the State, for
speedy trial purposes, is not to be held accountable,
really, at all, for not providing the money, insofar as
that's a cause of the delay?
Is that a conceded point? Or is that
something I have to spend quite a lot of time going
through?
And, if you don't concede that, what is it
that you concede, which would spare a little time going
through this record.
MS. SIGLER: Justice Breyer, I regret to
inform you that I do not concede that point.
JUSTICE BREYER: All right.
MS. SIGLER: I believe that if you look at
the --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: I thought maybe you would
not, but --
(Laughter.)
MS. SIGLER: I believe that, if you look at
Appendix D, as I stated earlier, the other Barker
factors are discussed. And the continuance motions that
were filed by defense counsel are mentioned with regard
to the assertion of the right; they are not necessarily
mentioned with regard to the State.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, you are right. Most
of this opinion -- and almost all of it is about the
other factors. Now, I agree with you, that's what it
looked like. But we do have this sentence.
So how am I supposed to figure out whether
that sentence really means what they say? Or just is
something they threw in to make the opinion more
difficult for us to understand?
MS. SIGLER: I don't think that was the
stated -- the -- the intention of the Third Circuit,
Justice Breyer.
JUSTICE BREYER: No, I don't either. I
don't either. But what's the argument -- sounds as if
it has something to do with funding. So what's the
argument it doesn't?
MS. SIGLER: Well, I believe --
JUSTICE BREYER: I mean, it says, you see,
"as determined by this Court and the Supreme Court."
What were they talking about?
MS. SIGLER: Well, I believe what the Third
Circuit was referring to was this Court's
Barker v. Wingo jurisprudence. This Court has stated,
repeatedly, that even if something --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, okay. Well, then,
that's it. They're referring to Barker. Okay.
So when they say it's out of this State's
control, as referred to in Barker, which is our case,
then what they mean is that it's not something that the
State had anything to do with, so they shouldn't be
blamed for it.
MS. SIGLER: I think that they are
attempting, in some fashion, to reconcile some of this
Court's later statements in the Barker jurisprudence,
which this Court made it clear, in Vermont v. Brillon,
that certain actions are not going to be attributed to
the State for speedy trial purposes --
JUSTICE BREYER: When you agreed with --
JUSTICE KAGAN: Ms. Sigler, could you go
back to Justice Alito's question?
MS. SIGLER: I'm sorry?
JUSTICE KAGAN: That was a good -- that was
a good segue.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You added the word
"deliberate" --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Justice Alito, I
think, has a question pending.
MS. SIGLER: Okay.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, you agreed with the --
the principle that I mentioned, except that you want to
draw a distinction between the failure to provide
funding and the deliberate failure to provide funding?
Is that a real difference?
MS. SIGLER: Absolutely.
JUSTICE ALITO: Can the State inadvertently
failed to provide funding?
MS. SIGLER: I think that this Court has
always recognized, in the Barker jurisprudence, that
negligence is a very different factor in how it weighs
against a State than a deliberate attempt to violate a
constitutional right to a speedy trial.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How can --
JUSTICE KAGAN: When we said in Krillon
delays resulting from a systemic breakdown in the public
defender system could be charged to the State, so that
suggests systemic breakdown doesn't necessarily mean
deliberate. It just means there has been a breakdown,
and the result is that the person can't get to trial.
And if -- I think -- if Justice Alito could
even read that again and if you think about it, in light
of this statement in Krillon, that systemic breakdowns
are systemic breakdowns, whether or not they are
deliberate.
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Kagan, I think
that the best evidence or the fact that there was no
systemic breakdown is the funding hearing itself,
Appendix JJ.
At that funding hearing, there are extensive
discussions about other capital cases within the State
that are being tried the entire time this case is
pending, including one case that we referred to,
State v. Reeves, in Calcasieu Parish, a capital case
that went to trial in less than four years, that
included a retrial.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, let's say you have a
case where the -- the defendant wants counsel, can't
afford counsel, and the State says, we'd love to provide
counsel for you, but we're broke, we just don't have any
money to provide counsel, but, maybe in a year, we'll
have money to provide counsel.
Now, what do we do with the delay between
that point and -- and the -- the point, a year later,
when the money becomes available?
MS. SIGLER: Well, I think, from that
scenario, we would have to look at the State's
intention. I certainly think that, if the State flat
out said, I'm sorry, you're not getting counsel for a
year, then we would have to attribute that factor to the
State more heavily, even though it does appear that, in
your scenario, it's more of a negligence problem than a
deliberate we're not going to fund you problem.
JUSTICE BREYER: Suppose it is negligent.
For -- for a year, this person isn't represented because
the State keeps sending the checks to his cousin of the
same name. I mean -- you know, they didn't do it
purposely. He just happens to have a cousin, this
lawyer, of the same name, who doesn't tell him he's
getting these checks out of nowhere.
So he can't hire the expert. Absolute
negligence. I mean, that's not to be attributed to the
State?
MS. SIGLER: No, Justice Breyer. Clearly --
JUSTICE BREYER: Is there any authority for
that? I mean -- you know, maybe you'd discount it
because it wasn't deliberate, but no attribution
whatsoever?
MS. SIGLER: Well, you discount it,
Justice Breyer, and you attribute it to more of a
negligence standard than you would a -- an absolute
failure or refusal to provide counsel. And this Court
has done that repeatedly.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm sorry. What's the
difference between saying, I'm broke, and I want to pay
the prosecutor because they kept paying the prosecutor,
I want to pay for the prosecutor's investigation, but I
won't pay you? What -- what is the difference in
applying the negligence versus deliberate standard?
I mean, look, in the end, States are always
strapped, but I don't know a State who doesn't make some
income. They make a choice about where they want that
income to go. And it may be, in your judgment, a more
legitimate decision, but why is the situation less
negligent -- why is it negligent and not deliberate?
Why is the choice one, not the other?
MS. SIGLER: Because, Justice Sotomayor, I
believe in this Court's decisions, under
Barker v. Wingo, the choice aspect -- the deliberate
intent aspect has been looked at by the courts in
deciding how much of the blame is to be assessed against
the State.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, then answer the
question. Why isn't the choice to say, I -- I'm broke,
so I don't want to pay you, I'm going to pay the
prosecutor -- which happened, the prosecutors were being
paid throughout. They had enough money to investigate,
but we're choosing not to pay the defendants.
Why isn't that a deliberate choice?
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Sotomayor, that
choice was not made in this case. There was available
funds. What we're here -- we're here today --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Available funds to pay
the lawyer?
MS. SIGLER: There were available funds in
2003. I was referring to that letter in the record
that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The -- the court itself
said, repeatedly, that the cause of the delay was the
funding crisis, the court -- I think we have to accept
that as being the case, that the funding crisis -- the
effort to get this lawyer paid failed, time and again.
And it was the court determination that it is the
funding crisis that caused the delay.
MS. SIGLER: Well, Justice Ginsburg, the
funding crisis that the court ruled on was present in
2006. It was not present in 2003, when this case
started. Mr. Lorenzi, himself, identified a source of
funds -- funds to pay him.
And when we hear Chief Public Defender Ron
Ware testify at that motion for funding hearing, at
Appendix JJ, he says, yes, I have a special capital
defense account, and, yes, I have been paying capital
attorneys from this account throughout this time period.
The fact that there weren't funds readily
available in 2006 is directly attributable to Petitioner's
counsels failing to move his funding herein forward in
03, when he first identified that source of funds.
This is not a case in which there was never any funding.
This was a case in which defense counsel,
for whatever reason, delayed a resolution of the funding
issue, an issue that he, himself, identified as one --
without any resolution, he was not going to go forward
with substantive motions.
The onus -- the -- the blame -- or more of
the blame in this case, on the funding problem, belongs
with the Petitioner, not the State of Louisiana, whether
we mean the prosecution --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I'm not going to argue
the funding issue because I've got to go look at the
record again.
But let's assume that the record doesn't
support your claim because, as I read the decisions
below and the record that I saw, there wasn't funding
available until -- I think it was 2006 or '7? And so,
somehow, there's a disconnect between what you're saying
and the record.
But let's assume that -- my hypothetical,
that there wasn't money, despite whatever you're saying.
What's your position then? Then it's not
deliberate? It's still negligence.
MS. SIGLER: Justice Sotomayor, I maintain
that position, and I believe it to be consistent with
this Court's repeated analysis under Barker v. Wingo
jurisprudence.
You do look at the intent of the State as
either a negligence factor, akin to more of a neutral
factor, a deliberate factor, or a valid reason for the
delay. And I would also suggest to Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there could never be
a systematic breakdown, in your judgment, because any
time the State gives resources to something else, it's
not deliberate -- it's not a systemic breakdown.
MS. SIGLER: Justice Sotomayor, I would
invite you to look at the motion for funding hearing
again. There was money allocated to indigent defense by
Louisiana. It has increased -- and this is public
record, and it's partially supported by the funding
hearing.
That money has increased from 9.4 million in
2006 to 20 million in 2 -- I'm sorry -- in 2005, to 20
million in 2006, to $33 million today. House Bill 1 of
the State legislative website. That is the precise
amount prosecutors are awarded by the State.
I would, again, suggest that this is not a
case of systemic breakdown. And I think that, as a
policy matter, this Court should be reluctant to rule
against the State of Louisiana, which, as Justice Scalia
noted, has been so generous in trying to provide capital
indigent defendants with specially qualified counsel,
which is more counsel than they're even entitled to
under the Sixth Amendment.
And I would also urge this Court to be
cognizant of its own repeated statements in the past,
that this is a very severe remedy with regard to letting
a convicted murderer free.
I'd also like to address, before I sit down
and turn this back over to Mr. Bourke, Justice Ginsburg,
earlier, you had addressed the question of whether or
not the armed robbery was, in fact, still a valid
charge.
Contrary to Mr. Bourke's assertion before
Your Honor today, if you look at Appendix 254A, there is
a writ of opposition that was filed by the Petitioner
before the Louisiana Supreme Court. And, at 254A, he
says -- and I quote -- "Even if the murder indictment
were quashed, Mr. Boyer faces the armed robbery
prosecution."
The Third Circuit also rejected Mr. Bourke's
current double jeopardy argument and stated specifically
that there was no speedy trial problem with regard to
the armed robbery.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Bourke, you have about 3 minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD BOURKE
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BOURKE: Thank you. And I have a few
points of clarification that I want to make, just in a
very quick fashion.
Justice Sotomayor, there was no funding in
01, 2002, 2003. It was never there. If Your Honor
looks at the Louisiana Supreme Court opinion in Citizen,
it will describe the Turner case funding hearing in
2001. Mr. Lorenzi was stuck with that one as well.
There was no money.
Mr. Lorenzi did, indeed, submit bills in
2003 because a new procedure had been announced, and
that's at page -- Joint Appendix page 401 to '3. You'll
see the correspondence showing he did submit bills, and
there was no money.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There was money
allocated, but, if I understood the record correctly --
by the State -- the funding was grossly inadequate to
cover all the needs?
MR. BOURKE: Right. It was -- it was
underwater. It was oversubscribed. It --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Mr. Bourke, would you
respond to the last point made by -- by opposing
counsel?
MR. BOURKE: Yes, certainly.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You did state -- it's in
Appendix J -- "Even if the murder indictment were
quashed, Mr. Boyer faces the armed robbery prosecution."
MR. BOURKE: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You told us, today, that
that's not the case, that the armed robbery prosecution
goes down the drain. Which -- which is true?
MR. BOURKE: The passage you're referring to
is from a writ application purely limited to the
application of the State speedy trial statute, which
does accord a new clock to every new filing.
So, under Louisiana State statutory law, the
armed robbery started the State statutory clock again,
but that is not the case for the Sixth Amendment --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As to the murder or as
to the independent robbery count? It's not a lesser
included offense, the robbery count.
MR. BOURKE: The armed robbery was a lesser
included of first-degree murder, but it is not a lesser
included of second-degree murder. Our double jeopardy
argument was the same force was applied in both, the
force for the murder and the force for the armed
robbery, so that's completely irrelevant.
But that was a State statutory argument
about the armed robbery charge, which has no
application in the case in front of us.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Boyer -- why would --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Go ahead.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Why would we get to that
question? I mean, no courts below have dealt with it.
It has been briefed to us in a grand total of two
paragraphs, I think. There would be no reason for us to
get to that question.
MR. BOURKE: It -- it is well beyond the
question presented, Your Honor, I agree.
Your Honor, the --
JUSTICE KAGAN: And so -- so, from that
point of view, we can assume that there is a robbery
conviction that is still out there.
MR. BOURKE: He has a murder and armed
robbery conviction from the same incident. It's the
same charge as the first-degree murder. It's just
unpacked.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Or assume that there isn't,
right?
MR. BOURKE: That -- that is why this Court
would remand to allow the -- the local court to deal
with it and ensure that that's accurate.
Justice Breyer, the reference to our
earlier -- the decision of this Court and the supreme
court is a reference to the earlier decision on the
interlocutory writ application, the earlier decision
that a lack of adequate funds prevented the prosecution.
And if Your Honor looks at Joint Appendix,
at page 126, which is part of the opinion of the Third
Circuit, you will see, earlier, in their opinion, they
discuss their own earlier ruling in the supreme court --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:59 a.m., the case in the
