IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
UTILITY AIR REGULATORY GROUP,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 12-1146
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY;  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
AMERICAN CHEMISTRY  :
COUNCIL, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 12-1248
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,  :
ET AL.,  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ENERGY-INTENSIVE MANUFACTURERS  :
WORKING GROUP ON GREENHOUSE GAS  :
REGULATION, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 12-1254
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,  :
ET AL.,  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
SOUTHEASTERN LEGAL FOUNDATION,  :
INC., ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 12-1268
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,  :
ET AL.,  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
TEXAS, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 12-1269
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,  :
ET AL.,  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE OF  :
THE UNITED STATES, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 12-1272
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY,  :
ET AL.,  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, February 24, 2014
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MR. PETER KEISLER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
the Private Party Petitioners.
MR. JONATHAN F. MITCHELL, ESQ., Solicitor General of
Texas, Austin, Texas; on behalf of State Petitioners.
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
MR. PETER KEISLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Private Party Petitioners  5
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MR. JONATHAN F. MITCHELL, ESQ.
On behalf of the State Petitioners  33
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents  45
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MR. PETER KEISLER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Private Party Petitioners  88
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We will hear
argument this morning in Case 12-1146, Utility Air
Regulatory Group v. The Environmental Protection Agency
and the consolidated cases.
Mr. Keisler.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER KEISLER
ON BEHALF OF THE PRIVATE PARTY PETITIONERS
MR. KEISLER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The situation presented by this case is, to
our knowledge, unprecedented in at least two respects.
First, EPA agrees that if its interpretation of the PSD
and Title V statutes is adopted, then applying other
provisions of those same statutes would, according to
their terms, would in EPA's words, result in a program
that would have been unrecognizable to the Congress that
enacted it, and so contrary to Congress's intent that
the agency calls it absurd.
And second, EPA took that conclusion not as
a reason to reexamine its interpretation, but as a basis
for rewriting other provisions of the statutes that are
clear and unambiguous, the numerical permitting
thresholds that Congress enacted, because the agency
wrongly believes that fixes the problem.  And this is
not a single one-time act of statutory rewriting, as
problematic as that alone would be, because the agency
has said it intends to continually adjust and readjust
thresholds into the indefinite future based on its
ongoing assessment of the costs and benefits of
regulation.  So --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Keisler, I'm sorry.  Can
I ask about your interpretation of the phrase "any air
pollutant"?  Because there are a lot of different
interpretations that have gone on among the various
briefs and among the lower court opinions in this case.
So here are some choices, all right?  And I want really
to ask you to pick what you're arguing for.
Your original position was that "any air
pollutant" meant any NAAQS pollutant for which the area
is in attainment; that was your original position.
Judge Kavanaugh's position is that it means any NAAQS
pollutant.  There is another position that goes on in
the briefs that says, no, it doesn't mean any NAAQS
pollutant; it means any local pollutant, whether or not
it's a NAAQS pollutant; and there is still another
position that says it's really any regulated pollutant
other than greenhouse gases.
So those are four different interpretations
that all of the folks on your side, and I realize there
are a lot of them, have presented.  And I guess I'm
asking you which one you're arguing for.
MR. KEISLER:  Yes.  Your Honor, I'm here on
behalf of all the Private Party Petitioners, and we have
two arguments.  Our principal argument and the one I
would like to focus on first is that while other
programs of the Clean Air Act give EPA authority to
regulate greenhouse gases from stationary sources, PSD
does not.  And that is because -- and this is where I
would choose one of the options Your Honor gave me --
and that is because the PSD program is exclusively
focused on emissions that have area-specific air quality
impacts, and not on globally undifferentiated phenomena.
I wouldn't use the words --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  May I ask --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  When you say area-specific,
I mean, I take it that these sort of ozone pollutants
are not area-specific.  Would your interpretation
exclude those as well?
MR. KEISLER:  If the EPA couldn't make a
regulatory finding that they had an area-specific air
quality impact, yes.  Now, the Solicitor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Could I ask you a
follow-up to Justice Kagan?  Now that's a fifth
interpretation by your side.  That to me is the
quintessential ambiguity in a statute where we give
deference to the agency.  So if your side can't even
come to one interpretation, why shouldn't we defer to
the agency?
MR. KEISLER:  Well, first of all, Your
Honor, the deference that an agency is afforded is
always going to be limited to reasonable
interpretations, and we would start out with the premise
that an interpretation that requires the agency to
rewrite other provisions of the Act is not reasonable.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, it hasn't
rewritten them.  All it has said, as I understand it,
and I don't understand -- other than your view that
there are too many people it's regulating, is that we
can't implement it immediately, because it would
overburden us administratively.  It hasn't said that
over time, with streamlining and with other adjustments,
that it can't do this.  It's just said we can't do it
right away.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right, Your Honor.  And
that actually reflects a deeper problem, and I'd like to
address that, and then also explain why our position, we
think, is the correct and only correct interpretation of
the statute on the broader question.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Before you do that, can
you clarify whether or not you agree with the dissenting
judges on the D.C. Circuit?  That is, if we limit it to
criteria pollutants, even so, BACT must be installed for
greenhouse gases.  You seemed in your main brief to
agree with that.  You have a footnote saying it's got a
heck of a lot of differences.  It's 86 percent of the
emissions on the Government's theory; 83 on yours.  But
your reply brief seems to turn 180 degrees from that.
MR. KEISLER:  And -- and let me sort that
out.  And I recognize, Your Honor, that having six
opening briefs isn't the most effective or most helpful
way to the Court to present our position.  So let me
express on behalf of all the private Petitioners, there
are two arguments.
Our principal argument, and the one I would
like to focus on the most, is that greenhouse gases are
not included within the PSD program at all.  They can't
trigger its applicability and they wouldn't be subject
to the Best Available Control Technology determination.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But, again, that's because
they're not local.
MR. KEISLER:  Because they don't have
area-specific air quality impacts, yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, what do you make --
what do you make of the endangerment finding that
greenhouse gases have severe effects at the local level
that -- I think the endangerment finding is not before
us today.  The endangerment finding is that they
exacerbate ground-level ozone and smog.
MR. KEISLER:  Certainly, every effect that
any environmental phenomenon has on the planet and on
people will at some point be felt in some local area.
Our point is that that is not the kind of measurable
area-specific, regionally-defined air quality impact
that the PSD statute --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's certainly not
measurable.  The agency doesn't even assert that it's
measurable, right?
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.  And -- and
maybe it would help if I specifically identified.  There
are three features of the PSD --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm sorry.  Before
you do that, we have an outstanding question from
Justice Sotomayor.  Maybe --
MR. KEISLER:  Thank you very much, Mr.
Chief Justice.
The problem is not simply that the agency
rewrote the thresholds and said that it will eventually
try, as it did say, to get down to the level of the
statutory thresholds, because the reason that Congress
wrote those thresholds was because it wanted to exempt
small entities from the costs and burdens of the
permitting process.  And so when EPA says that it hopes
eventually to get down to the apartment buildings and
large high schools that would be covered if those
thresholds were applied to carbon dioxide, it is
contravening congressional intent in another way.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I didn't read them as
saying that anyway.  I read them as saying they'll try
to do it, but make whatever exemptions are necessary.
MR. KEISLER:  Well, and the problem is,
Justice Scalia, that those exemptions violate the
statute as well.  The exemptions they're talking about
in order to deal with the small entities that Congress
meant to exclude would be to have general permits by
category.  And the statute specifically says that these
determinations are to be case by case followed by an
individualized hearing.  And so --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It -- it clearly is not a
matter of the EPA simply saying we can't do it right
away, but we're going to do it eventually.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It hasn't said that.
MR. KEISLER:  It hasn't, and if they did say
that, they would be violating the statute in worse ways.
They would be treating a command by Congress not to
regulate small entities into a command to regulate small
entities.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Mr. Keisler, do you really
mean to say that the only difference between greenhouse
gases and the air pollutants that Congress clearly had
in mind when it enacted the Clean Air Act is that
greenhouse gases don't have a localized effect?  Isn't
there also a big difference in that the quantity of
greenhouse gases that are emitted by sources are much
greater than the quantity of these other pollutants and
that's why there's this discrepancy between the
statutory threshold and the threshold that EPA has --
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.
JUSTICE ALITO:  -- substituted?
MR. KEISLER:  That's right, Your Honor.  And
I think there are really two parallel problems that
we're dealing with, each of which creates its own need
for the EPA to violate the statute in order to save it
for greenhouse gases.
One is the one that Your Honor and Justice
Sotomayor were referring to, which is this was a statute
designed for case-by-case permitting of a small number
of large sources that materially contribute to the
problem.  And whether you rewrite the thresholds or
promise to regulate down to the infinitesimal level, you
are violating that aspect of the statute.
But the other aspect of the statute, which
is equally violated here, is the requirement that this
particular program, not the other programs in the Act,
but this particular program, be focused on these
area-specific air quality impacts.  And there are three
features, the three central features of the PSD statute,
which we think show that.
The first is Section 7471, which is, I
think, on page 13A of the appendix to the Government's
brief.  And that is the provision that specifies what
the PSD program applies to and also explains what PSD,
"prevention of significant deterioration," refers to.
And 7471 says, "The program consists of emissions
limitations and other measures as may be necessary to
prevent significant deterioration of air quality in each
region that bears certain designations."  And "air
quality in each region" is Clean Air Act language for
that subset of air pollution problems that have
regionally-defined effects on the air that people
breathe.
JUSTICE BREYER:  How does the -- this
differ?  I mean, there are many statutes, I believe,
particularly in the regulatory area, where Congress
passes a statute that tells the agency, do A, B, C and
D.  And then it turns out, since there's so many of the
regulated things, that it just doesn't make sense to
apply A, B and C and D to all of them.  So often I would
think courts read in an exception where it makes no
sense.
For example, if there were a statute that
said you have to throw out all bubble gum that's been
around for more than a month.  Well, what about bubble
gum used in a display case that nobody ever intends to
eat?  You see?  And so what we do all the time is we
say, well, it doesn't mean to apply to that.  Now, why
can't we take the same approach or EPA takes the same
approach here?  It says 250 tons or more and we apply
that all over the place, except it doesn't make sense
here, so we read an exception into it, unwritten, for
places where it makes no sense?
MR. KEISLER:  I don't know that there
actually is a precedent of this Court which says the
agency can do precisely what it did here, which is take
an express command that identifies thresholds, that
didn't delegate to the agency the determination of the
thresholds but says --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But I'm -- but I'm a
little confused, because there have to be pollutants
who -- where it doesn't emit just 250, where it emits a
million.  And the Best Available Control Technology
won't get it down to below 250.  Yet the PSD program is
in effect when they get down below 250 on any pollutant
of the six criteria.  So it can't be your view that this
statute was written only to -- to get to measurable
pollutants that -- that are at 250 or -- or can be
brought below 250.
MR. KEISLER:  Well, that's right, Your
Honor.  It's not our position that the purpose of Best
Available Control Technology is to bring facilities down
to below the 250 level.  It's our position that the
statute sets that 250 ton per year level as the trigger,
that a facility which emits or has a potential to emit
that or more is subject --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That's a minimum, but
anything --
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- above it.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.  Anything above
it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  All right.  So --
MR. KEISLER:  And then -- and then Best
Available --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And so GHG is something
that's above that and it's never going to be brought
down below it.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.  But it's above
it for millions of entities that Congress intended to
exempt from the permitting process.  And if I could just
continue --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Right.  Well, let's
go --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Keisler, if I could
follow up, really, on Justice Breyer's question, because
the conundrum here, you keep saying:  Look, EPA is
violating this specific statutory term.  But the
conundrum that this cases raises is that everybody is
violating a statutory term.  EPA is saying, no, we can't
do the 100 to 250 with respect to greenhouse gases, but
you are also violating a statutory term.  You know, it
says any pollutant or it says in the other provision
each pollutant subject to regulation.  Nobody would
think that the most natural, most reasonable readings of
those phrases are any pollutant if they have localized
effects, but not otherwise.
So I mean, what's happened here is that you
have this new kind of emission that basically makes
these two terms of the statute irreconcilable, and the
agency has essentially picked one.  It said:  Look,
we're not going to just exempt a broad class of
pollutants.  Instead, we're going to fudge the numbers.
And why isn't that the more reasonable of the two things
to do?
MR. KEISLER:  Because we don't agree, Your
Honor, that those two -- that those two horns of the
dilemma that Your Honor described are equally situated.
Certainly, 100 and 250 tons per year is a clear and
unambiguous congressional command.  The question of how
to interpret the phrase "air pollutant" is -- that is an
issue that is subject to interpretation.  And if I could
just then follow up --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, I think I don't really
understand then.  But I mean, it's true that one is a
number.  But the other, each pollutant subject to
regulation or any air pollutant, what the EPA has done
is for 30 years across presidential administrations
treated those phrases as meaning a single thing, which I
think if you put aside the absurdity problem in this
case, everybody would agree is the most reasonable
interpretation of those phrases.  And you're saying the
EPA should junk that most reasonable interpretation of
those phrases because there's a new kind of emitted --
emitted chemical or whatever that makes the numbers not
work.
MR. KEISLER:  No.  Let me -- it goes much
beyond the numbers, Justice Kagan.  I think if anybody
were looking at the PSD statute in isolation, without
the benefit of Massachusetts v. EPA, assume that the
word "pollutant" was an undefined term and the question
was, what pollutants does this provision of the Clean
Act refer to, they would conclude that it refers to
pollutants only that have those area-specific air
quality impacts.  And it's not only that the prevention
of significant deterioration referred to in the statute
is the deterioration of air quality in each region.  It
is also two other features of that statute which we
think make that unambiguously clear.
The first is Section 7475(e), which can be
found on pages 27A to 29A, I think, of the Government's
statutory appendix.  And that mandates the one analysis
that has to be conducted in every permitting process,
and the one analysis that Congress has required be
available for public hearing, and that is an analysis of
the air quality and local conditions at the site of the
facility and each area that is going to be affected by
the emissions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Counsel, you began
that discussion by saying putting Massachusetts v. EPA
to one side.  But I was in the dissent in that case, but
we still can't do that.
MR. KEISLER:  No, that's --
(Laughter.)
MR. KEISLER:  That's -- that's right, Your
Honor.  And I think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And -- and my question is
along that exact same line.  Let's assume, and it's the
case, that we're bound by both the result and the
reasoning of Massachusetts and EPA, and the -- the
American Electric v. Connecticut case.  Under your view,
what regulatory force, what regulatory significance, do
those cases have under, A, your approach and, B, the
approach by the Chamber of Commerce in the blue brief?
I -- I think that may be consistent with the subject the
Chief Justice just opened.
MR. KEISLER:  Sure.  Let me begin with
Massachusetts v. EPA and then I'll turn to AEP v.
Connecticut.  Massachusetts v. EPA did not hold that the
interpretation of pollutant in that opinion had to be
applied every time the word "pollutant" appears in the
Clean Air Act.  The same day that Massachusetts came
out, this Court decided Environmental Defense v. Duke,
in which it specifically said that even when a defined
term in the statutory definition provision is construed
a particular way, that doesn't mean that that same term
used elsewhere in the statute can't be construed
differently where context requires.  And the Court
reversed the Fourth Circuit for holding that they had to
be the same.
And that's why in Massachusetts, after
indeed holding that the definition of "pollutant"
unambiguously in its literal sense included greenhouse
gases, the Court didn't stop there.  It went on to ask
whether applying that definition to the Title II
provisions on motor vehicles that were at issue in that
case would produce what the Court called "extreme
measures or counterintuitive results."  And only after
finding that there'd be no extreme or counterintuitive
results did the Court direct the EPA to apply that
definition to those Title II provisions.
And I think what that reflected was that the
Court understood that the literal definition of
"pollutant" was sufficiently broad that it shouldn't be
mechanically applied, plugged in everywhere in the Act
that the word "pollutant" appears, without some
additional analysis of the context of those provisions.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  What else does it cover
other than Title II, other than mobile vehicles?
MR. KEISLER:  There are multiple places in
which the word "pollutant" appears in the Act in which
the EPA has understood Mass v. EPA the way I just
described, in which they have interpreted the words "any
air pollutant" to mean only a subset of the pollutants
that -- that the definition literally could be held to
encompass.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That's generally because
the section that it's in gives a different definition
directly.
MR. KEISLER:  No, that's -- with respect,
Your Honor, that's not correct.  So, for example, in the
PSD in Title V provisions, it says, "any air pollutant."
The EPA has interpreted that to mean any regulated air
pollutant, not because of any separate definition, but
because of context.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You are right, but --
MR. KEISLER:  The context suggests
otherwise.  The same thing with the provision on
visibility-impairing pollutants.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But your -- your answer is
that they can be treated differently under different
parts of the Act.  Doesn't that contradict your earlier
view that we can't change the statute?
MR. KEISLER:  No, I don't think so, Your
Honor, because it was an act of interpretation in
Massachusetts v. EPA of a particular term, and the
question is, reading that decision as a whole, what
import did the Court give that interpretation.  It would
not have needed to go on and say, let's look at
specifically the Title II provisions at issue here and
ask whether it will produce extreme or counterintuitive
measures if it weren't the case that that was an
additional part of the inquiry that was necessary.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And what other programs
I asked earlier.  So we have the mobile vehicles.  What
else?  You're saying it excludes PSD.  What else does
it --
MR. KEISLER:  I think most critically, Your
Honor, it includes the new source performance standards
program of Section 111 that this Court discussed in
Connecticut v. AEP.  And this is a very important point,
because this case is not about whether EPA can regulate
greenhouse gases from stationary sources.  This Court
held that it could under this program in Section 11.
This is about whether State and local
permitting authorities, the 90-plus State and local
permitting authorities, are supposed to regulate plant
by plant under this particular PSD program.  And I
mention the NSPS program because the features of that
program highlight what's wrong here because the NSPS
program doesn't contain the elements of the PSD program
that require the PSD program to be rewritten in so many
particulars to make greenhouse gases fit.
NSPS doesn't have the 100- and 250-ton per
year thresholds.  It lets EPA by notice and comment
rulemaking decide what categories of sources are most
contributing to the problem and most require regulation.
It doesn't require the area-specific local impact
analysis of subsection (e) of 7475, which EPA has told
State and local permitting authorities, even though it's
mandatory, don't conduct it because it can't be done for
greenhouse gases.
NSPS permits the EPA to look at reducing the
national footprint without regard to area-specific
impacts, and it permits the EPA to do this through a
national uniform emissions standard that the plants can
then determine how best to meet, rather than asking 90
State and local permitting authorities, which is what
PSD is about, to decide plant by plant what they think
each plant in their jurisdiction should do about global
warming.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So in your opinion -- is --
I'm not sure what the statutory cite is to the provision
you are talking about.  Is it 7411?
MR. KEISLER:  That's right, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  So you're
saying they could use 7411(a) and (b) to get to just the
same place they are today.
MR. KEISLER:  Yes, without --
JUSTICE BREYER:  You don't see an objection.
There must be some reason they didn't do that.
MR. KEISLER:  Well, they are doing it, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER:  They are doing it?  Well,
then I don't know what this case is about.  I mean, it's
a question of whether they do exactly the same thing
under one provision or another provision.  And you agree
with them that they could do it under the other one and
we'd end up at exactly the same place.
MR. KEISLER:  But it's not exactly the same
thing, Your Honor.  And it is the difference between
having the EPA, through notice and comment rulemaking,
establish a national emissions standards, and then the
plants can deal with that incentive system in the best
way they can and figure out how to meet it, versus this
command and control PSD mechanism, where 90-plus State
and local permitting authorities are each having to
decide on their own what controls they think each plant
in their area should engage in, in order to deal with
global warming.  It makes perfect sense to have 90 State
and local permitting authorities addressing the
area-specific air quality impacts of plants that are
built in their States.
JUSTICE BREYER:  It says, "such standards
with such modifications as he deems appropriate."
That's the language of 7411(b).
MR. KEISLER:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  So if this is the
right program, why couldn't they copy it word for word
into the rules and just put a different section number
at the bottom?  I know you'd have a preferred way to do
it, but if they disagreed with you and they think this
is the perfect program, why can't they do it?
MR. KEISLER:  Because the statutory language
and structure of the PSD program does not, we think,
encompass these kinds of pollutants that have globally
dispersed results and not area-specific impacts.  And
it's for the reasons that I've indicated.  7411, which
says -- sorry.  7471, which says that the prevention of
significant deterioration is focused on deterioration of
air quality in each region; the study required by
7475(e), which is of local conditions; and the fact that
this is assigned to 90 State and local permitting
authorities.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Is that your second point?
I've been keeping a list here of points you -- you have
not been permitted to get to.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA:  One, you were going to
discuss not just the Massachusetts case, but the
follow-on case to Massachusetts.
MR. KEISLER:  Oh, well, Connecticut.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You never did that, yes.
MR. KEISLER:  Well, Connecticut v. AEP, and
the only point to make about that is that that was the
case which held that the commission -- that the EPA has
authority under Section 111, the NSPS provision, to
address greenhouse gases without having to rewrite
thresholds by designating the categories of sources like
it's trying to do here.  But it has to do it by national
emissions standards through notice and comment
rulemaking.  Connecticut v. AEP certainly did not
approve -- the PSD provisions here -- certainly did not
approve the regulations rewriting the statutory
thresholds that the EPA had to -- had to promulgate in
this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The other thing -- you were
going to give two points and you only got to -- what is
it -- 7411(e), but there was another point.
MR. KEISLER:  There were really -- yes,
there were three features I mentioned of the PSD statute
which we think make the context clear.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You got the first, which
was the --
MR. KEISLER:  Which was 7471, prevention of
significant deterioration.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.
MR. KEISLER:  The second was that study, the
only required study is of local conditions and
area-specific impacts.  And the third is just that this
is assigned to 90 State and local permitting
authorities, which is -- it is not plausible to think
that with respect, not to these area-specific impacts,
but to a global problem like global warming that what
Congress was doing was saying we think 90 State and
local permitting authorities should make those decisions
rather than, perhaps, EPA on a national basis.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You -- just to be clear,
your reading would say that the -- that the agency was
not permitted, with notice and opportunity to be heard,
to say -- to make a -- make this a criteria of pollution
in NAAQS.
MR. KEISLER:  If the agency had tried to
establish a NAAQS for greenhouse gases, we think that
would be contrary to the statute because the National
Ambient Air Quality Standards are all about regional
concentrations.  Is this area in or out of compliance?
If the gas goes up to the atmosphere and is mixed there,
either the whole country is going to be in attainment or
the whole country is going to be out of attainment.  It
doesn't work at all with the NAAQS structure.
And if I could reserve the ---
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, why don't you
take an extra 5 minutes, and -- and you can begin by
answering the question:  You know, the Government
disaggregates the discussion, and their first point in
their brief is that greenhouse gases can be regulated
with respect to sources that are already covered by the
PSD program.  That position does not implicate your
concern about the broad reach of EPA regulation, does
it?
MR. KEISLER:  I think it does, Your Honor,
because while that might deal with the specific issue of
rewriting the thresholds, the fact that the PSD
provisions for the reasons I have indicated is limited
to area-specific air impacts would, we think, be
violated merely by applying Best Available Control
Technology to a globally dispersed substance like
greenhouse gases.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I understand.  But
they would only be applying that with respect to sources
that are already required to operate under PSD permits.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right, but they would
be applying it to a substance, greenhouse gases, which
the PSD program was not designed to address, which was
designed to be addressed by other programs.  And I would
say, Your Honor, that while they have tried to separate
those issues out, that there's one issue about who has
to get a permit and the other issue about whether the
requirements of Best Available Control Technology apply,
the regulation that they have adopted to implement what
they call their tailoring rule applies equally to both.
What they've done is say that the words
"subject to regulation," which are the words in the BACT
provision, shall only apply to greenhouse gases, even
when they are regulated, if you're emitting them at
levels of 100,000 tons per year or more.
When they did that, they both rewrote the
provision that says who has to get a permit and they
rewrote the provision that says what Best Available
Control Technology applies.  They did both at once even
though their brief treats it as separate.
And if -- I'm not certain how much time I
have, Mr. Chief Justice.  If I have --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You have three and a
half minutes left.
MR. KEISLER:  Not including rebuttal?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No.  You will get 5
minutes of rebuttal.
MR. KEISLER:  Thank you, Your Honor.
If I could then turn briefly to the second
argument that I made reference to at the very beginning,
which is an argument that need not be addressed if the
Court is persuaded by what I've just said.  But if not,
we have a second, narrower argument which is in the
American Chemistry Council brief, which addresses the
requirements for triggering the PSD statute, and our
position on that is very much like Judge Kavanaugh's
position below, which is that the statute is triggered
only by emissions of major amounts of a pollutant for
which the area is in attainment.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, but that's not Judge
Kavanaugh's position.  I thought Judge Kavanaugh's
position is any NAAQS pollutant, all NAAQS pollutants.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right, Your Honor, and
that is a distinction.  Our position is similar but not
identical to his position.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And it comes from a
different portion of the statutory language.
MR. KEISLER:  That's right.  We are focused
on the language in any area to which this part applies,
and that is because Part C, the PSD provision, applies
not to an area as a whole, but for some pollutants and
not for others in any particular area.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Can I ask, Mr. Cavanaugh,
why Judge Kavanaugh's argument has been left by the
wayside?
MR. KEISLER:  It is very similar, Your
Honor, to the argument that we're making, but we get at
it in a different way and with a slightly different
result.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, it does -- it comes
from different statutory language.  His arguments about
the structure of the statute don't apply to your
argument.  So I think, notwithstanding that there is
some overlap between the arguments, the legal rationales
are entirely different, and I guess I'm just curious.
MR. KEISLER:  This is the argument we made
below and it's the argument we've continued to make
here.  And the point of the argument --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I don't think that
answers the question.
MR. KEISLER:  Excuse me, Your Honor?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I said I don't think --
I don't think it answers the question, which is I know
that's the argument; are you saying you can't defend his
argument or are you saying that --
MR. KEISLER:  No, it's just that it's been
hard enough to make two alternative arguments in this
forum, and to add a third to it would be more than I
think I could handle.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Can you clarify that?  We
have the NAAQS criteria.  EPA has added many others
across the years.  For 30 years it's been adding things
for which there are no NAAQS.  What about all of those?
MR. KEISLER:  Your Honor, it is true that
ever since 1980 -- although it proposed our
interpretation as its original interpretation of the
statute, ever since 1980, EPA has said that any
pollutant, whether it's a NAAQS pollutant, whether it's
a pollutant for which the area is in attainment, any
pollutant would be sufficient to trigger PSD permit
requirements.  But that has had virtually no practical
effect because all of those other pollutants, if they
are emitted in threshold quantities, invariably -- we've
been able to find about two or three exceptions over 30
years -- invariably the facility that is emitting them
is also emitting 250 tons per year of one of the
criteria pollutants.
So this was a difference which made no
difference until greenhouse gases came onto the scene.
And with the Court's permission, I will
reserve the remainder of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
General Mitchell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JONATHAN F. MITCHELL
ON BEHALF OF STATE PETITIONERS
MR. MITCHELL:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
There are at least two issues in this case
in which EPA and the Petitioners agree.  The first is
that the term "air pollutant" cannot be given a uniform
construction throughout the Clean Air Act even after
this Court's ruling in Massachusetts that "air
pollutant" includes all things airborne for purposes of
Title II.  The second point of agreement is that
greenhouse gases cannot be treated the same as other air
pollutants for purposes of the PSD and Title V programs,
because the unambiguous statutory requirements of those
programs are incompatible with sensible regulation of
greenhouse gases.
EPA thinks it can fix this problem by
imposing an atextual agency-created regime that applies
only to greenhouse gases.  The proper response, however,
is for EPA to conclude that Congress never delegated
regulatory authority over greenhouse gases in the PSD
and Title V programs.  Congress does not establish round
holes for square pegs, and Brown & Williamson holds in
these situations, an agency cannot make a round hole
square by rewriting unambiguous statutory language.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  General, I take it that the
unambiguous statutory language that you are referring to
is the references to 100 and to 250.  And it seems to me
that that's an odd kind of term to drive such an
important statutory interpretation question, because
what those numbers were all about is that they were
supposed to separate major emitters from minor emitters.
I mean, they were supposed to be about the size of the
facility.  They were not supposed to have -- they were
not supposed to make any distinctions as to the type of
pollutant.
So you're essentially using those numbers to
make distinctions as to the type of pollutant rather
than, it seems to me a more sensible approach would be
to say, look, the 100 and 250 numbers don't work for
this new kind of pollutant, we're going to up the
numbers, and that will leave the rest of the statute and
all the purposes of Congress intact.
MR. MITCHELL:  Justice Kagan, the reason we
don't think the approach that you describe is
permissible is because there are statutory provisions in
the Clean Air Act that specifically forbid EPA to do
what Your Honor is describing.  7661(a)(A) says that EPA
cannot under any circumstance exempt any major source
from the Title V requirements.  And because that
provision is in the statute, EPA cannot be claiming to
seize discretion when Congress has specifically withheld
that type of discretion here.  This is akin to a
dispensing power, for EPA to be coming in and rewriting
the Title V permitting thresholds in the way that they
are.
And the question to ask is whether the term
"air pollutant" is flexible enough to accommodate
different meanings in different statutory contexts.  And
here even EPA agrees with us that "air pollutant" can
mean different things in different parts of the Act,
even after Massachusetts.
Massachusetts held that "air pollutant"
unambiguously includes all things airborne, all airborne
compounds of whatever stripe for purposes of Title II.
But EPA has refused to carry over that definition
throughout the Clean Air Act when the term "air
pollutant" appears in at least three different places.
One of them is section 7411(a)(4), which is part of the
NSPS program.  In that provision the term "air
pollutant" appears as part of the definition of
modification.
EPA does not interpret that to mean all
things airborne.  It doesn't even interpret it to mean
all regulated air pollutants.  It interprets that to
mean air pollutants for which a standard of performance
has been established.  In the PSD and Title V permitting
thresholds, EPA interprets the phrase "any air
pollutant" not to mean all things airborne, but to mean
any regulated air pollutant.
And then finally, in Section 7491 EPA
interprets the phrase "any pollutant" to mean any
visibility-impairing pollutant.  So if Massachusetts's
all things airborne view of the phase "air pollutant" is
forced to be applied to every provision of the Clean Air
Act where the word "air pollutant" appears, all of these
longstanding EPA interpretations would have to be
discarded.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But, General, if you think
about the question of what any pollutant means, and you
put aside this whole absurdity question that the numbers
get you to, you just say, what does any air pollutant
mean?  Does it mean what EPA has said it has meant for
30 years, which is any pollutant that's regulated under
this Act, or does it mean something more along the lines
of what you're saying, which is anything other than
greenhouse gases, or anything other than pollutants that
have particular localized effects.
You would obviously choose EPA's version of
the thing.  And the only reason that you're not choosing
that is because of these numbers that are in the
statute, which were designed only, only to distinguish
between major and minor emitters.
So if you can distinguish between major and
minor emitters while keeping the completely sensible
longstanding interpretation of any pollutant, why
wouldn't you do that?
MR. MITCHELL:  Because I don't think it can
be said, Justice Kagan, that the phrase "any air
pollutant" unambiguously means any regulated pollutant.
That is a possible interpretation of air pollutant, but
there are others, and EPA has adopted other definitions
depending on the surrounding statutory --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Let me ask you a
question.  Assuming we agree with you, that neither
Massachusetts or Alabama -- there's no statutory command
to come to EPA's conclusion, what do we do?  Do we just
reverse them, or do we vacate and remand and tell them,
no, you were wrong at step one; there is ambiguity in
the statute?
MR. MITCHELL:  It's more than just that
there's ambiguity, Justice Sotomayor.  We're asking the
Court to hold that a greenhouse gas inclusive
interpretation of air pollutant simply does not fit with
the unambiguous provisions of the PSD and Title V
programs, just as a tobacco inclusive or nicotine
inclusive interpretation of the word "drug" was not able
to fit with the unambiguous requirement --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But that's a difficult -- I
think where Justice Kagan is going -- and I will if she
wasn't, but I think she was -- is put the definition
from 7479 in your mind.  That means something to you,
right?  You know what I'm talking about.
MR. MITCHELL:  The definition of?
JUSTICE BREYER:  Of the major emitting
facility.
MR. MITCHELL:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  Now, we look at
7475, and it says you have to have a permit and use Best
Available Control Technology.  For what?  And then we go
to the definition, and it says, among other things, "For
any source with the potential to emit 250 tons per year
or more of any pollutant."
Now, that doesn't -- my God, that maybe
means every 500 people, every school is applied here.
So you say we've got to do something about this statute
because they don't really mean to every football game
they're going to have a permit, or it doesn't mean every
500 people, like all of my relatives are together, they
have to have a permit.  No, it can't mean that.
So we have two choices.  Choice A, which is
what you would like, is it means any air pollutant, any
regulated air pollutant, but not greenhouse gases.
Okay.  That's choice one.
Choice two is it means any air pollutant
including greenhouse gases, but implicitly EPA has the
authority to exempt small emitters.  You see?
Now, which does the less violence to the
statute?
MR. MITCHELL:  Choice one.  And the reason
choice one --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I knew you would say that.
(Laughter.)
MR. MITCHELL:  The reason choice one does
less violence is because the term "air pollutant" is
flexible and has been acknowledged to be by EPA for
decades.  And I think even by this Court,
notwithstanding its holding in Massachusetts, it's
permissible for an agency to construe ambiguous
statutory language to avoid absurdity.  In fact, it must
construe the ambiguous language to avoid absurdity
before taking choice two that Your Honor described,
where it rewrites unambiguous statutory language to
avoid absurdity.
If the simple choice were between construing
one unambiguous statutory provision to avoid the
anomalous results and construing another unambiguous
statutory provision to avoid that outcome, then EPA
would have a much stronger case for deference here.
The problem for EPA is they've insisted for
decades that air pollutant can mean different things in
different parts of --
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  So let me
modify my question.  I get that answer on the language
there.  But if you had been sitting in Congress and the
Senate, Mr. Billings, I think, is the staff person,
Senator Muskie, and suppose that you had this choice put
to you with your language.  We'd either like to have the
authority implicit here to exempt the football team, the
tiny emitters, or we'd like it not to cover it at all.
Which do you think the Senate would have
chosen in enacting this bill from the evidence in the
language itself, in the evidence which I look at, the
history of the bill?
MR. MITCHELL:  I think they did make a
choice, and it's in the language of the bill, that EPA
does not have the authority to exempt any major source
from Title V.  They say that right there in Section
7061(a)(A) on page 44 of the statutory appendix in --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Title V is not the PSD
requirement.  Title V is just the recordkeeping
provision.
MR. MITCHELL:  That's true, but EPA --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And so why should we
exempt people from Title V?  That's not what's causing
the burden that you're talking about.  It's just a
recordkeeping provision.
MR. MITCHELL:  But it's a -- it's a very
burdensome recordkeeping provision as -- as EPA
acknowledges.  That's why they're not willing to impose
it on every entity that emits more than 100 tons per
year of carbon dioxide.  It costs, on average, $20,000
to get a Title V permit and -- and hundreds of man
hours.  And it's plausible to impose those burdens,
perhaps, on large industrial sources, but certainly not
to impose that on the corner deli or -- or the Chinese
restaurant or a high school building.
So, again, to return to Justice Breyer's
question, which would Congress have chosen, the choice
was made in the statute to establish rigid numerical
permitting thresholds that were defined not only by 100
tons and 250 tons per year, but also defined by a
specific metric.
And to withhold from the agency the
discretion to depart from those unambiguous
requirements.  Instead, they provided looseness to the
extent they provided it in the definition of air
pollutant, which even though this Court held in
Massachusetts unambiguously includes all things
airborne, for purposes of Title II, EPA has narrowed
that construction in numerous other parts of the
statute.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  If you can
narrow it, why not narrow that one?  Any air pollutant,
including greenhouse gases, to the extent that they can
be sensibly controlled under this statute.  Now I've
worked with the words "air pollutant."  You see, I can
do it any way you want if I'm prepared to read in
exceptions.  And, of course, we do have exceptions when
agencies enforce statutes.  We do have exceptions from
general language all the time.
MR. MITCHELL:  I don't -- yeah, I don't
think it would be a permissible act of statutory
construction to say that carbon dioxide could be an air
pollutant and not an air pollutant at the same time.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you -- you'd accept
his definition, wouldn't you?  You'd be happy with a
definition that says air pollutant means any air
pollutant to the extent it can be sensibly controlled
under the statute.  And you would say this one obviously
can't.
MR. MITCHELL:  Right, which means it can't
be regulated under the Title V --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So that would be a
wonderful definition.
JUSTICE BREYER:  It can, though.  It can in
large quality -- quantities.  I mean, you don't see
anything wrong with large quantities.  It's just the
small quantities you have a problem with.
MR. MITCHELL:  Well, we have a problem
with --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I mean, are you saying it
doesn't make sense to control major emitters of CO2?
MR. MITCHELL:  We're saying it doesn't make
sense to construe air pollutant in a greenhouse
gas-inclusive manner for purposes of the PSD program
because the unambiguous requirements require the EPA to
reach the small emitters.  And if EPA wants to fix the
problem, they can't resort to this form of agency
self-help.  They need to get --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  General, one question is
what would Congress have wanted, given the obvious
purposes of the Act.  And that's an important question.
Another question is:  What did the agency decide here?
I mean, obviously, this is the apex of Chevron
deference.  There's nothing that gets more deference
than this agency with respect to this complicated a
statute.
And given that this whole thing arises
because there's this new kind of emission, which --
which the numbers don't work for, but which essentially
makes these two terms in the statute irreconcilable, why
isn't that a classic case for deference to the agency,
that the agency gets to choose how to make the thing
work as best it can, when a changed circumstance makes
it work not entirely the way Congress had foretold?
MR. MITCHELL:  I think because the Court
rejected that very idea in Brown & Williamson, where
tobacco was trying to be regulated by FDA under a
statute where the word "drug" clearly included nicotine,
if you just looked at the definition of "drug" in
isolation, but this Court rejected FDA's assertion of
jurisdiction by saying that the unambiguous requirements
of the Food and Drug Act would be --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  To accept your -- your
argument, we have to reverse Massachusetts.
MR. MITCHELL:  No, not at all, Justice
Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, you're saying
that the -- that Congress didn't intend to control this
pollutant.  We said there that it did.
MR. MITCHELL:  No.  The Court only needs to
revisit Massachusetts if it believes that air pollutant
must have a uniform, unambiguous construction everywhere
it appears in the Clean Air Act.  And -- and not even
EPA is making that assertion to this Court.  And we've
shown throughout how EPA has interpreted air pollutant
differently.  So there is no need to revisit
Massachusetts at all to conclude that at least in the
context of the PSD and Title V programs, it's not
plausible for the agency to construe the phrase "air
pollutant" to include greenhouse gases.
If the Court has no further questions, I
yield my time back to the Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, General
Mitchell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GENERAL DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
Greenhouse gases pose the same threat to
public health and welfare when they are emitted from a
power plant as when they are emitted from the tailpipe
of a car; and in American Electric Power this Court said
it was plain that EPA has the authority to prescribe
general rules limiting greenhouse gas emissions by
stationary sources like power plants.  Yet Petitioners
say EPA lacks any authority to use the PSD permitting
program to regulate the same emissions, from the same
sources, causing the same harms.
That's not a reasonable reading of the
statutory text, and it rests on a fundamental
misunderstanding of the PSD program and the way it is
supposed to operate in conjunction with the --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why?  Why would it be
unreasonable to give -- give EPA authority to regulate
mobile sources and not authority to -- to regulate
stationary sources, given that stationary sources have
to be licensed in this fashion and it -- it produces all
sorts of other problems?  That doesn't seem to me
irrational at all.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, the Court said, I
think, that it was plain that Congress gave EPA the
authority to regulate stationary sources in the American
Electric Power case under Section 7411, and that I think
gets to a fundamental premise where the Petitioners are
just wrong.
Section 7411 -- and this relates to a
question you asked, Justice Breyer -- Section 7411 and
the PSD program are not aimed at different problems.
They are aimed at the same problem, and you can see that
from the statutory text.  For example, if one looks at
Section 7475(a)(3), which you can find at page 21A of
our appendix, you will see that in order to become
eligible for a PSD permit if you are a major emitting
facility, you've got to -- if you are looking at
subsection (3), under (3)(A) and (3)(B), you've got to
show that you can meet all of the local air quality
requirements of the NAAQS, those standards; and then (C)
says you've got to meet any other applicable emissions
standard or standard of performance under this chapter.
And that standard of performance language is
not an accident.  In 7411 the standards that are set,
the nationwide standards that Mr. Keisler was discussing
for greenhouse gases or other air pollutants, are called
standards of performance.  So it's specifically picking
up the Section 7411 standard.
Then if one turns to the definition of Best
Available Control Technology under the PSD program,
which you can find at page 34A of the appendix to our
brief, you will notice that Congress specifically linked
the operation of the Section 7411 standards and the Best
Available Control Technology under the PSD program.  And
what this provision says, I won't belabor you by reading
the lengthy provision, but what it says is that once
Congress has set a standard under section 7411, a
nationwide standard, that becomes a floor for the
evaluation of Best Available Control Technology.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Are you reading subsection
(3), the (A), (B) and (C), and you focus on (C), any
other applicable -- are you reading those in the
alternative?  I read that they -- that all three have to
be complied with.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes, they all three have
have to be complied with, yes, Justice --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But then that doesn't help
you, because you are right back to where you started.
You have the tonnage per year requirement.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I would be happy
to --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And with the absurd result
that follows.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I would be happy to
get to that.  But if I could just finish off this point
about the connection between the operation of the two,
because I do think it's of critical importance here.
That what you are supposed to do under BACT is use Best
Available Control Technology to get above the floor,
that the NSPS program sets those standards on an every
8-year basis, and the point of BACT is to force best
practices to keep raising the bar during those 8-year
intervals.
And there is an additional point to be made
about the relationship between the two.  This goes back
to Senator Muskie in 1977.  The NSPS program was enacted
as part of the 1970 Act.  The PSD program was added in
1977; and it was added in 1977 because of
dissatisfaction over both the pace and the
comprehensiveness of the -- of air pollution regulations
that were being enacted by EPA under the 7411 standard;
and it's because under 7411, EPA has got to go one
source category at a time.  It has got to do power
plants; then it's got to do refineries; then it's got to
do the next thing, and the next thing, and the next
thing.
And so EPA hadn't gotten standards in place
for all the different sources, and the point of -- of
the PSD program is to put in place an additional
requirement.  It's exactly what Congress was after.  So
that when there is a standard under 7411 that becomes
the floor, and you -- and BACT says let's keep raising
the bar.  But when there isn't a standard under 7411,
PSD is supposed to fill the breach, and it makes sense
because you want to get -- the PSD program, remember,
applies to -- excuse me -- it applies to new
construction or major modification.  The idea behind it
is you want to get in there at the beginning when the
source is first being constructed, so that they don't
lock in old pollution -- pollution-causing technology.
They have got to meet Best Available Control Technology.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  About the Best
Available Control Technology, I think I have an idea of
what that looks like with respect to sources already
regulated, because they're relating to the NAAQS.  You
know, filters, scrubbers and all that; I'm sure it's
oversimplified.  But what does Best Available Control
Technology look like with respect to greenhouse gases?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, it's an evolving
process, Your Honor, and there are now 140 or so permits
that have been issued applying BACT to greenhouse gas
emissions.  There is some very helpful discussion of
this kind of specifics in two places:  The State
Respondents' brief, pages 35 to 39, and the Calpine
amicus brief.  Calpine is a major utility, regulated --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Right.  But am I --
am I right because the greenhouse gases do not affect
ambient air quality in a way that the current or the
NAAQS provisions do?  I mean, you're dealing with
regulation of energy usage, right, as opposed to
emissions of lead, emissions of the other NAAQS
provisions?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, it's -- one
thing we're doing -- the main thing now is significant
energy efficiency, for example, different kinds of
turbines; different kinds of processes, that sort of --
that sort of thing.  That's right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The same sort of
thing as with -- for domestic uses, as the energy
efficient light bulbs.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I really don't
think this is about light bulbs, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No, but my point is
it relates to energy consumption as opposed to
particulate emission.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  At the -- at the moment
that's largely true, not entirely true; there are some
other technologies described.  But of course, the EPA is
considering and scientists are trying to develop
additional control technologies like carbon capture
technologies; and that's the whole point of Best
Available Control Technology, is as technology advances
and better options come on line, that allow for even
greater control of the pollutants, the statute requires
that they be incorporated.  That's how it's supposed to
work.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  If you -- if you
regulate -- I'm talking about your two distinct
arguments in your -- in your brief.  If you prevail on
the first:  In other words, greenhouse gases may be
regulated with respect to sources that are already
subject to permitting, my understanding, it gets you to
83 percent of the greenhouse gas emissions.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Prevailing on the
second argument gets you to 86 percent.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So this is a
fight -- putting aside your first argument -- about an
additional 3 percent, and yet according to the
Petitioners that brings in this huge regulatory problem,
of, you know, regulating the high school football game
and what-not.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right.  Just an aside on
the high school football game.  Human beings are
actually net neutral on carbon emissions, and you will
need a chemist to explain that to you.  But it doesn't
matter how many family members you have; you won't get
to the limit.  But with respect to the -- with respect
to the question --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The lights at the
game.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  The lights at the game I
don't think would be a problem, either.  But anyway,
there obviously is -- and EPA has acknowledged that
there is a significant expansion of the permitting
obligation under EPA's present understanding of
permitting.  But let me try to take this in two pieces,
if I could.
Let me first talk about why it's not just
about the 3 percent, and then let me try to get back to
Justice Kennedy's question to talk about the expansion
of the permitting obligation and what EPA is actually
thinking and doing about that.
The problem here is that the options -- one
of the problems, significant problem is that the options
that the -- the American Chemistry Council have advanced
and even that Judge Kavanaugh has advanced would require
an invalidation of or at least a significant, a
significant revision of EPA's 34-year understanding of
the meaning of the phrase "any air "pollutant" in
7479(1), which they have always interpreted to mean any
-- any air pollutant subject to regulation under the
Act.  That -- you can't apply that 34-year-long agency
interpretation here and get to one of those results.
You've got to -- you've got to change it.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes, but the 34-year agency
interpretation is not a statute.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, it's not, Justice
Scalia, of course.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And you are -- you know,
you are saying, oh, rather than alter our 34-year
interpretation, we're -- we're going to revise the
provisions of the statute.  I don't think that's a --
that's a good trade.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I -- with all due
respect, I don't think that's what the agency is doing.
And if I may, just -- let me, if I could just sort of
finish off this.  The problem is that if you take the --
if you draw the line either at NAAQS pollutants versus
all other previously regulated pollutants, or if you
draw the line at local pollutants, but not global
pollutants, you are going to knock out some sources that
have been subjected to the permitting requirement
previously.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Can I ask you this question
about -- can I ask you this question about EPA's
position?  Because this is something I don't understand.
On the one hand, EPA says that applying the statutory
thresholds to greenhouse gases would transform the PSD
program into something that would be unrecognizable to
the Congress that enacted the program; isn't that right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes, they did say that.
JUSTICE ALITO:  On the other hand, EPA says,
but that's what we're going to aim to achieve at some
point down the road.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, that's a fundamental
misconception, Justice Alito, and I would like to try to
clear it up, and it goes to -- I'll try to answer Your
Honor's question as well, Justice Scalia.
What EPA's doing here is saying this is a
transition, it's not a rewrite.  And the goal of the
transition is not to gradually expand the permitting
requirement until they've got all the Dunkin' Donuts in
America under it.  That's not what's going on.  In fact,
it's the opposite.  What they're saying is, they're
taking a look at the standards they used to decide who's
eligible for a permit.  They're looking to change those,
to the extent they can, consistent with their statutory
authority and appropriate Chevron deference, to
substantially narrow the numbers of people who will be
deemed eligible.  And that's in particular --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, then they're never
going to get to the statutory thresholds.  I thought EPA
said, well, we're going to work toward that.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, this is -- this is to
try to get to the statutory threshold.  Well, let me
give you an example of the main -- one of the main ways
--
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, that's -- then I don't
understand the position.  If -- if applying the
statutory thresholds makes the program unrecognizable,
and yet that's what they're going to aim to do down the
road, get to -- get to the statutory thresholds, will it
become more recognizable at that point?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Under the point -- the
nuance there, that I think answers Your Honor's
question, is that there -- the agency has discretion in
deciding what constitutes the potential to emit 250 tons
per year.  What they have done historically is evaluate
that on the basis of an assumption that it's facilities
operating 24 hours a day --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But then they'll -- then
they'll be back down to -- to 41,000 people fully within
this.  And when you get to Number 5, Title V, 6.1
million, that sort of changes what -- I mean, if that's
the question, does, in fact, this provision give the EPA
the -- the obligation to impose permit requirements on
41,000 businesses of a size that really are --
constitute, at most, 10 or 15 percent of the problem,
well, that's -- that's pretty hard to accept.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well --
JUSTICE BREYER:  What I thought the question
was, was whether EPA had the authority to implement this
in a way that EPA itself thinks makes sense, which might
be, on their own reasoning, to not impose permitting
requirements on tens of thousands, perhaps millions of
small businesses.  I thought that was what the question
was.  That did seem to be the way they put it.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  It is.  But I think the
two things converge, Justice Breyer.  They're trying to
get to the point of saying that you won't have to apply
-- if you apply the standards EPA uses now, you sweep in
all these people, and EPA says, well --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Are they going to get some
new standards?  But are these -- but the words they used
in their opinion were streamlining.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  The words they used in
their opinion implied to me when I read them that
they're never going to want to put tiny boilers under
this because it just doesn't do very much good and it's
expensive to administer.  That's how I read it.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  Then my
question is back, because you've been -- this has been
very helpful.  I learned I'm not a net emitter of carbon
dioxide.  Believe me, because that means I'm a part of
sustainable development.  I thought --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  So I learned
quite a lot from this, and I'd like to learn one more
thing, which is, look, 7411, remember what the Chief
Justice just said about the 83 percent and the 86
percent.  And even if you lose, they still can regulate
83 percent, and if you win, you can regulate 86 percent.
And, my goodness, if 7411 is over there letting them do
precisely what they want, why do you need this, too?
That's the part that I haven't got a clear answer to in
my mind.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So the -- it's the reason
I tried to suggest earlier, Justice Breyer, that the PSD
program is supposed to work as a complement together
with 7411.  For example, if 7411 now is being used, at
least EPA's contemplating setting standards, greenhouse
gas emission standards for power plants.  That's a very
significant contributor of greenhouse gases, but it's
not the only one.  There are refineries, there are other
major sources --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, put those all in.
Put those all in.  Write -- write complicated standards.
Write standards that have certain enforcement capacities
and abilities.  Write standards that require you to get
a PSD permit.  I mean, what's wrong with all that?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  They can do all of that,
but the -- but the problem is that that's going to take
a lot of time, and that was the very reason Congress put
the PSD program into existence in 1977 was because of
the dissatisfaction, because of the time it took to go
source by source, pollutant by pollutant under the EPA's
7411 program.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  I just want
to make sure that I understood correctly.
Under 7411, you can require a PSD --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, you can set a
national standard.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Right.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  But part of the reason,
as I said, I think it's just wrong to think about the
PSD program as being -- addressing a different kind of
problem from the 7411 problem is that you've got to meet
the 7411 standard in your PSD application.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  General -- General, if I
could actually get back to Justice Alito's question,
because I had a similar issue with what EPA did here.
It seems to me it would be completely responsible and
understandable if EPA had said, look, the 100 and 250
don't work with respect to this category of pollutant,
Congress didn't know that this kind of pollutant was out
there when it wrote those numbers, what it was trying to
do was to distinguish between major and minor emitters.
The new numbers are X and Y for that -- for this kind of
pollutant.
But, you know, and I understand that EPA may
have felt like, oh, gosh, can we really do that?  But
the solution that EPA came up with actually seems to
give it complete discretion to do whatever it wants,
whenever it wants to, and to not -- and to be much more
problematic than if EPA had just said, no, it's not 100
and 250.  It's 10 times that.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I take that point, Your
Honor.  I don't actually think that's what EPA was
trying to do.  I know it's been portrayed that way.  I
think that they were trying to do the opposite.  They
were trying to say, well, let's look at how we define
what it means to emit 250 tons per year, and see if we
can make that a more realistic analysis by going from
the 24/7, 365-day-a-year hypothesis to figuring out how
much this source is actually likely to emit, and you
could drastically lower the number of sources who would
be found to emit 250 tons per year, and that would bring
-- it would try to bring the system into line with the
expectations that major emitters would be regulated.
That -- that's their objective here.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Are greenhouse gases the
only air pollutant for which EPA has the authority to
change the statutory thresholds?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I'd like to make a
point, if I could, about that.  The real problem here is
CO2.  Actually, of the other -- of the six greenhouse
gases, the other five you could use the statutory
thresholds on without difficulty.  It's the CO2 alone
really that causes a difficulty.
JUSTICE ALITO:  But could it do -- could it
do this for another pollutant, something other than any
of the greenhouse gases?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I think, in
fairness, what EPA is saying here is that we've got an
obligation under the statute to regulate.  We've got an
obligation to require a permit when there's more than
250 tons per year, and we've got an obligation to get
the permits out within a year.  That's also a statutory
requirement.  And that just given the reality of the CO2
emission, something's got to give.  So I don't think
it's that they're asserting authority to rewrite the
statutory thresholds.  They're dealing with a practical
problem that's arisen under the immediate circumstances.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  One of the things that
EPA said in -- in the explanation of this rule is that
EPA could say that PSD or Title V applies only to
certain GHG sources -- it's been suggested that that
source would be carbon dioxide -- applies only to
certain GHG sources and does not apply to the remaining
GHG sources.  But there didn't seem to be any follow-up
on that idea.  Well, the way to cure it is carbon
dioxide doesn't work, take it out.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  But I think the reason,
Justice Ginsburg, is because that is not going to
make -- the carbon dioxide is also a huge part of the
problem, and so you're really not going to be getting to
the heart of the problem.  And there really is an
urgency here, you know, that's part of what's driving
EPA in this situation, of course, is understanding that
this is an urgent environmental problem.  It's the -- it
is the gravest environmental problem that we face now as
far as EPA and EPA's judgment, and it is one that gets
worse with the passage of time.  The effects are
cumulative and they're delayed, and so every year we
wait, we make the hole deeper and we create an even
greater threat to future generations.  And that really
goes to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm sorry.  I didn't
get an answer to -- hear an answer to Justice Alito's
question and I think it's an important one.  There are
currently criteria pollutants under the -- under the
Act.  Let's assume you find out that there's a
particular substance that does cause harm to ambient air
quality that is not already covered, and you publish a
NAAQ for that, can you decide that 100 and 250, you want
to regulate at a different threshold, just like you have
here.  I mean, is this a particular assertion of
authority only with respect to greenhouse gases or does
it cover any pollutant under the Act?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, if you're -- if
you're going to use the NAAQS approach and designate it
as a NAAQ, as a NAAQS pollutant, then you would be under
the rules of NAAQS pollutant and -- pollutants, and that
would include this standard.  But this is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Can you publish a
NAAQ for greenhouse gases?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think it would be
within EPA's authority to do so, but there are really
significant problems with trying to regulate that way,
and that's why -- but -- and -- but it's important to
understand, Mr. Chief Justice, that the PSD program
applies to more than just NAAQS pollutants.  It's --
it's any pollutant subject to regulation under the Act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Okay.  Let's pick --
there is a pollutant that isn't currently regulated, and
science advances to the point where you think it should
be regulated.  Can you change the 100 and 250 thresholds
for that new covered pollutant?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I guess what I would say
about that is that if EPA found itself in exactly the
same circumstances it finds itself in with respect to
greenhouse gases, where it's -- it feels like the
statutory definition compels it to regulate, it kicks in
at 250, and you've got to issue a permit in a year, that
they could make a judgment comparable to the one they
made here.  But it's -- that would require that
confluence of circumstances to arise.
JUSTICE BREYER:  But why?  Why does it have
to do that?  Statutes all the time have implicit
exceptions, and not every statute has such exceptions
written in words into it.  I mean -- you know, it's a
classic example, one after another.  A statute that
requires animals to pay 50 percent on the train does not
apply to snails.  Okay.  I mean, that's the most common
thing in law.
So what's the big problem here that
everybody seems to have, except me, just about.  I mean,
what's the big problem with writing an implicit
exception so that you don't regulate tiny little things
which no one normally wants to have regulated?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, if the Court were
to do that, that would certainly justify the
EPA's judgement --
JUSTICE BREYER:  And now, my problem is I
will hear from many that what I would -- perhaps it
isn't a question of what I'd like to do.  The question
is, what does the law permit?  And therefore, it's
helpful if you can or others think of similar examples.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, EPA has committed
itself in this -- in the regulations, in the rulemaking
proceedings, to try to bring the 250 tons per year into
alignment with the expectation that only large sources
will be regulated.  That's what EPA is committed to.
It's --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  General Verrilli, you know,
I don't have as expansive a notion of reading exceptions
into a statute that are not there as Justice Breyer
does.  But assuming, just assuming that you can -- you
can read exceptions, that isn't the issue here.  The
issue is whether you can read in exceptions
unnecessarily when the absurdity in question doesn't
flow inevitably from the statute, when the statute can
be interpreted another way that would not produce the
absurdity.
Aren't you compelled where there is
ambiguity to adopt the interpretation of the statute
that does not produce absurdity rather than adopting the
interpretation that produces absurdity, and then going
around altering the provisions of the contract -- of the
statute?  I mean, to take Justice Breyer's bubble gum
example, yes, I suppose it -- would you have to make an
exception for bubble gum in the display window if the
statute were subject to two interpretations, one of
which would include display windows, and the other one
of which wouldn't.
It seems to me, of course, you would have to
adopt the interpretation that didn't include display
windows.  And that's what is going on here.  There's --
there's -- yes, there's absurdity but the issue is how
is that absurdity to be taken account of?  By simply
letting EPA rewrite the very clear numbers in the
statute, or else by adopting a permissible
interpretation of the statute that does not lead to that
absurdity.  And I think that's quite a different
question from -- from what we've been discussing.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Two points about that, if
I could.  First, that goes to the question of what
triggers the permit application.  It's only the
expansion of the number of permit applicants that even
raises this question of the so-called absurdity.  It
doesn't go to the -- to the argument -- the Petitioners
are making a far more substantial argument, that EPA
lacks any authority to consider greenhouse gas emission
under the BACT provision and other provisions, even for
sources that have a permit for their emissions of
non-greenhouse gases.
So it only goes to the question of the scope
of the triggering provision, not to EPA's authority to
use PSD to regulate greenhouse gases for entities that
are already subject to the permit for other reasons.
Now, with respect to the trigger, what I
would say about that, Justice Scalia, is that the
statutory language is "any air pollutant."  Reading
Massachusetts against EPA, the EPA came to the
conclusion that that language necessarily encompasses
greenhouse gas emissions.  That conclusion is most
consistent with the EPA's statutory obligations here,
because if the choice -- and you can say the choice is
between doing something sensible and absurd results.
But really, the choice is between throwing
up your hands with respect to what EPA considers to be
the most serious air pollution problem we have or trying
to deal with the implementation problem that exists with
respect to the --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- about 15 percent of
the sources.  That's really the choice here.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  General, wouldn't it be
right to say that the rule that Justice Scalia is
referring to only applies if there are alternative
interpretations that are consistent with the legislative
purpose.  There have to be plausible alternative
interpretations of the statute.  And reading the phrase
"any pollutant" to mean any pollutant except for
greenhouse gases for reasons that have nothing to do
with the purposes of the statute is not a plausible
alternative interpretation.  Wouldn't that be the
argument?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes, that's exactly the
argument, and I think that's exactly what EPA did when
it read Massachusetts against EPA and its understanding
of air pollutant and thought about that in the context
of the regulatory goals of this program.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  In the -- you know, the
argument against that is, no, that the statute evidences
concern with ambient air quality and requires that to be
measured.  And the agency acknowledges that you cannot
possibly measure the effect on ambient air quality of
greenhouse gases.
So it is not clearly compatible with the
statute to bring greenhouse gases into regulation.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  And the other
is -- I mean, this is quite -- I see -- I've got it
focused now.  It seems to me in my mind that we have two
questions, and I think they were well stated by Justice
Scalia, actually.  The first is, what is the alternative
interpretation that doesn't apply it here?  And that
would be an interpretation that doesn't put greenhouse
gases within this PSD provision at all.  And that might
be really unthinkable -- no, not unthinkable, but have
worse consequences than worrying about the
interpretation of this trigger provision.
So either we have to do the one or the
other.  Either we have to interpret the trigger
provision with flexibility so that there are written
exceptions -- unwritten exceptions in it, one way or the
other, or we have to say you can't do that, and
therefore they don't apply to all.  Which is worse?  Is
that a -- have I got it right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think that states it
fairly.  I think that states it fairly.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't think so.  I mean,
it depends on what you mean by "unthinkable," General
Verrilli.  Is it --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think that was Justice
Breyer who said "unthinkable."
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But what is supposed to be
unthinkable, that greenhouse gases should not be
regulated?  Maybe that is unthinkable.  But the issue
is, is it unthinkable that Congress did not intend to
regulate greenhouse gases when it enacted the current
provisions of the statute?
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But isn't that the argument?
Justice's Scalia's alternative plausible interpretation
of the statutes might have been an alternative plausible
interpretation of the statute pre-Massachusetts.  But it
no longer is; isn't that right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's certainly true,
but it wasn't -- but it -- also, even before
Massachusetts, it had -- there's significant problems
with it.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Here we have a statutory
provision that has very specific numbers, and the agency
has said these numbers are absurd.  We're going to
multiple them by 400.  Now, in the entire history of
Federal regulation what is the best example you can give
us of an agency's doing something like that, where it
has taken a statute with numbers and has crossed them
out and written in the numbers that it likes?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Obviously, I wouldn't
characterize it quite that way.  I don't have a case
that's exactly on point.  I think Morton against Ruiz is
a case that's like this in the sense that the agency had
an obligation to provide something to a certain
population, and it didn't have the funds that made it
available to provide it to the whole population that was
statutorily entitled, and it made the judgments it made
to try to get the program to work.  And I mean, if I
could give you a hypothetical --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  What was that case?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Morton against Ruiz.  And
-- and if I gave you a hypothetical on that -- if
Congress enacted a statute that said that the -- the
Customs authorities, border authorities have an
obligation to search every cargo container that comes
into a port in the United States for radioactive
materials, but no container shall be delayed more than 3
days, if a -- if an agency were faced with those kinds
of obligations, and it didn't have the resources to get
every container searched within 3 days, and it said,
well, what we're going to do is search the containers
that come from places where we think the risk is most
likely, I think everyone would think that that's a
reasonable interpretation of the -- of the agency's
charge under the statute; and that's essentially what
the EPA has done here.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Just to be clear, you're
not saying -- or are you saying -- that if you're denied
the authority you seek here, there can be no significant
regulation of greenhouse gases under the Act?  You are
not saying that?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No.  I think -- I want to
provide some more specificity, though, in my answer, if
I could.  The Court has held in American Electric Power
that the EPA has the authority to prescribe general
national standards.  Now, with respect to the PSD
program, I want to -- I do want to emphasize that there
is a distinction between the question of what triggers
your obligation to get a PSD permit and whether your
emissions of greenhouse gases count as any air pollutant
that triggers it, versus a situation in which if you are
already subject to a PSD permit because you are
emitting, say, a NAAQS pollutant or another one of the
regulated pollutants, whether under Section 7574(a)(4),
you have to meet the Best Available Control Technology
requirement, which is phrased in terms of a requirement
for each pollutant subject to regulation under the Act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  That's the 80 --
that's the 8386 question, right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's correct, Your
Honor.  That's correct.  And so I think those things are
different.  And so there really are three points.
There's 7411, there's triggering, and then there's if --
if you're already subject to the permit.  And the
questions about whether the PSD program is limited
entirely to pollutants that affect local ambient air
quality, I just don't think that adds up at the end of
the day.
For one thing, EPA has been regulating since
1988 under the PSD program something called
ozone-depleting substances.  We talked about this a
little bit in our brief.  Those are substances that have
no local effects; they -- they are substances that are
released; they go up into the stratosphere; and they eat
up the ozone and that then creates additional
ultraviolet rays which cause cancer and cataracts.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, that has local
effects.  I mean, everybody knows there's smog in Los
Angeles versus Montana, right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, that -- well, if
those local effects count, then certainly, greenhouse
gases have those kinds of local effects, because they
raise the sea levels, which cause flooding in certain
places and they cause droughts in other places.  And so,
to the extent you're talking about local effects, the
greenhouse gases really aren't local --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Where have the sea levels
risen other than Massachusetts?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, certainly
Massachusetts, but -- but with respect -- but EPA has
been regulating ozone-depleting substances since 1988.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Is it your argument Congress
has acquiesced in that?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.  In fact, we think
in 1990, that they ratified it.  Because in 1990,
Congress undertook a very substantial amendment of the
Clean Air Act.  One thing they did was specifically
address ozone-depleting substances.  They created a new
Title VI for ozone-depleting substances, so they were
clearly focused on it.  And they did not pull
ozone-depleting substances out of the PSD program at
that time.  They left them in.  And that's significant
because they did pull out hazardous air pollution -- air
pollutants, which was another new category they created
in 1990 for the PSD program.
JUSTICE ALITO:  I thought there was a very
short time lag between EPA's assertion of the authority
to regulate the ozone-depleting substances under the PSD
program and the enactment of --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  2 years.  It was 2 years.
JUSTICE ALITO:  So was it a full 2 years?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I don't know if it was a
full 2 years, but -- but the Congress focused
specifically on exactly how ozone-depleting substances
were going to be regulated under the Clean Air Act, and
they created a new -- they were -- it's not an accident.
They were focused exactly on how they were going to be
regulated.  So I do think -- so I do think it's quite a
strong ratification argument.  And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  What's the -- I know
litigants hate this question.  If you were going to
lose, what's the best way for you to lose?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I knew you were going to
ask me that question.
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So I actually think, you
know, there's the Judge Kavanaugh approach, there's the
ACC approach, you know, we -- obviously, we're not
endorsing this, but --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  There's a difference
between them.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  There is a significant
difference between them.  But --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So which one?  Either one
of them?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I've got another
thought on that subject --
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- which is, as I said to
Justice Alito earlier, the whole problem in terms of
expanding the permitting requirement is CO2.  And so
that if the Court were to say that "any air pollutant"
can't be interpreted in the way that EPA has interpreted
it at the trigger level, to mean what we think it says,
and what Massachusetts against EPA compelled, but if the
Court disagrees with that, it seems to me the -- the
answer that is least problematic from EPA's point of
view does the -- is the least dissonant and the least --
causes the least risk of collateral consequences with
respect to established regulatory programs, which go
beyond NAAQS pollutants under PSD, would be to say that
you can't read any air pollutant to include CO2, because
the inclusion of CO2 generates a permitting obligation
that is out of accord with what Congress would have
expected.  I think -- I'm not endorsing that, but I
think that's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, what -- what about
BACT for CO2, then?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, no, BACT would be
in -- that's just at the trigger, Justice Ginsburg.
Just at the trigger.  We think that the -- I just don't
see, given that BACT says in unambiguous terms in
Section 7475(a)(4) that anybody who's subject to a
permit has got to meet BACT for each pollutant subject
to regulation under the chapter, meaning the Act.  I
just don't see how you can get out from under that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You've got to
follow -- you've got to follow the plain text of the
statute there.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, if the command of
the statute is that BACT applies for each pollutant
subject to regulation --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Yeah, but the plan
of the statute is 250 tons per year, too; and you've
changed that to 100,000 tons per year.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right, but I think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And you were going to get
to 7475(3),(a),(b),(c) on that point.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, 7475(3)(c) also
does say that if -- if EPA does set a greenhouse gas
standard for a particular stationary source like power
plants, then that becomes a condition of the permit.
That's what (c)(3) says.  And so between (c)(3) and
BACT, greenhouse gas -- assuming that EPA acts under
7411, those, it seems to me, have to be in.
This is a question about the definition of
the trigger.  Now, we don't agree with it.  But -- but
in trying to faithfully answer Your Honor's question,
that's what I think.  That that's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I just want to be clear.
Your reading or -- or your suggested out would mean
that -- that only the major facilities as defined now
essentially would -- would --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  If you took CO2 out of
the equation, I don't think this -- the expanded scope
of the permitting obligation is going to happen, because
it's the CO2 emissions that expand the scope.  And so
that's why -- you know, I'm not endorsing this.  I'm
just saying --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, Justice Breyer
said the difference between 83 percent and 86 percent,
that 3 percent difference of who you're covering is
thousands and thousands of people.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Or entities, I should
say, not people, of institutions.  Is that going to be
the same under the reading that you are proposing?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Pretty close.  But I
think -- but I think the reason that we would -- the
reason that the exclusion of CO2 seems to me to be the
least problematic is that EPA does have an established
regulatory framework here that applies not just to NAAQS
pollutants, but to the other non-NAAQS pollutants,
sulfuric acid mist and the other things that EPA
regulates under the PSD program.  And you wouldn't be
redefining the trigger to exclude those things which
have previously been included.  That's, I think, the --
the rifle shot solution, to the extent that the Court
thinks it's a problem.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, wouldn't the proper
answer be if we are rejecting your entire position to
say there are these other options?  We're not going to
say take out CO2.  We're not going to say adopt the
Kavanaugh approach.  We're going to say those are
choices for EPA to make.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes, certainly that's
right.  Certainly, that's right.  But I think the -- the
argument that, as I -- as I read Judge Kavanaugh's
opinion and as I understood my friend's argument on
behalf of the ACC, was that the statute essentially
compelled the conclusion that you had to pick one or the
other of those alternative readings in order to avoid
expanding the permitting obligation.
And the problem with that way of thinking
about it is that there are many other pollutants,
non-NAAQS pollutants that EPA has regulated for years
and used as a trigger for years to require PSD permits,
which you would be at risk of excluding from the program
if you were to adopt the ACC or the Judge Kavanaugh
reading as triggers, and that's a problem that, it seems
to me, the Court ought to be thinking about trying to
avoid.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I have to say in reading
the brief for the States and reading your brief, I -- I
couldn't find a single precedent that strongly supports
your position.  Brown & Williamson I think is
distinguishable for the reasons set forth in the reply
brief.  And what are the cases you want me to cite if I
write the opinion to sustain your position?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So at the -- at the --
sustaining the argument that the trigger applies here, I
do think there aren't -- there aren't a lot of cases.
You're right.  This is not a -- a situation that arises
very often.  I think Morton against Ruiz comes the
closest.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But that's not cited
in your brief, is it?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, it's not, Mr. Chief
Justice.  That's true.  It was cited and relied upon by
the EPA in the rulemaking proceedings and rulemaking
opinions.
So if I could just sum up here.  The EPA did
what it did because the problem it's confronting is a
problem that EPA considers to be urgent.
JUSTICE ALITO:  General, I don't want to
interrupt your summation, but on the -- let me just ask
this quick question.  On the issue of what happens with
a facility that is subject to the PSD program because of
the emission of other pollutants, the Petitioners argue
that the permitting process would be entirely different
for greenhouse gases because it would make no sense to
require monitoring of local air conditions and -- air
conditions.  It would make no sense to try to assess the
effect of the emission of the greenhouse gases on the
area in the region.  Could you just give a quick
response to that?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  You know, I'm glad you
raised that, Justice Alito.  That's actually quite
important.  That's just not right.  I mean, if you think
about it in multiple ways, there are multiple pollutants
that are currently regulated under the PSD program.
Some of them have National Ambient Air Quality
Standards, and the local testing makes sense for those.
Others don't have National Air Quality -- Ambient Air
Quality Standards, like sulfuric acid mists, for
example, and others.  There aren't standards for those.
And the way EPA has handled that is they
look at the regulations.  The regulation says in terms
of the monitoring that the statute requires, there's a
specific exemption for substances that are otherwise
regulated but for which there is no NAAQS or related
standard.  So they're just exempt from the monitoring
requirement.
There's also an analysis requirement.  And
what EPA has said and what the States do in their
permitting processes with respect to the analysis
requirement for the non-NAAQS substances, for example,
sulfuric acid mists, is to apply a very simple idea.
You're not trying in that situation to make sure that
the particular emissions aren't having -- are consistent
with the overall ambient air quality level.  It's a very
simple calculus.  More is worse; less is better.
And so with respect to things like sulfuric
acid mist, with respect to things like ozone-depleting
substances, that is how it has always worked at the
State level under the PSD program.  You just -- you look
at what the BACT emissions levels are.  You try to get
them down.
And so you're not treating greenhouse gases
any differently than sulfuric acid mist or
ozone-depleting substances or the others that don't have
those requirements.
And then in terms of localized effects
versus wider effects, I mean, I would just remind the
Court about the EMC-Homer City case from just a few
months ago, it's not at all unusual that the EPA would
be regulating emissions in one place because they --
they impose effects hundreds or even thousands of miles
away.
The pollutants emitted in Ohio or Kentucky
contribute to the air pollution levels in New Haven or
Bangor, Maine.  That's what that case was all about.
And so -- and you regulate those pollutants also through
the PSD program.  And so you don't -- you aren't in that
situation looking just to see what happens in the local
area.  It's just never been the nature of this program.
It's not -- it just doesn't work that way.
And if I could just remind the Court, in
conclusion, why EPA did what it did, it is because this
is an urgent problem.  Every year that passes, this
problem gets worse, and the threat to future generations
get worse.  And I think, faced with the obligations that
EPA had, it made the most reasonable choice available to
it.  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, you've got
five extra minutes, to be -- to be fair.
And one thing --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  You should have told me
that before my summation.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You had already
gotten going, I didn't want to disturb -- you don't
think that greenhouse gases should be regulated at the
250-tons-per-year level, right?  You said Congress did
not intend that, and it would be absurd.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.  Certainly --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So what level do you
think they should be regulated at?  In other words, what
intelligible principle are you taking from the statute
to say we're going to -- we're at 100 now.  We're going
to aim for 50 or -- in other words, if you had all the
resources you need, what level would you pick as the
proper one --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I think --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- other than --
since it's not 250?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  You would want to look at
the definition of what it means to emit 250 tons per
year, and then you'd want to think about the underlying
notion that what Congress is trying to do is to impose
these obligations on facilities that are capable of
responding to them, that are going to tend to be
facilities that are major in quality.  And then those
are the things that are going to guide you in trying to
figure out what the number is.  And I think that is what
EPA is trying to do.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Could I make sure I
understand that?  Would you pick the number that leads
to the same class of emitters?  Is that the number you
would pick?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I'm sorry, Justice Kagan.
The same class of emitters as?
JUSTICE KAGAN:  As in the more typical
emissions context, right?  So 100 and 250 --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  It might -- I don't think
it would --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- captures a certain set of
emitters.  Are you essentially looking for the number
that captures the same class of emitters?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think -- I don't know
that it will be the same, but I think it'll be -- but I
think the -- the class will be a lot smaller than the
class under EPA's current understanding of what it means
to emit 250 tons per year.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, how did the EPA
come at -- settle on the number?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yeah, they tried to
explain that in -- in one of the rulemaking orders, and
I think what they did was to try to figure out the right
balance point where they were accomplishing very
significant emissions limitations while not sweeping in
sources that were -- these very large number of small
sources that were only making the incremental -- an
incremental difference.
And what EPA did was say, essentially, we
can get to 85 percent of the emissions we're trying to
get to by setting the standards where we've set them.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Why -- two things.  One is,
you haven't said anything about the Title V problem,
which they said was at 6.1 million persons or
individuals or, you know, businesses coming into it.  So
how do you get them out of that one?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I think the
streamlining.  Same idea, I mean --
JUSTICE BREYER:  It's the same basic point.
Okay.  Why -- and there would be a good reason for this,
but the bell that it rang is that agencies have
tremendous authority about how they distribute their
enforcement resources.  They don't have to enforce
everything against everything.  And that is a basic
principle.  They have to put their money where it will
do the most good.  And so why wasn't that -- no one's
really argued it --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I just wondered.  It's sort
of like the missing --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  There would be a helpful
point for us, but for this, and then I'll tell you
why -- explain why we didn't, because there is a citizen
suit provision in the -- in the law.  And so the --
that's what they'll tell you on rebuttal.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  And so, I think that's
the reason why, because it's subject to a citizen suit,
whether we exercise our --
JUSTICE BREYER:  In other words, you would
be out of it totally, and any citizen could go bring a
suit and say where is your permit?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I see.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's the problem with
that.  If there are no further questions, thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, General.
Mr. Keisler, 5 minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF PETER KEISLER
ON BEHALF OF PRIVATE PARTY PETITIONERS
MR. KEISLER:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
You had asked the Solicitor General what
would BACT involve in this kind of situation.  And I
think Your Honor gave a perhaps absurd hypothetical
about light bulbs.  Your Honor should know that EPA's
instruction to the State and local permitting
authorities does address light bulbs in the cafeteria.
What it says is that State and local permitting
authorities likely -- likely do not need to look at
whether more efficient light bulbs should be used in a
plant's cafeteria because that would probably be not
worth the burden in terms of the payoff.
But the fact that they are talking about it
at that level of detail just brings into sharp relief
that this PSD process when applied to greenhouse gases,
which is about energy efficiency, not about adding
technology to control the stuff that comes out of smoke
stacks, is pervasive in potentially affecting every
aspect of an industrial plant's operation and asking the
90 State and local permitting authorities to decide what
needs to be done.  And that's what is so different
between this and the NSPS program which functions by
setting emissions standards that each plant can then
decide how best --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So what do I do with the
examples in the brief of the 144 permits that have
already been given, people who have managed to come into
compliance under BACT?
MR. KEISLER:  It's certainly not our
submission that every single determination by every one
of these authorities is going to be unreasonable or
outrageous or is going to reach into the cafeterias.
But it is the scope of this is so different in nature
and kind than the NSPS program, which would set
efficient standards that people would be able to meet.
And the second point I would like to make,
Your Honor, is there is a selectivity about what the
agency considers ambiguous and unambiguous.  It
unambiguously is required to apply Massachusetts'
definition of "pollutant," but "any air pollutant" is
ambiguous enough to accommodate any regulated air
pollutant.
But 100 and 250 tons per year, that's really
ambiguous because it can mean 100,000.  And I mention
this because the selectiveness with which EPA has turned
the ambiguity on and off, so that in combination it
maximizes the agency's discretion shows that when we
talk about what is -- what does the least violence to
the statute, we have to think about it, among other
things, along the parameter of separation of powers and
whether the way in which the agency has perceived it
here has arrogated an exceptional and troubling degree
of discretion to design its own climate change program.
And finally, with respect to the different
definitions of pollutant, we have certainly proceeded
here as if we are defining that particular word in the
statute, but here is another way to think about the
interpretative exercise here and that is Brown &
Williamson.  Brown & Williamson started with the
assumption that the definitions in the statute of drug
and device encompassed nicotine and cigarettes, but then
it went on to say that giving the FDA jurisdiction under
those programs over tobacco would be inconsistent with
the regulatory structure that Congress enacted.
And when it did that, it didn't go back to
those definitions and say, we have to now figure out
which word in that definition means something different
than what we originally assumed.  It said that the
interpretation as a whole conflicted with the statute as
a whole and that was sufficient.  We think the same is
true here.
If the Court has no further questions, I
thank the Court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel,
counsel.  The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:42 a.m., the case in the
