IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ANTHONY WALDEN,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 12-574
v.  :
GINA FIORE, ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, November 4, 2013
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:03 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JEFFREY S. BUCHOLTZ, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Petitioner.
MELISSA ARBUS SHERRY, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Petitioner.
THOMAS C. GOLDSTEIN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
JEFFREY S. BUCHOLTZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MELISSA ARBUS SHERRY, ESQ.
For United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Petitioner  18
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
THOMAS C. GOLDSTEIN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents  28
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JEFFREY S. BUCHOLTZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  60
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:03 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We will hear
argument first this morning in Case 12-574,
Walden v. Fiore.
Mr. Bucholtz.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEFFREY S. BUCHOLTZ
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
In holding that the -- in holding that
Respondents could bring this Bivens lawsuit against
Officer Anthony Walden in Nevada, the Ninth Circuit made
two errors that independently require a reversal.
First, as to personal jurisdiction, the
Ninth Circuit held that it was sufficient that
Respondents have connections to Nevada, and that Officer
Walden allegedly targeted his conduct at them, knowing
of their contacts with Nevada.  That plaintiff-centered
approach is inconsistent with this Court's precedence
which emphasize that the defendant himself must have
meaningful contacts with the forum State.
Second, as to venue, the Ninth Circuit
relied on the fact that the Respondents felt in Nevada
the effects of Officer Walden's alleged conduct in
Georgia.  That, similarly, Plaintiff-centered approach
is in conflict with the text of the venue statute,
1391(b)(2), which focuses on where the events or
omissions giving rise to the claim occurred, not where
the impact of those events or omissions may be felt.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Do you have any preference
as to which of those errors you would like us to rely
on?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, Justice Scalia, I
think, for the reasons set out in the Federal Law
Enforcement Officers' amicus brief, which I will try to
explain, I think that it would be preferable for the
Court to address personal jurisdiction and not just
venue, that the reason is that venue in removed cases
works differently.  There really is no venue, per se, in
removed cases.
And so if the Court only reaches venue here,
holds that venue is improper, in theory -- and maybe
there are limitations problems with this, but in theory,
the plaintiffs could refile the same lawsuit in State
court in Nevada.  It would be a Bivens lawsuit; it would
arise under Federal law, so we would remove it.
But then removal would mean, under 1441(a),
venue would be proper, per se, in the district of
removal because that's the way removal works, and this
Court so held in Polizzi half a century ago.
And then there would be no personal
jurisdiction, and then the personal jurisdiction would
be under the Ninth Circuit's decision, and we'd be back
exactly where we are now.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of course, the venue
question does not -- does not bring into the Court a
constitutional question and the jurisdictional -- the
jurisdictional one does.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  That's true.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And we usually try to avoid
constitutional questions.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  That's true.  And the
avoidance canon is certainly one factor the Court could
take into account in deciding which issue to reach -- or
which issues to reach or in what order.
On the other hand, the personal jurisdiction
question is -- is a constitutional question, but it's
not a constitutional question in the strong sense of the
term because the only reason that the -- the personal
jurisdiction question, as applied in this case, is a
constitutional one is because Congress hasn't provided
for nationwide service of process for Bivens claims.
And as the Court pointed out in Omni
Capital, the Congress has the power to do that.  It's
not for the Court to do that on its own, to fill a
perceived policy gap in personal jurisdiction law.
And so, even though it is a constitutional
question as currently configured, if Congress thought
that it were a problem to apply the existing personal
jurisdiction jurisprudence to Bivens claims and wanted
to provide for nationwide service of process based on
the idea that what counts is contacts with the U.S. as a
whole, as opposed to any particular State.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  It's not likely, is it,
considering that the Bivens claim was created by this
Court and not Congress.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  I'm not suggesting that
Congress should do that.  I think Congress should not do
that.  I think Bivens claims, for the reason that Your
Honor just stated, is -- is sort of the last place
that -- that anyone should start to create a more
plaintiff-friendly version of personal jurisdiction.
The Court has gone -- I'm sorry, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You -- you would not have
any problem about -- assuming we agree with you that
it's -- there's no personal jurisdiction, it's the wrong
venue, for the district court in Nevada to transfer the
case to the Federal district court in Georgia?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, I think,
Justice Ginsburg, in the ordinary course, in a -- in a
case starting in district court, under Section 1631
or -- or the venue statute, that would be an appropriate
course.
Here, the district court asked Respondents
specifically, if I agree with Officer Walden on personal
jurisdiction or venue, do you want me to transfer, or do
you want me to dismiss?  Because the statute gives the
district court discretion and -- and says, in the
interest of justice, transfer is -- is permissible in
lieu of dismissal.
The Respondents said, emphatically, we don't
want you to transfer.  We want you to dismiss.  I guess
they -- they decided they would rather have an appeal to
the Ninth Circuit and take their -- their chances
with -- with an appeal, then pursue the case in Georgia.
So I think under the unusual --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  That's probably --
it turned out to be a good -- good strategy, at least to
the extent they got to the Ninth Circuit.
Isn't Calder against Jones in considerable
tension with your proposition that you don't look to the
plaintiff's contacts with the forum?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  I don't think so, Your Honor.
I think there -- there is definitely some language in
Calder that could be read in a variety of ways.  I think
the key language in Calder -- excuse me -- as the Court
states its conclusions, it says, "In sum, California was
the focal point both of the article and of the harm
suffered by the plaintiffs."
And then the Court later says that -- that
the defendants expressly aimed their conduct at
California.  It doesn't say at the plaintiff, who
happened to be in California; it says at California.
And I think that's not an accident, that the Court used
those formulations.
In all of the personal jurisdiction cases
before Calder and since -- and, for that matter, decided
the same day, in Keeton -- decided the same day as
Calder, the Court has emphasized that random,
attenuated, and fortuitous contacts with the forum State
are insufficient and that, in particular, contacts
between the defendant and the -- and the forum that are
created by the unilateral activity of the plaintiff are
not sufficient.  So --
JUSTICE ALITO:  What do you think the Court
meant when it said that the -- the article was aimed at
California?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  I think what the Court meant,
Justice Alito, is that the article was distributed in
California, and California was, by far, the largest
market for the National Enquirer.  The article recounted
events or -- or alleged events, that happened in
California.  And the article was drawn from California
sources.
So it's not fortuitous that the effect of
the article was felt in California.  That was -- that
was -- nothing about that was fortuitous because the --
the defendants knew that the article would be
distributed widely in California, that it was the
largest market, and they --
JUSTICE ALITO:  When it was distributed, it
was distributed everywhere.  It was the National
Enquirer, so it was probably in every supermarket in the
country.
And why does California, as an abstract
entity, care about an article that makes allegedly
defamatory statements about things that people
supposedly did in California?  I don't quite understand
that.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, let me try to answer
the first part of your question first, Justice Alito.
It's true that the National Enquirer was national; it
was distributed throughout the country.  But the Court
went -- went to pains in the opinion to emphasize that
California was the largest market.
And so when the Court said the brunt of the
harm -- that -- this is right after the Court's
reference to express aiming, where the Court says --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's the largest market for
everything, isn't it?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, I think particularly for the
National Enquirer, when you're talking about articles
about celebrities, about actresses in particular, that
allegedly injure their professional reputation and
prevent them from getting future acting jobs.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I don't understand.
Are you suggesting if this -- everything was the same,
except Ms. Jones was in New York, there'd be a different
result in that case?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  No, I'm not suggesting that.
I think that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, I thought,
several times, you said California was the biggest
market.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Right.  I think -- I think
the way that -- that Calder reads, I think that there
are a number of factors.  One of them is plaintiff's
residence in California.  That's where she was when she
suffered the emotional distress from -- from reading
the article about herself and where her job prospects
were -- were allegedly adversely affected.
But it's also true the Court points out that
not only is -- when the Court says the defendants
expressly aimed their conduct at California, the next
passage after that, where the Court explains what
that -- what express aiming at California means, it says
California was not only where -- where Ms. Jones
suffered the brunt of the harm, but where the defendants
knew that the Enquirer had its largest circulation.
So I don't think you can disentangle the
fact that that's where she was, which, of course, was a
relevant factor in that case because it was true, from
the fact that the defendants, in a broader sense, in a
more -- in a sense not based on her unilateral activity,
but in a sense based on their own contacts, aimed at
California.
They drew their --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, what does it mean --
what does it mean, in the context of an intentional
tort, which is what we're talking about here, to aim at
a particular State, if it doesn't mean to aim at a
person who you know to be within that State?
I mean, nobody conducts an intentional tort
intending to injure California, per se.  You're
intending to injure a person who resides in California.
So what would it actually mean to aim conduct at a
State, irrespective of a person?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, Justice Kagan, I think
the answer is that it could take a few forms.  It
depends on the type of case.  It would be very difficult
to try to come up with the single -- you know, sort of
comprehensive unitary answer to that question that would
govern all types of cases.
I think the way that the plurality put it in
J. McIntyre, for intentional tort cases, is that maybe
you're intending to obstruct the laws of the forum
State.  That would be more meaningfully aimed at the
forum State qua State and not just somebody who happens
to be in it or have a connection to it.
Another way that conduct could be aimed at a
State would be if -- if it's a species of purposeful
availment or purposeful direction, where you're
projecting your conduct into that State, whether
that's -- whether that's physical and literal or whether
it's -- it's through some indirect or technological
means for --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, suppose -- suppose --
and I'm sorry.  Please.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  -- for some benefit, for some
reason, where you're projecting your conduct into that
State, not just because that's where the plaintiff
happens to be, which is incidental and irrelevant to you
that the plaintiff is there, as opposed to anywhere
else, but because you're seeking that State out.
That could be -- it could be, in a case like
J. McIntyre, the Court, of course, divided over whether
in a -- in a very broad sense, sending your product into
the stream of commerce, intending that it in some
sense -- you know, go to the U.S. as a whole, without
any particular focus on a given State, was sufficient.
But at least there -- at least there, you
have the intent to serve the U.S. market as a whole.
And so you at least are on notice that your own conduct
is putting you at risk of being haled into court in any
one of the States.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Yes.  I mean, I guess I
just -- the -- the McIntyre example is a very different
kind of example because, in those cases, you really are
talking about a company seeking to serve a general
market in a State.
But intentional tort cases don't usually
have that quality.  You're going after a particular
person in an intentional tort case.  And it's odd to
think of going after an intentional -- a particular
person, whether it's a defamation suit or it's a fraud
suit or -- or what have you, as -- as targeting the
State itself.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, I think if it's a
defamation suit, Justice Kagan, if you project your
defamation into the forum State, then it's fair to say
that you've, in a sense, entered the forum State,
whether that's electronic or physical, as in Calder.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But in -- in this case, it
was known -- or should have been known that these were
gamblers; they were in Nevada.  That's where a lot of --
that's where their gambling takes place.  They were
residents of Nevada.  So in that sense, they were like
the plaintiff in -- in Calder.  The injury was there,
and the defendant arguably knew or should have known
that that's where its major impact would be.
I recognize your point that, when you take
money away, then you're inconvenienced in any State
where you happen to be, but there was an argument
here -- it seems to me there is an argument here that
this was gambling, and these people were from Nevada,
and so you've -- this -- this curtails their right or --
or their option to conduct -- to conduct their
activities in -- in Nevada.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, Justice Kennedy, the
complaint alleges that the plaintiffs had contacts with
Nevada, were residents of Nevada.  Of course, they
showed Officer Walden California licenses.  That's what
the complaint alleges, not Nevada licenses.  And so at
the time of their actual --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But didn't they say they
were residents in both places, in both California and
Nevada?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  They do say that.  But
there's no reason to think -- and even they don't allege
this, that Officer Walden knew that at the time that he
actually interacted with them.  And so there's no
allegation that he --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Let me ask this -- and
it's probably clear in the briefs.  Is -- is the
gravamen of the complaint the seizure at the airport or
the later false affidavit?  Because, to the extent it's
the later false affidavit, that cuts against you
marginally.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, I would emphasize
"marginally," Justice Kennedy, because I think the
gravamen of the complaint is both.  I don't think
there's a way to separate them.  The effect that the
plaintiffs are -- the reason for their lawsuit --
they're claiming damages based on the allegedly false
affidavit, is that it took them longer than it otherwise
would have to get their money back.
It's the same money that was seized in
Atlanta.  So it's a continuation of the effect of the
seizure.  You can't separate them cleanly.  And the
affidavit --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, would you -- would
your answer be different -- suppose that the -- the
officer had said, you can keep -- you can keep your
money, go on to Nevada with it.
And then, once Fiore -- the Fiores had reached
Nevada, the officer said -- the officer filed a false
affidavit, which, let's say, froze the Fiores' bank
accounts.  Would your -- would your answer be different?
The affidavit was filed in Georgia, but the money was
not seized in Georgia; instead, the money has gone on to
Nevada.  Is there personal jurisdiction in Nevada?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, Justice Kagan, I think
if -- if what Officer Walden allegedly had done -- of
course, that's not this case -- is freeze a bank account
in Nevada, then --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, he did it by filing an
affidavit in Georgia, and then it froze a bank account.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  No, I understand that.  I
understand the question.  But if what he had done is
freeze a bank account in Nevada, then maybe it would be
fair to say that he had entered into Nevada by freezing
the bank account in Nevada.
But, here, the cash was in Atlanta.  The
plaintiffs brought the cash to Atlanta.  Officer Walden
didn't seek them out, knowing that they had any
connection to Nevada.  They -- he didn't go to Nevada.
He didn't direct anyone in Nevada to do anything.  He
didn't seize a -- or freeze a bank account in Nevada or
direct anyone to do anything like that.
He never had any contact with Nevada at all,
except for the very intangible contact, if you can call
it that, of -- of allegedly writing this affidavit to
keep the plaintiffs from getting the money back sooner
than they would have.
But the plaintiffs would have gotten the
money back wherever they happened to be or, really, more
precisely, wherever their lawyer happened to be.  The
fact that they chose a lawyer in Nevada, and that's
where they asked the government to send them their money
back, ultimately, is the very definition of fortuitous
contact between Walden and Nevada.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Could you tell me -- you
started by saying that our personal jurisdiction and
venue provisions and jurisprudence center on a -- on a
defendant's action, not on the plaintiff's action or
injury.  Calder suggests otherwise.
But how do you respond, not only to
Justice -- I'll do this after, but let me just pose the
question, and you can answer it on your rebuttal.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Thank you.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm worried about the
internet effects from somebody's account in Vermont by
someone in Illinois -- the hypothetical on page 19, who
steals something from a store in California.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Thank you, Justice Sotomayor.
If I may, I'll reserve the balance of my time and, as
you suggested, address that on rebuttal.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Okay.  Thank you,
counsel.
Ms. Sherry.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MELISSA ARBUS SHERRY,
FOR UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE PETITIONER
MS. SHERRY:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
If I could start with this Court's decision
in Calder because the facts of this case stand in stark
contrast to Calder.  In Calder, the article was all
about the State of California.  It was about the
California activities of a California resident whose
career was centered in California, based on California
sources, and in a magazine that its -- where its primary
publication was in California.
Here, even if you were to focus just on the
affidavit, the affidavit is, in every real sense,
focused on the State of Georgia.  According to
Respondents' own allegation, it recounts what happened
in the Atlanta airport in Georgia.
It was based on information that was
received by Officer Walden in Georgia.  It's about funds
that were seized in Georgia, that remained in Georgia.
It was prepared in Georgia, forwarded to an AUSA in
Georgia, for forfeiture proceedings in Georgia.
And so the two cases could not be more
different.  Just as the focal point of the tortious
activity in Calder was on the State of California, here,
the focus of the tortious activity was on the State of
Georgia.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Did the affidavit ever get
to Nevada?
MS. SHERRY:  It didn't get to Nevada.  Based
on Respondents' own allegations, it was sent to an AUSA
in Georgia for forfeiture proceedings in Georgia.  And,
notably, had Respondents wanted to regain their property
during the 6 months' period of seizure, they would have
had to go to Georgia to do so.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Do we know how much of the
information -- the supplemental information that was
prepared in Nevada and then was forwarded to Georgia,
how much of that information was in the affidavit?
MS. SHERRY:  Based on the current record, I
don't know that we do.  If you look at the complaint
allegations, they suggest that the -- what they call the
"exculpatory information" was left out of the affidavit.
The affidavit itself, if it even exists, is not in the
record in this case.
And then -- you know, by focusing -- you asked
the question, Your Honor, about what the gravamen of
this case is.  I think, in a very real way, the gravamen
of the case is the initial seizure.  The Ninth Circuit
focused exclusively on the affidavit, and Respondents do
so here as well.
But I think it's a quintessential example of
the tail wagging the dog.  The affidavit is, at best, a
thin and artificial read.  Even if you were to focus
exclusively on the affidavit, as I explained --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But it was -- it was
stated as a separate claim, and I think Judge Grisholm
read it that way, and I don't think Petitioner has taken
issue with that, that there's -- one claim is for the
seizure, another claim is for the false affidavit.  So
the seizure stops the funds immediately, and then the
false affidavit keeps them there.
So I didn't think there was a -- a genuine
difference between the parties on whether the
affidavit -- knowingly composing a false affidavit is an
independent claim.
MS. SHERRY:  There isn't for purposes of --
of this case in this Court, and I don't mean to suggest
otherwise, but while there may be a distinct claim,
there is no distinct injury.  The injury that
Respondents allege based on the affidavit is simply that
the initial seizure continued beyond the time that it
otherwise would have.
And for that reason, the harm -- the same
economic harm that they were already feeling in Nevada,
continued beyond a certain person point in time.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But imagine a case where
everybody agreed that the initial seizure was lawful, so
that that wasn't part of the complaint at all, and the
only complaint was that a false affidavit had been
filed, so that, after making the preliminary
investigation, the officer hadn't transferred the money,
but had, instead, kept it.
MS. SHERRY:  And, again, I -- obviously,
that's not this case, but I don't think that case would
be any different because, assuming that the affidavit
looks the same as it's alleged to look in this case, it
would still be focused -- that money in Georgia and
everything about it would still be related to Georgia.
Again, the only connection to Nevada would
be the fact that Respondents felt some harm in that
State.  It's not a harm that's unique in any respect to
Nevada.  It's a harm that they would have felt no matter
where they traveled.  If they had gone to their other
residence in California, if they had left on another --
JUSTICE ALITO:  And that would be true, even
if the Respondents had never been in Georgia?
MS. SHERRY:  No.  I think it's -- I think
it's significant, here, that the Respondents did go to
Georgia.  I mean, here, we are talking about a traveling
Plaintiff -- a mobile Plaintiff, who voluntarily left
their home State and traveled to other States, traveled
to New Jersey, traveled to San Juan, and traveled to
Walden's home State, the place where he lives and works,
and brought their cash with them there.
And so I think it is significant that they
did travel to the State of Georgia, and I think it shows
how broad the Ninth Circuit ruling really is.  As far as
law enforcement officers, go, Federal, State, or
local, this is a really problematic decision because
they interact with travelers from all 50 States and
beyond on a daily basis.
The idea that, based on those interactions,
that they can be hauled into a far-away and distant
forum, based on nothing more than their interaction with
a traveler and finding out where that person is from,
which, of course, unlike this case -- the facts here are
somewhat unique, in that the drivers' licenses that were
showed were not from the State of Nevada.
In most cases, when travelers show a
driver's license, it's from their State of residence.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Do you think it's relevant
in a case like this whether the -- the Federal officer
who is sued is represented by the Justice Department?
MS. SHERRY:  I don't think it's relevant at
all.  I would point Your Honor to the Court's decision
in Stafford v. Briggs.  In that case -- it's a venue
case.  It's about 1391(e).  In that case, the dissent
made an argument that that provision should extend to
personal capacity cases against government officials.
And one of the arguments made is there's
really not much of a burden on them because they have
DOJ representation and because they have
indemnification.  And the majority there rejected that
argument.
I think it's equally implausible here, and I
think it's significant that, not only did the Ninth
Circuit rely on the fact of DOJ representation, which,
mind you, is not a guarantee, it's a discretionary
determination; but not only did they rely on it, they
relied on it to say that there would be personal
jurisdiction here because this is a Federal official --
or, really, a State official deputized as a Federal
official.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Ms. Sherry, just to try to
figure out how far your argument goes, suppose there's
an IRS agent sitting in Washington, D.C., and she
maliciously does something, files an affidavit, does
whatever she does, to impose a tax penalty on somebody
in Nevada, and everything that she does happens in
Washington, D.C.
Does the person in Nevada, who is the victim
of this malicious attempt to impose a tax penalty, have
to go to Washington, D.C., to sue her?
MS. SHERRY:  I think there's more difficult
questions there, where the individual hasn't left the
State at all and where it's targeted at the State.  I
think that comes to Your Honor's question about what it
means --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, she's a very mobile
person.  She lives in Nevada, but she goes other places,
and -- and this could -- you know, harm her wherever she
goes.  Isn't that what you said?  So why should she be
able to bring suit in Nevada, under your view?
MS. SHERRY:  That is what I said and  I
think maybe it goes to Your Honor's other question,
earlier, about what it means to expressly aim your
conduct at the forum State, as opposed to just the forum
resident, when we're talking about an intentional tort.
In the cases that have looked at this,
they've -- they have looked for something more besides
simply aiming your conduct at a forum resident, some
indication that the -- that the defendant is trying to
reach into the forum State.  And some of the examples
that have come up is when they've actually sent
something into the forum State, whether it's a
defamatory article or a letter, the bullet example
that's in the restatement and mentioned in the briefs.
In those cases, the defendant is actually sending
something physically into the State or, for example,
directing activity in the forum State -- directing
something to happen in the forum State.
Whatever the answer is to the -- to that
hypothetical, the facts here are really quite different.
Walden didn't do anything to reach into the State of
Nevada.  And as my colleague pointed out, the only
connection to Nevada and the idea that the money was
going to be returned there and eventually was returned
there is entirely fortuitous.
It's based entirely on the unilateral acts
of the plaintiff, the fact that they happened to hire a
Las Vegas attorney.  If they hired --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Ms. Sherry, you -- would
you want us to decide this case on the jurisdictional
question or the venue question?
MS. SHERRY:  The Court, I think, can do
either.  My preference would be --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I -- I understand that.
That's why I asked the question.
(Laughter.)
MS. SHERRY:  My -- my preference would be
that -- the same as Petitioner's, that the Court decide
it on personal jurisdiction grounds, and the reasons are
the ones expressed in the Federal Law Enforcement
Officer brief.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What -- what type of
action would the United States have brought if they
decided to bring an action?  It would have been in
personam or in rem against the assets?
MS. SHERRY:  It would have been an in rem
action against the assets.  It would have been a
forfeiture complaint that would have been filed in
Georgia.  And in those proceedings, the Respondents
would have had an opportunity to contest the forfeiture.
If during either the pendency of those
proceedings or even before those proceedings, if they
had wanted to seek to regain control of their property,
they would have had to file a motion or a petition in
the State of Georgia.  They wouldn't have been able to
file one in their home State.  And, again, those are the
statutes that we cite at page 31 of our brief.
The consequence of the Ninth Circuit's
decision here really is to allow personal jurisdiction,
as well as venue, to travel with a mobile plaintiff in a
way that it cannot travel with mobile chattel.
We've talked mostly about personal
jurisdiction here, but could I -- if I could just take a
quick moment on venue and point the Court to this -- to
the Leroy decision in 1979.  Nobody contests that there
would be no venue in the District of Nevada under the
Leroy decision.
The language change in 1990 does nothing to
change that and does nothing to change the result in
Leroy.  Respondents avoid the statutory text, and I
think it resolves this case.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Goldstein.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF THOMAS C. GOLDSTEIN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
You are being asked by the other side to
write an opinion about personal jurisdiction that is
going to try and slice the salami very, very, very thin,
that is going to create a huge amount of confusion about
these facts versus the facts in Calder and that is going
to be very, very difficult to reconcile with the
internet cases and the cases that the lower courts are
constantly confronting, about where a person in State A
intentionally injures a person in State B.
And that person frequently doesn't shoot a
gun into the other State.  They sit at their computer,
and they steal money under the bank account.  They take
the person's ID.  They use their credit cards and the
like.
I think, in truth, the way the case is most
likely to be resolved --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  They didn't really injure a
person in State B here.  I mean, these people were in
Georgia when the injury occurred.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Scalia, we disagree,
and so let me focus on your point and Justice Kennedy's
question about which claim it is.  The claim here -- the
complaint states two complaints, Judge Berzon
recognized.  One is about the seizure.
It's exactly what you are describing.  The
other is about the false affidavit.  And those really
are different as a matter of law.  I have a couple of
citations to give you to explain how this legal process
works.
What happens is the DEA seizes the money at
the Atlanta Hartsfield Airport.  He takes the cash and
turns it in to a locker.  Then what happens is that we
have to state a claim to the money.  And when we state a
claim to the money, they either have to do one of two
things:  They have to give it back to us as a matter of
law, or they have to start a forfeiture process as a
matter of law.
And if you start the forfeiture process, you
have to provide to the assistant U.S. attorney a factual
basis for the forfeiture.  And the way to look at this,
I think, is the way that Justice Kagan's hypothetical
asked, and that is imagine that there were two officers
here, not one.
Officer A -- we'll call him Walden -- is at
the Atlanta Hartsfield Airport, and he seizes our money.
And just assume that that's perfectly lawful.  We then
state a claim to the money, and then we provide factual
information about why it is that the money is not
subject to seizure.  They have to return it to us at
that point, or they have to start the forfeiture
process.
And when that second officer creates a false
affidavit to start the forfeiture process, we are not in
Georgia.  We have no ongoing contacts with Georgia.  And
we are losing access to the money only in Nevada.
That's the only place we're in --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, suppose that the
plaintiffs in this case were not professional gamblers.
Let's say they were Major League umpires, or they are
members of a rock group that's going on a tour of 25
cities.
Where would there be personal jurisdiction
there?  In every place where the umpire was going to
appear at a game?  Every place where the group was going
to perform?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, sir.  The lower courts
have tackled this question because people go visit their
mother-in-law.  They do travel around.  It's a mobile
society, and they have taken, from your opinion in
Calder and Jones, the focus on where it is that the
plaintiff lives and works.  And there is a good reason
for that.
Personal jurisdiction is trying to tackle
the question of where does the defendant reasonably
believe that he will be haled into court.  It's a
fairness principle.  And that is, we need to have a
predictable rule that allows the would-be defendants to
know, okay, if I do this --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, here, the -- here, the
plaintiffs apparently lived in two places, right?
California and Nevada.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  That is --
JUSTICE ALITO:  And suppose my hypothetical
rock performer has five houses, one in California, one
in Montana, and so forth.  He -- personal jurisdiction
everywhere?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, sir.  The -- and let me
just start with the premise of this case, all right?  My
friend said that this officer was shown the
California -- California driver's license.  That's not
correct.  He wasn't shown a California driver's license.
The officer in San Juan, Puerto Rico, was
shown one.  They only -- their principal residence, the
complaint alleges, I think, in paragraph 2, is in
Nevada.  We do have situations -- and that's where they
lived and worked.  We have situations --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, they were sufficiently
residents of California to get California driver's
licenses, were they not?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  That is true, at one point,
and they had moved.
I'm going to step outside the record, just
so I can accurately answer your question.  But it will
give you a sense of how these cases actually operate.
Most often, you have the situation where
they're college students -- you know, you have a college
student who lives at home with their parents, but they
go off to college, and they may be injured where it is
that they live and go to school in that case.
And what the lower courts do is, sensibly,
they say, if you know where the person's principal
residence is -- and this case is simplified by the fact
that the district court understood and assumed that the
defendant knew that they lived in Nevada.  It's never
been contested in the case.
And Judge Berzon said, quite correctly, what
you have to do is you have to make it a prima facie case
because there's no evidence in this case that the --
that the principal residence was Nevada and that the
defendant knew that.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So you're really arguing
for a very broad principle.  Whenever there is an
intentional tort, you can be haled into court at the
place of residence of the person against whom the tort
is committed.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, sir.  I'm sorry --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, that's what I thought
you were saying.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  Then I've -- I've
misled you, and let me state our test, which I haven't
done yet, and that may help you.  Our rule is as
follows:  When the defendant intentionally targets the
plaintiff for injury in State A, where the injury
arises -- and that's going to be the big difference.
Does the injury arise there?
Justice Scalia, your impression in your
earlier question was that this injury didn't arise in
Nevada.  But our test requires that it arise in Nevada,
and the defendant knows that it's going to arise in
Nevada.
I'll contrast our -- our false seizure
claim, right?  We were in the airport.  We lose the
$97,000.  If we then go back to Nevada and then file
suit, our injury can't travel with us.  And that's the
big concern of --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, I don't see how it
arises in Nevada.  What they're saying is that some
people in Georgia didn't give back some money that they
took in Georgia.  To take your example, my question is
this:  There could -- you say there are many, many, many
cases.  We could get this all mixed up if we don't
follow your rules.
All I want you to do is cite me a few, but
the few that I want you to cite me will meet certain
criteria.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.
JUSTICE BREYER:  For example, a college
student goes into the bookstore, and it's also a
pharmacy, by the way.  And he breaks his finger in the
door.  Which he thinks is his fault.  He says, I am going home; send
me some bandages.  The store never does.  Send me some
books, I just bought them.  The store never does.  They
know his home address, all right?  Injury -- now, what
about those?
Cite me some lower cases where they say
there is jurisdiction in cases like that.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  I have not seen --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Oh, I lost my billfold.  I
lost it here in the store.  When you find it, will you
send it back?  They never send it back, though they
found it.  All right.  So just give me some lower court
cases that finds jurisdiction in that kind of situation.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  In that kind of situation,
where the injury actually -- and you have named several
situations.
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, no, the injury -- my
goodness, he lost his billfold.  There was money in it.
And by the way, when he gets home, his parents are away,
and he's not going to have any money to spend on food or
even, like, CDs or anything.
(Laughter.)
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  So, Justice Breyer, it is
our position that, in that situation, there is not
personal jurisdiction.  And let me try --
JUSTICE BREYER:  There is no jurisdiction in
those cases where he lost his billfold in the bookstore
in the college town, 1,000 miles away from home, and
he's going home, and everybody knows he's never going to
have any money, and they keep the money.
Okay.  What's the difference?  If there are
no cases on those, what is the difference between that
case and yours?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  The difference is
that the defendant in that instance, the injury arises
at the bookstore.  Okay?  And the fact that it has a
continuing effect, as a practical matter, the lower
courts uniformly treat the injury arising as in the
bookstore.
But there are situations that you can
imagine the following:  And that is, he loses the
billfold in the store.  Okay.  That injury arose there.
Now, someone takes the credit card from the billfold
after he has gone home, knows that he's at home, and
starts spending his money with it.  That injury arises
where he lives.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  Now, give me the
case that says that.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  The cases that are
closest to that -- two of them are at page 25a of the
petition appendix.  They are the Bancroft case, and
that -- these are not going to be billfold cases.  Okay?
Billfold cases, people tend not to -- if you lose $100,
people don't file a lawsuit.  These are bigger cases.
And it's the petition appendix.  You've
pulled open the red brief, so I am asking you for the
cert petition.  The Bancroft case at 25a is where a
Georgia resident writes to a Virginia registrar, and the
registrar misappropriates the website of a California
company.  And that is, they never set foot in
California.  They don't -- you know, do anything in
California at all.
And there, there is jurisdiction in
California because they know that the person's going to
be hurt in California.
The next one is Metropolitan Life, that --
the same page, an Alabama resident writes to an
insurance company, and they say, Ah, I'm entitled to the
insurance proceeds.  But the actual proceeds belong to
someone in California.  And they never get the money.
So it's like this case.  The money never gets sent into
California.
And these remote injury cases --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Is this a case -- is this a
case like -- I'll look at those cases.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.
JUSTICE BREYER:  But is your case a case
like where the -- a credit card is used, somebody finds
it in a bookstore and starts spending the money and did
the agents here, who were outside Nevada and they were
keeping the money, were they going and spending it?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  They weren't going and
spending it.  They were --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Was there a credit card
that they were using?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, sir.  I -- I am giving
you -- I was trying to take a billfold example and --
I'm -- I'm trying to --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I was trying to figure out
just which cases I should read carefully, and I will
read those cases.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  And there's a case
that's discussed in several of the briefs called
Dudnikov, and that involves an -- an eBay -- eBay-like
auction, and someone in one State blocks an auction in
another State.
So one of the impressions --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Was the money here in
Georgia the whole time?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  The money here was --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Was it still there in that
locker?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No.  Here's the thing about
it, this is no longer about the cash.  And this -- the
actual answer to your question is he turns the money in
at a locker, okay?  Then it's deposited into an account.
It's not about the physical money in any way, shape, or
form at that point.
We weren't -- when we got the money, nobody
sent us a duffle bag full of cash.  There was a check,
of course.
JUSTICE KAGAN:
them --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
JUSTICE KAGAN:
a gold watch --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
JUSTICE KAGAN:
return the gold watch.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
JUSTICE KAGAN:
Well, if it were about
Yes.
So -- so suppose they seized
Okay.
-- and then they refused to
Yes.
But the gold watch really is
still sitting there in Georgia.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Okay?  Would you say that --
that then there's -- there's personal jurisdiction in
Nevada?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  Okay.  And same
facts, and that is a false affidavit, it's not just they
seized it, it's they make a false --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Yeah, they seize it, and
then there's a false affidavit keeping it.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Right.  Yes.  That --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And the complaint is only
about the false affidavit, but it's in reference to
property that is indisputably in Georgia.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.  I do think, if you can
prove an injury, which I think is very hard from the
gold watch -- let's say a computer, just to make it a
little bit more plausible, that they would be hurt in
Nevada, then, yes, I do think if you can make out an
injury, which isn't -- the tort doesn't arise until the
injury occurs.
That's why the lower courts treat these
cases as the tort occurring where the victim is.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Goldstein, can I take
you back to the origins of all of this?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  The main move for
personal jurisdiction, traditionally, is the plaintiff
must go to where the defendant is, no matter how
inconvenient that is for the plaintiff.  Jurisdiction is
defendant-centered.  You're trying to hold a defendant,
you have to go where he is.
Then the long-arm age comes about, and we
have specific jurisdiction, which, by the way, is what
you're urging.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You're certainly not saying
they have all-purpose jurisdiction over Walden.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No.  Correct.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And this Court, as the
McIntyre decision indicates, has been pretty careful
about specific jurisdiction.  And Miguel wasn't enough
that machine blew up or cut somebody's fingers in New
Jersey.  They had to purposely avail themselves of
wherever the -- the standard words are.
And here, you're asking for -- really
pushing this specific jurisdiction to the limit.  The
defendant has acted only in Georgia.  He hasn't set foot
outside the State.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  So I don't think we
are trying to push the bounds -- let me make one point
about McIntyre and then try and correct the
misimpression that I think that's been left, that there
are a few contacts between Nevada and this case and
hopefully prove to you that there are far more contacts
between this tort and this forum than will be true in
the overwhelming majority of cases that the lower courts
confront.
And the point I would make, Justice
Ginsburg, and it's made by the plurality in McIntyre, is
that there have always been special rules for
intentional tort cases.  That's the distinction, and
that's why Calder comes out the way it does, citing
restatement Section 32nd of the second -- the second
restatement of the conflict of laws, and that is the
reason -- it's not just made up.
The reason there's a special rule for
intentional torts is that the defendant knows he's
hurting someone somewhere else and, therefore, expects
to be haled into court.  The view of the McIntyre
plurality, of course, was that the overseas manufacturer
there wasn't, itself, doing anything directed at the
forum.
But if I could just get to the very
important point about --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Before you move on from that
point --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO:  -- your -- your argument is
dependent on the fact that the officer here knew that
the -- the plaintiffs were residents of Nevada; is that
right?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  That they lived and worked
there.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Why should that make any
difference?  The conduct is the same; the injury is the
same.  What if he didn't know?  Then there would be no
personal jurisdiction.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  That -- that is actually,
generally, what the lower courts hold, and their reason
is that the defendant is doing something, knowing that
he may be haled into that court.  It is a
defendant-favoring rule that intends -- attempts to give
predictability.
Now, if that's wrong, it doesn't hurt my
case because, as the case comes to you, it's not --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you could say that
about whatever rule we adopt.  Once we adopt the rule,
when -- the defendant will know that, if he violates
that rule, he's going to be haled into court.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Scalia, there is
a --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I mean, it's sort of a
self-fulfilling point you're making.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Right.  It's almost like the
Fourth Amendment reasonable expectations to privacy.
There is a circularity here.  But it's not entirely
circular because we're talking about a specific State
here.  It's not that he knows that the plaintiffs might
be -- live in Georgia or might live anywhere in the
United States, it's a very specific State, and that's
why it's not circular.
Now, if I could just help you understand our
view that there are a lot more contacts between this
tort and Nevada than in the great, great -- at least
90 percent of the cases the lower courts are
confronting.  So here are the points that I would make
about those contexts, and there are six, and I will try
and be brief.
The case involves money owned by Nevada
residents, $30,000 of which originated in Nevada, and
all of which was on its way to Nevada.
Second, the defendant intentionally hurt the
plaintiffs, knowing that they would lose access to the
money in Nevada, where they lived and worked.
Third, we will use documents in Nevada to
prove that his action was intentional because it omitted
the information that the defendant requested.  This is
not a -- us unilaterally sending money.  At the Atlanta
airport, he said, send us the proof that the funds are
legitimate, that he requested and received from the
plaintiffs in Nevada and that he learned in searching a
Nevada law enforcement database, which is paragraph 79
of the complaint.
The two last points I would make is that the
plaintiffs will show that they were deprived of the
money in Nevada until the Nevada lawyer they had to hire
used records in Nevada to persuade the government to
send the money to Nevada.
And the plaintiffs in their case, of course,
will show, because it is the fact that they are gamblers
working in Las Vegas, that the economic injury occurred
to them there.
Now, if you think that's not enough, if you
conclude that's not enough, you are closing the door
absolutely to all of the internet cases because those
are cases where someone sits at the computer and targets
someone in another State.  This --
JUSTICE ALITO:  But, when you're talking
about the internet, you're in a different world.  But
this is a -- the facts here are old-fashioned.
Everything that happened here could have happened in
1920.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
JUSTICE ALITO:
the 19th century.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
JUSTICE ALITO:
Yes.
Could have happened in -- in
Yes.
So I don't see what the
internet has to do with this.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Alito, you always
tell us that you've got to write a legal rule, and there
is no special personal jurisdiction rule, and the lower
courts --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.  Well, there seems to
be because it's hard to think of an internet case where
a defendant wouldn't be having communications with
people in the foreign State, wouldn't be inviting
business, wouldn't be doing all kinds of things.
So there are many kinds of internet cases,
but I don't -- I don't automatically see, in deciding
this, that we're deciding any on --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Breyer, the kinds of
internet cases -- and it's wrong for me to just say,
"internet" -- the kinds of cases that I'm talking about
are the fraud cases, the intentional tort cases --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Like what?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  You steal -- you're sitting
in Georgia -- you don't, but someone is sitting in
Georgia, and they steal the identity of someone who's in
Nevada.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I wouldn't do that.
(Laughter.)
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  I'm -- exactly -- that's why
I took it immediately back, recognizing the error.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  He wouldn't know how.
(Laughter.)
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  But there are bad people in
the world, obviously, and those people do, with
increasing and distressing frequency at -- with these
new tools of communication, they are very, very capable
of causing significant harm to someone else without
actually do -- setting foot in the State.
Now, I have to offer you a solution.  Let me
just be clear.  I recognize that this can go either way
because if I say, "internet cases," well, then I'm
opening the door to potentially a very wide-ranging set
of cases going into Nevada, and we have here the special
case of the law enforcement officer, and I believe that
I do have the solution.
And that is, this is actually a case about
transfer.  It is not a case about jurisdiction and
venue.  This is the unusual case where the defendant
filed a motion to dismiss and did not file a 1404 motion
to transfer.
And this case is a lot -- you should treat
it like Atlantic Marine because what you need to do is
recognize, I think, that there's the big category of
jurisdiction.  Where there is jurisdiction, there's a
subset, there is venue.  That's where you can file a
lawsuit.  That is not where the case is going to be
litigated.
And in these cases, what defendants
uniformly do -- and the lower courts pay incredible
attention to the fact that law enforcement officers are
going to be witnesses or are the defendant.  In these
cases, the defendant comes in and says, okay, I
recognize, technically, there's jurisdiction and venue,
but let me tell you how disruptive it will be if I
actually have to litigate the case here.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, I don't understand
what you're saying.  You're saying that we should
reverse the Ninth Circuit's dismiss -- the dismissal and
send it back for the district court to consider whether
the case should be transferred?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, sir.  I would not --
this is my judgment.  I do not want it reversed.  What
I'm saying --
JUSTICE ALITO:  I know that, so that's why
I'm confused by what you're saying about transfer.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  I'm trying to describe an
opinion that you would write, and the opinion that I
think you would write is this -- and it says, look,
personal jurisdiction in the wake of Calder,
particularly where there are contacts here, exists.
Venue exists because several of these are events and
omissions, including the injury that occurs in Nevada.
But what we expect the lower courts to do in
a case like this is to pay particular attention at the
beginning of the case, as we do with qualified immunity,
to have an efficient process in which the defendant can
say --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But you are asking the
Court to decide a big-ticket item, personal
jurisdiction, and what -- the theory that you are
proposing would apply not to -- just to Officer Walden,
but it would be about as far out as any specific
jurisdiction case I know.
So the Court shouldn't say, well,
jurisdiction, okay, venue, okay, but consider it
transferring it to Georgia.  That seems, to me, wild.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Ginsburg, I am not
trying to just skip over.  I have talked for this entire
time about why I think we are right on jurisdiction and
venue, and I am pleased to return to the issue.  What
I'm suggesting to you is that I recognize that we can't
have -- there are two ways of dealing with the prospect
of a broad personal jurisdiction rule.
One is to narrow it substantially.  The
second is to recognize that it doesn't determine where
the case is going to ultimately be litigated.
I will tell you, Justice Ginsburg, from
personally reviewing all of the post-Calder cases in the
Federal courts and the State courts, that the contacts
here are much, much greater between Nevada and this tort
than exists in the great majority of cases that the
lower courts are confronting.
And so if you --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Did -- did Calder have
something to do with the notion that every defamation
is -- that every publication is a tort where it occurs?
There is something special about the libel cases.  There
was that theory that, wherever the paper that contains
the libelous article -- wherever it is sent, each one of
those places, the tort occurs there.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Two things about that.  That
is the rule for torts, not specifically -- it does -- it
is true of libel, but it is true, as well, of fraud.
The fraud occurs where the person is defrauded.  This is
straight from the Restatement.  It's the ordinary common
law rule.  So the tort does happen where the victim is
injured in libel and in a case like --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, but you are libeled
wherever it is published.  You don't have to be there
where it's published.  You are libeled wherever it is
published.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  And, Justice -- that's
correct.  And, Justice Scalia, this is exactly why --
you were asking the question, why is it that
then-Justice Rehnquist's opinion in Calder has the
discussion that the other side is focusing on about how
the article was centered on California and how it came
from California sources.
Now, none of the holding of the case
describes it, but you wondered -- and he has emphasized,
my friend has, why is it in the opinion?  And it's for
the reason you have just given.  And that is defamation
and libel cases, when you are talking about the
publication to the internet or publication nationwide
like the National Enquirer, the lower courts have
rightly focused on the fact, can we say that this isn't
just directed to the United States?
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So -- so you could say that
Calder, far from being an expansive decision, was a
narrowing decision.  It said -- you know, there's
jurisdiction not necessarily everywhere where the libel
was published, which is where the injury occurs, but
there is jurisdiction only -- only in California, where
these other connections existed.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  We are saying the same
thing.  I'm just not explaining my view of it well
enough, and that is  the
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Except it's harder for you
to establish that the injury occurred in Nevada.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  I don't think so, and let me
try my best.  All right.  The reason these defamation
cases about internet and national publications -- say
the New York Times is sued for defamation.
The Court was very concerned and the lower
courts are very concerned that the publisher can't be
sued in all 50 States.  And so what the lowers courts
have done in the wake of Calder is say, I know you
published it to the whole country, National Enquirer,
but is it fair to say you expected to be haled into
court in California because there were special features
about this defamation.
Now, defamation and nationwide publication
is very different from the other torts the lower courts
confront, which, as was suggested in the first 30
minutes of questioning, I think, by Justice Kagan, are
directed at a person, the "shoot the gun" example, the
"defraud the victim" example.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But our jurisdiction cases
have not been based on where you expected to be sued.
You could expect to be sued anywhere if the State says
you are going to be sued here.
Our cases have focused on whether the State
has jurisdiction, whether the State has enough
connection with it to assert its power; not the
expectation of the defendant, but the power of the
State.  That's what's going on here.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Scalia, I agree with
you, but I will say in my defense that, when the Court
has said -- when we are trying to figure out if there
are minimum contacts and whether it's consistent with
fair play and substantial justice, the language the
Court has used is, is it fair, because the defendant
could reasonably be expected -- could reasonably expect
to be haled into the court.
That's true of purposeful availment cases
like McIntyre.  It's true of intentional tort cases.
And that is, we measure fairness and whether you are
getting process that is due to you procedurally by
whether this is something that you could expect to
happen to you --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's your new test, just
whether you could expect this to happen?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, sir.  No, sir.  I have
given you a specific test about where you have to
intentionally injure the person, knowing that they will be
injured there, and the injury has to arise there.
And as I've said, the way in intentional
tort cases that has to work is that the lower courts
recognize that a tort has a wrong and an injury, and the
injury is what makes the tort complete and the tort
occurs where the victim is.
Just take the "shoot the gun" example,
right?  The reason is that the person is injured there.
It doesn't have to be that you shoot the gun, that the
bullet travels across the State line, because the same
thing can happen when money is taken out of your bank
account.
JUSTICE BREYER:  What is the -- what are the
elements of the -- of the second tort?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.  It is essentially a
fraud claim.  And that --
JUSTICE BREYER:  And what is the element?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  That he knowingly submitted
information that caused the government not to send us
the money.  False --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Injury element?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.  That is --
JUSTICE BREYER:  How do I find that?
Because you see, in the fraud case, the element includes
the victims being misled.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.  That's --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But that's not necessarily
true here.  I wonder --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, it's actually not the
case that the victim has to be misled in fraud,
Justice Breyer, so for example --
JUSTICE BREYER:  It has to be a
misrepresentation --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes, a knowing
misrepresentation.
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- material to.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Material to?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Here, to the government's
decision --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Not here, but material
to -- normally, it has to be material to the obtaining
the, say, of property.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Right.  Or the refusal to
return.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, where do I find the
elements of the tort that you are alleging here?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  The tort that we are
alleging here is essentially common law fraud under
Bivens.  I can give you citations --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I don't see anything in the
complaint that says anything like that.  It just says --
where -- where do I look to see it?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Okay.  The citations to the
complaint about -- it would be paragraphs 99 to 101.
"It's alleged to violate the Fourth Amendment and our
due process rights to have submitted the false affidavit
that caused the government not to send us the money."
And if you were to conclude, Justice Scalia,
that this injury doesn't arise here -- let me just tell
you what the consequences of that are.  And that is
there are a large number of cases that arise constantly
where people lose access to money, where they don't have
the insurance proceeds sent to them or the Social
Security checks or the IRS refunds.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But, Mr. Goldstein, as I
understood what Mr. Bucholtz was saying, he was saying
there is a distinction between an officer who commits a
fraud in Georgia, when your money is in Nevada, and so
he commits a fraud and he freezes your bank accounts in
Nevada, versus he commits a fraud by filing this
affidavit.
But it is as to money that is located where
he is, not where you are, but where he is in Georgia.
That's the distinction that I understood him to be
drawing.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Right.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  What do you think about
that?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  It doesn't make any
practical sense to me, and the money wasn't in Georgia.
The money was in an account in Quantico, Virginia that
belonged to the DEA.
What difference does it make as a matter of
personal jurisdiction between the following two cases
and that is the defendant sitting in Georgia steals
money from my bank account in Nevada or the defendant
sitting in Georgia causes the government not to send me
the money in Nevada --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Because one of the elements
of the crime in the -- in the second case, no element of
the crime or no element of the tort, it's only the
injury, which isn't an element of the actual underlying
behavior that gives rise to, and in the first case, it's
the other.  There is an element that takes place there.
That's what I'm looking for.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
JUSTICE BREYER:
not saying that I have it.
question I did.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:
Okay.
I'm looking for that.  I'm
That's why I asked you the
Right.  I believe that the
elements of the tort that Justice Kagan is describing
are the same elements that I am talking about here.
It's just where the money starts.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What -- what if the
plaintiffs in this case didn't leave Georgia?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  They said, look, I'm
not leaving until I get my money back, and I'm going to
get my money back as soon as the lawyer sends us the
receipts or whatever it is.  Is that a different case?
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes, it is a different case,
Mr. Chief Justice.  And the lower courts say the real
question is, where -- is this the kind of injury that
will arise where the Plaintiff lives and works.  And any
case --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I thought your
arguments were, basically, it does arise where he lives
and works because it is in Nevada.  And he still lives
and works in Nevada, even if he stays in Georgia and
says, I'm not leaving until I get the money.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  No, I -- that is -- for
example, on our seizure claim, we acknowledge that, at
the very least, there wouldn't be venue.  And there's
another difference, in addition to the fact that they
had returned to Nevada and they had returned to living
and working.
And that is, in our actual case, we have the
documents that are sent at his request from Nevada.  We
have the fact that he searches the Nevada law
enforcement databases.  And we have the fact that the
money is going to be sent by the government to Nevada.
It's requested by their Nevada lawyer,
sending documents from Nevada.  And so those are -- if
we think of Calder as a case in which there's not merely
injury in California, but a few extra factors that were
in California, that's much more this case than it is any
of the other cases that the lower courts are
confronting.
I would just discourage the Court, if I
could, from --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Except, Mr. Goldstein --
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- it -- it is of no
consequence to Walden whether this person is from Alaska
or Nevada.  In Calder, the article was about a person in
California.  The sources came from California.  The
paper had its principal circulation in California.  It
seems to me there's nothing resembling that in this
case.
MR. GOLDSTEIN:  Justice Ginsburg, to my
mind, what resembles it are the documents that go from
Nevada to the defendant, and we think that's a --
specific to the fact that it was a libel and defamation
case.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Bucholtz, you have four minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JEFFREY S. BUCHOLTZ
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  There was a lot of talk about
intentional torts being different, and -- and how there
should be a different rule in intentional torts.  And I
want to start just by -- by emphasizing the implications
of that.  The other side is putting all their eggs in
the basket of what's in Officer Walden's mind,
triggering some different personal jurisdiction inquiry.
And my friend even referred to qualified
immunity by analogy, but I think that analogy is very
important.  And it shows why it would be unworkable to
make personal jurisdiction turn on what's allegedly in
the defendant's mind.
This Court initially created qualified
immunity on that model as a -- as a -- based on
subjective good faith.  That turned out not to work
because subjective good faith --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Write a -- counsel,
write a holding that takes care of your case without
putting at risk the internet cases that he's talking
about.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Justice Sotomayor, I think
there is absolutely no reason the Court needs to address
internet cases or any other cases involving modern
technology.  This case is -- the most modern technology
involved in this case, I think, is a dog sniff at the
airport.  There's just no reason for the Court to
address any of those --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Counsel, your adversary
is right.  We write rules that get applied to different
concepts.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So write the holding for
me that can't be just plaintiff -- defendant's
activities because Calder did more than just defendant's
activities, so write a different -- write the holding.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Of course, Justice Sotomayor.
I understand there has to be a rule, and the rule is
here there is -- there's tangible property.  This isn't
a case about property with no real-world presence that
only exists on a server somewhere.
This is a case about cash that was in a bag,
and the bag was in Atlanta, on the plaintiff's person in
Atlanta.  It was seized in Atlanta.  And the only
effect --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I'm sorry.  So there'd be a
difference if the bag had been shipped to Washington,
D.C.?  And -- you know, money is -- is fungible.  Money
is everywhere and nowhere.  So it -- it seems as though
money is a bit different from a gold watch, that -- that
it was -- it's only contingent that the money remained
in Atlanta, rather than being shipped to a bank
someplace else.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, I think it's not
contingent -- and from Officer Walden's perspective, I
think it's incidental and contingent that the plaintiffs
happened to be from Nevada, and that's where the effects
of the seizure or the continued seizure or the delay in
return were felt.
But I think to -- to try to answer, Justice
Sotomayor, your question and your question earlier about
freezing a bank account in other kind of electronic
cases or internet cases, where different technologies
are involved, maybe there's a difference between
freezing a bank account in Nevada.
Maybe that can be said to be something that
occurs in Nevada -- that's reaching into Nevada to cause
a real effect in Nevada, to cause something to happen in
Nevada, which is different from seizing cash in Atlanta,
knowing and failing to return it, knowing that the
failure to return it is going to have an impact wherever
the plaintiffs are, which presumably will include where
they live, which is Nevada and California.
So maybe there's a way to draw a line
between freezing a bank account in Nevada, or in
Bancroft and Masters and Dudnikov, the cases that my
friend relied on, there were real-world activities
happening in the forum State.
In Dudnikov, there were goods.  There
were -- there were fabric prints that existed in the
real world.  And they were being -- they were in
Colorado, and they were to be sold in Colorado.  And the
defendant --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Could this record or these
complaints be read to support the conclusion that the
injury was substantially altered by the false affidavit,
based on the misuse of the information received from
Nevada?
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  Well, Justice Kennedy, I
think the complaint -- again, we're not challenging
the -- the reading by the lower courts that there's a
claim based on the affidavit that's distinct from the
claim based on the seizure.  On the other hand, the
complaint only has a Fourth Amendment claim in it.
That's the only source of law that the complaint relies
on.
And the Fourth Amendment injury was complete
upon the seizure -- upon the search and seizure which
occurred in Atlanta.  The quantum of damages wasn't
known yet at that time because the plaintiffs didn't
know whether they'd get the money back or when or what
might happen in-between.
But that Fourth Amendment injury occurred
then and there.  And so the fact that maybe their
consequential damages are higher because they didn't
have the use of the money for longer, as opposed to
shorter, I suppose that could increase their damages.
But it doesn't fundamentally change the
nature of this case as one that has no meaningful
connection between Officer Walden's conduct, all of
which occurred in Atlanta and -- and Nevada.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You say the affidavit
wouldn't give rise to a Fourth Amendment claim.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  I think Judge Ikuda made that
point below, Justice Scalia, and I would agree with
that, that -- that, however, is what the complaint
alleges, and we're here on personal jurisdiction and
venue and not on the merits of the -- of the complaint.
So, again, the complaint alleges that
there's this affidavit -- may I finish,
Mr. Chief Justice?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You can finish your
sentence.
MR. BUCHOLTZ:  The complaint alleges that
there is this affidavit written in Georgia for the
purpose of seizing funds that were seized in Georgia,
that were to be forfeited in Georgia.  The only
connection to Nevada is the fact that the plaintiffs
allegedly felt the impact there.  Under any of this
Court's precedents, that's not sufficient.
Thank you, Your Honors.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the case in the
