IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
BILL SCHUETTE, ATTORNEY  :
GENERAL OF MICHIGAN,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 12-682
v.  :
COALITION TO DEFEND AFFIRMATIVE  :
ACTION, INTEGRATION AND IMMIGRANT :
RIGHTS AND FIGHT FOR EQUALITY BY  :
ANY MEANS NECESSARY (BAMN, ET AL.):
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, October 15, 2013
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 1:00 p.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOHN J. BURSCH, ESQ., Solicitor General, Lansing,
Michigan; on behalf of Petitioner.
MARK D. ROSENBAUM, ESQ., Los Angeles, California; on
behalf of Cantrell Respondents.
SHANTA DRIVER, ESQ., Detroit, Michigan; for Coalition to
Defend Affirmative Action Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
JOHN J. BURSCH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MARK D. ROSENBAUM, ESQ.
On behalf of the Cantrell Respondents  25
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
SHANTA DRIVER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Coalition to Defend
Affirmative Action Respondents  41
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOHN J. BURSCH, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  53
P R O C E E D I N G S
(1:00 p.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We will hear
argument next today in Case 12-682, Schuette v. The
Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action.
Mr. Bursch.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN J. BURSCH
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BURSCH:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The issue in this case is whether a Michigan
constitutional provision requiring equal treatment
violates equal protection.  And for two reasons, the
answer is no.
First, unlike the laws at issue in Hunter
and Seattle, Section 26 does not repeal an
antidiscrimination law.  Instead, it repeals
preferences, and thus, it's an impediment to
preferential treatment, not equal treatment.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Holt had nothing to do
with an antidiscrimination law.  It had to do with a
remedy, defacto segregation.  Why isn't this identical
to Seattle?
MR. BURSCH:  Justice Sotomayor, it's not
identical because of the remedy issue.  In Seattle, they
were trying to create, in the court's words, equal
educational opportunity by imposing a remedy that would
result in equality in the schools.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You don't think that the
proponents of affirmative action are attempting to do
the same thing?  One of the bill sponsors here said that
this constitutional amendment will bring back
desegregation in Michigan, and it appears to have done
just that.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, there's two points to
that question and I'll address them both.  First on the
merits, under Grutter, the point of preferences in
university admissions cannot be solely the benefit of
the minority because under Grutter, it's supposed to
benefit the campus as a whole through diversity, and
which we think is a laudable goal.
It's a forward-looking action, not a
backward-looking action, to remedy past discrimination.
And we know that because under Grutter, you can use
preferences whether or not there's de facto or de jure
segregation, simply to get the benefit.
But with respect to your -- your point about
the University of Michigan and what has or has not
happened here, two thoughts on that.  First, we have the
statistics that we discuss in our reply brief where it's
not clear that -- that the diversity on Michigan's
campus has gone down.  But our main point on that is --
is not those numbers, but the fact that there are other
things that the University of Michigan could be doing to
achieve diversity in race-neutral ways.
For example, we know that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I -- I thought that in
Grutter, all of the social scientists had pointed out to
the fact that all of those efforts had failed.  That's
one of the reasons why the -- I think it was a law
school claim in Michigan was upheld.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, there's social science
evidence that goes both ways.  But I want to focus on
the University of Michigan because there's two things
that they could be doing right now that would get them
closer to the race-neutral goal.
The first thing is that they could eliminate
alumni preferences.  Other schools have done that.
They have not.  That's certainly one way that tilts the
playing field away from underrepresented minorities.
The other one, and this is really important,
is the focus on socioeconomic --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  It's always wonderful
for minorities that they finally get in, they finally
have children and now you're going to do away for that
preference for them.  It seems that the game posts keeps
changing every few years for minorities.
MR. BURSCH:  Given the makeup of Michigan's
alumni right now, certainly that playing field would be
tilted the other way.
The other thing that we press is
socioeconomic diversity.  And at the University of
Michigan, there was a stat in "The Wall Street Journal"
just two days ago that if you measure that by Pell
grants, the number of students who are eligible for
those, at the University of Michigan the number of
students who have Pell grants is half what it is at more
progressive institutions like Berkeley and the
University of Texas at Austin.
So the University of Michigan could be
trying harder.  But our point isn't to get into a debate
about whether preferences are a good or bad thing
because that's not what this case is about.  The
question is whether the people of Michigan had the
choice through the democratic process to accept this
Court's invitation in Grutter to try race-neutral means.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Bursch, could you go
back --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, while you're on
Seattle, can you -- I have difficulty distinguishing
Seattle.  One factual difference is that there was a
school board there, a directly-elected school board
elected for a short term of years.  Here there's a board
of trustees.
Is that -- is that the distinguish -- a
distinguishing factor in the case in which a principal
distinction could be made?
MR. BURSCH:  I think it's a distinguishing
factor.  You know, kind of sticking with how hard is it
under the new political process.  And I think the chart
that we have on page 17 of our reply brief explains that
it's really easier to change race-based admissions
policies now than it was before Section 26.  And that's
one basis.
But I think the more fundamental basis is to
say, you know, what Seattle is about.  And -- and if you
indulge me, I'm going to suggest that Seattle could mean
one of three things.  One of those I think you should
clearly reject, and then the other two I think are --
are possible interpretations that you could adopt.
When Seattle talks about racial
classifications, it focuses on laws that have a racial
focus.  Now, right out of the box, equal protection is
about people, not about laws, but even more
fundamentally, that cannot be the right test.  At a
minimum, that part of Seattle has to go because if you
had a race-neutral law, like Michigan's Equal Protection
Clause, which forbids discrimination on the basis of
race or sex -- you know, it mirrors the concept of the
Federal clause -- that itself would be subject to strict
scrutiny because it has a racial focus.  So we know that
can't be right and that's Respondent's position.
So that leaves you two other choices.  And
one would be an incremental change to this political
restructuring doctrine; the other would be a more
aggressive change.  The incremental change would be to
interpret racial classification in Seattle as meaning a
law that, one, repeals an antidiscrimination provision,
as it did in Hunter and Seattle.  And two, removes that
issue to a higher level of the decision-making process.
And because Michigan's law requires equal
treatment, it eliminates preferences, not an
antidiscrimination law.  That would be a way that you
could keep Seattle and Hunter as a viable doctrine, and
still rule in our favor on this case.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I don't see the
distinction.  Bussing could be viewed, and was viewed,
to benefit only one group.  It was a preference for
blacks to get into better schools.  That's the way the
case was pitched, that was its justification, and to
integrate the society.  Affirmative action has the same
gain.  We've said that in Fisher, it should be to
diversify the population, and so it favors diversity as
opposed to desegregation.
MR. BURSCH:  Right.  But there's a
difference between favoring diversity as an abstract
concept on campus, which Grutter clearly allows, and
remedying past discrimination, which was the point of
the bussing in Seattle.  And that's why we're really in
a post-Seattle world now because under --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But there -- there was no
proof that there was any de jure segregation in Seattle.
MR. BURSCH:  That's correct because, at the
time of Seattle's decision, we didn't yet have parents
involved, and so there wasn't a strict scrutiny test
that was being applied to that bussing program.  And so
you didn't have to go as far as you would today if you
wanted to uphold that same bussing program.
But what really -- what ties this case up --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But you're saying there --
there are three things.  One, the first you reject.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  The law was a racial
focus.
MR. BURSCH:  It can't be because of racial
focus.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Okay.  And the second was
an incremental improvement in the -- in the democratic
process -- or democratic responsibility?
MR. BURSCH:  That, plus --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Responsiveness, I guess.
MR. BURSCH:  Right.  That, plus repealing an
antidiscrimination law.  I think that's a narrow way --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And was there a third, did
you say?
MR. BURSCH:  Well, the third way is really
to -- to look at racial focus and say that's wrong, and
maybe this whole doctrine needs to be reexamined.  And
the way that you could do that is to look at what
Seattle and Hunter are really doing, which is falling
right into the Washington v. Davis line of cases.
Both of those cases could have been resolved
by saying, one, there's a disparate impact; and two,
given the facts and circumstances in 1969, Akron, Ohio
and 1982, Seattle, Washington, that there was
discriminatory animus based on race.  And if you did
that, you could reconcile those cases with
Washington v. Davis and the entire line of equal
protection jurisprudence this Court has used since that
time.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But the reason to claim
in this case, it just wasn't decided -- wasn't there a
racial animus, that the reason for Proposition 2 was to
reduce the minority population?  The court of appeals
didn't get to that, but there was such a claim.
MR. BURSCH:  There was a claim, but, Your
Honor, there was also a decision.  And the district
court was really clear on this.  Keep in mind that this
was a summary judgment posture, and the district court
concluded properly that there wasn't even a question of
material disputed fact with respect to intent.  This is
at pages 317 to 319 of the supplemental appendix
petition.
And that's because the primary motivation
for Section 26 included so many nondiscriminatory
reasons, including the belief of some in Michigan that
preferences are themselves race discrimination.  Others
that -- race-neutral alternatives is actually a better
way to achieve campus diversity that results in better
outcomes for underrepresented minority students.  Some
could believe that the preferences result in mismatch,
as Justice Thomas is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  That, it seemed to me a
good distinction for Hunter and Mulkey v. Reitman, which
the briefs don't talk much about.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But not necessarily a
distinction in Seattle because Seattle you could argue,
well, there are other methods that are less racially
divisive.
MR. BURSCH:  And I think -- and I would like
to come back to Reitman because that fits into this
framework, too.
But I think if you have any question about
what Seattle really meant, the place to look is the
later decision in Cuyahoga Falls because in Cuyahoga the
Court specifically mentions, quote, "the evil of
discriminatory intent present in Seattle."  That's at
pages 196 to '97 of the opinion.
And it also talks about the decisionmakers'
statements as evidence of discriminatory intent in the
Hunter case, at page 195.  And so I think if you look at
Cuyahoga Falls, it has already done some of the work for
you if you are going to take the more conservative route
and say there's intent.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But I don't see how the
argument would be any different here.  One of the main
sponsors of this bill said it was intended to segregate
again.  The voters in Seattle were not all filled with
animus, some of them just cared about their children not
leaving -- not having outsiders come in.  I mean,
there's always voters who have good intent.
MR. BURSCH:  That's true and there is always
some bad apples, too.  We don't dispute that point.  But
-- but here you have a district court holding that there
is not even a material question of fact with respect to
animus, because there are so many reasons that could be
advanced, legitimate reasons again, about mismatch and
about the benefits of racial --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  In Seattle as well.  So
it wasn't the issue of animus that drove Seattle.
MR. BURSCH:  I think it's much harder in
Seattle, Your Honor.  But, you know, to fit Reitman into
this discussion and what I would consider the more
conservative way to deal with Seattle and Hunter, one
that would preserve those as a doctrine, is to think
about how Reitman would come out under that test.
In Reitman, of course, you had
antidiscrimination laws, just like in Hunter, at the
local level, which were then repealed by a State
constitutional amendment.  And the political
restructuring doctrine had not yet been invented yet,
and so what the Court did is it relied on the California
Supreme Court's finding that there was discriminatory
animus in striking down those antidiscrimination laws.
I think that if you view Hunter and Seattle
similarly as cases where if you repeal an
antidiscrimination law, as opposed to one that requires
equal treatment, that's the narrow way to cabin those
cases and ones that -- a way that would allow those
cases to survive, yet to distinguish Section 26.
One point that we haven't discussed much is
the democratic process, and it's important that I
emphasize that, obviously, the use of race-based and
sex-based preferences in college education is certainly
one of the most hotly contested issues of our time.  And
some believe that those preferences are necessary for
campus diversity.  Others think that they are not
necessary, and in fact that we would have a much better
world if we moved past the discussion about race and
instead based it on race-neutral criteria.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Bursch, can I ask you
to go back to the very first thing you said because I
didn't get your – get your point.  The question, what
impact has the termination of affirmative action had on
Michigan, on the enrollment of minorities in the
University of Michigan?  Do we have any clear picture of
that, what effect the repeal of affirmative action has
had?
MR. BURSCH:  Yes, Justice Ginsburg, we have
a muddy picture.  As we explain in our reply brief, the
first thing that we have is the actual statistics for
the first full year after Section 26 went into effect.
This is 2008.
And what we find is that the number of
underrepresented minorities as part of the entering
freshman class at Michigan as a percentage changed very
little.  It went from about 10-3/4 percent to about
10-1/4 percent.
Then it gets very difficult to track,
because, following the U.S. Census's lead, in 2010 the
University of Michigan stopped requiring students to
check only a single box to demonstrate what their race
or ethnicity was and moved to a multiple checkbox
system.
And Justice Sotomayor, when you see in the
amici briefs that there has been a dramatic drop, for
example, in African American students on campus at the
University of Michigan, those numbers don't take into
account that people who before were forced to check a
single box now could be checking multiple boxes.  And if
you fold in the multiple checkbox students, the number
of underrepresented minorities on campus actually comes
out higher.  Now, we don't know what those numbers are
because you could have a student who might be white and
Asian and they would not be considered an
underrepresented minority, and they could be in there.
But we know that the numbers are a lot closer than when
you just look at single checkbox students in isolation.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So what do we do with
the statistics from California?  An amici from
California, their attorney general, has shown, another
State with a similar proposition, has shown the dramatic
drop.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, the statistics in
California across the 17 campuses in the University of
California system show that today the underrepresented
minority percentage is better on 16 out of those 17
campuses.  It's not at Berkeley, they haven't gotten
there yet, but it's better on the rest.
And by going to race-neutral criteria, what
they discovered was that underrepresented minority
students have higher GPAs, that they take more
technology, engineering, and math classes, and they have
a graduation rate that is 20 to 25 percent higher than
it was before California's Proposition 209.
You can see similar effects in Texas in
their top 10 percent program before it was modified.
And not only did it have those positive impacts, but it
actually increased minority performance at
social-economically disadvantaged high schools, where
the students said, hey, if I can only get into the top
10 percent of my class, I can be in the University of
Texas at Austin.
And again, we can all agree that diversity
on campus is a goal that should be pursued.  What the
California and Texas experiences have demonstrated is
that there are good, positive reasons why the voters
might want to try a race-neutral alternative.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So why is it okay to
have taken away -- not okay to have taken away the
decision to have bussing from the local school boards,
the people on the ground, but it's okay to take that
power away from the people on the ground here, the board
of regents, who are also elected like the school board
was in Seattle?
MR. BURSCH:  Because as this --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The general population
has feelings about many things, but the only decision
that they're -- educational decision that they are
taking away from the board of regents is this one:
affirmative action.  Everything else they leave within
the elected board of regents.
MR. BURSCH:  You've put your finger on the
fulcrum of Respondents' best argument, that only race as
a factor alone has been removed.  And there their
argument is exactly backwards because it's not Michigan
or Section 26 that single out race, it's the Equal
Protection Clause itself.  Because, Justice Sotomayor,
if a student wants to lobby for an alumni preference or
a cello preference and put it in the State constitution,
strict scrutiny is never applied to that effort.  But
when you try to get a preference based on race or not
based on race in the Federal -- or the State
constitution, strict scrutiny is always applied.
And so it's the Equal Protection Clause
which is making a differentiation between race and
everything else.  And that's why this Court in Crawford,
again decided the same day as Seattle, at page 538,
recognized, quote, "a distinction between State action
that discriminates on the basis of race and State action
that addresses in neutral fashion race-related matters."
And Section 26 falls into that latter category.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You have been asked
several questions that refer to the ending or
termination of affirmative action.  That's not what is
at issue here, is it?
MR. BURSCH:  No, and I'm glad that you
brought that up, Chief Justice Roberts, because
affirmative action means a lot more than simply the use
of race or sex-based preferences in university
admissions.
The -- Article I, Section 26, only focuses
on this one aspect of university admissions.  Now,
another important point to understand is that Section 26
is not all about university admissions.  This is
actually a much broader law that applies not just to
race and ethnicity, but also to sex and other factors,
and that affects not just universities, but also public
contracting and public employment.
This was a broad-based law that was
primarily motivated by the people of Michigan's decision
to move past the day when we are always focused on race,
exactly as Grutter invited the States to do.  And you
can -- you can see how that discussion gets mired when
you look at some of these statistics that we have been
talking about.
Is someone who has multiple racial boxes
checked more or less diverse than someone who only has
one box checked?  Is someone who comes from outside the
country -- say from Mexico --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You've done something
much more.  You are basically saying if -- because
Fisher and Grutter -- we've always applied strict
scrutiny.
MR. BURSCH:  Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  All right.  So it's
essentially a last resort, within some reason.  But what
you are saying, if all those other measures fail, you're
by Constitution saying you can't go to the remedy that
might work.
MR. BURSCH:  No, that's not what we are
saying.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, but you're -- but
this amendment is stopping the political process.  It's
saying the board of regents can do everything else in
the field of education except this one.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, again, it actually runs
the other way because equal protection is what singles
out race-focused measures for strict scrutiny.  But what
we're saying is under Grutter, race preferences are
barely permissible.  It cannot be unconstitutional for
the people to choose not to use them anymore, to accept
this Court's invitation in Grutter, to move past the
discussion about race and into a race-neutral future.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  What would you do with a
constitutional amendment that said pro-affirmative
action laws, and only those, require a three-quarters
vote of the State legislature?
MR. BURSCH:  Well, under what we're going to
call the narrow "Save Hunter and Seattle," something
like that would be unconstitutional because it removes
an antidiscrimination provision and moves it to a higher
level of government.
Now, one of the problems with keeping that
doctrine is it could also work the opposite way.  You
know, pretend that the political climate in Michigan was
turned on its head and that universities had agreed that
they were no longer going to use race or sex in
admissions and that it was the State electorate, either
in the legislature or in the constitution, which imposed
a Grutter plan on everyone.
Well, under Hunter and Seattle, that would
have to go because that law removes an
antidiscrimination provision and moves it to the higher
level.  And so that would be one reason why you might
want to take the Washington v. Davis approach and
consider whether there's discriminatory animus based on
race.
But, you know, in either of those cases, I
think you can either, you know, pare down the doctrine
or get rid of it entirely and distinguish our case from
it.  But the one point that I want to leave you with
today is that the -- the core of Respondent's arguments
that somehow a racial classification can be any law that
has a racial focus, cannot be the right test.  No matter
what, that portion of Seattle and Hunter has to go.
Because equal protection is about protecting
individuals, not about protecting laws, and even
nondiscriminatory race-neutral laws that have a racial
focus would fall under their racial focus test.
You know, the hypothetical we give in our
briefs on that, besides a State Equal Protection Clause,
would be the Federal Fair Housing Act because it
references race, it has a racial focus, in the words of
Seattle and Hunter, and it has the ability of preventing
anyone from lobbying for preferences based on their race
or sex at lower levels of the government, either State
or local.
So under their theory, the Federal Fair
Housing Act would have to be applied under strict
scrutiny.  And their only response to that in the brief
is that, well, the Supremacy Clause takes care of that
problem.  And we all know supremacy doesn't kick in
until you first determine that the Federal law itself is
constitutional, and it wouldn't be under their theory.
So -- so what we're asking you to do is
eliminate that portion of Hunter and Seattle that
suggests that a law's racial focus is the sine qua non
of a political restructuring doctrine test and to
either --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Bursch, isn't --
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- isn't the position
that was taken in Seattle derived from a different view
of the Equal Protection Clause?  I mean, strict scrutiny
was originally put forward as a protection for
minorities -- a protection for minorities against
hostile disadvantageous legislation.  And so the view
then was we use strict scrutiny when the majority is
disadvantaging the minority.  So you do, under the
Carolene Products view, you do focus on race and you
ask, is the minority being disadvantaged?
If that were the view, then I suppose we
would not be looking at this, well, the criterion is
race and wherever the disadvantage falls, whether a
majority or minority, it's just the same.  That wasn't
the original idea of when strict scrutiny is
appropriate.  So if we were faithful to that notion,
that it is -- measures a disadvantage the -- the
minority that get strict scrutiny.
MR. BURSCH:  Well, two thoughts on that,
Justice Ginsburg.  First, under Grutter, this Court made
crystal clear that a Grutter plan is not about which
minority group is being advantaged or disadvantaged.
It's supposed to benefit the campus as a whole.  And to
the extent the claim is that preferences benefit certain
classes of minorities and not others, you know, for
example, it benefits African Americans and Latinos, but
not Asians, even though they're both discrete and
insular underrepresented groups, that -- then it fails
under Grutter.  It can only be something that benefits
everybody.
But more fundamentally, going back to your
question about the origin of the doctrine, I think it's
really important to understand why we have Hunter
because Hunter, remember, was decided before
Washington v. Davis.  And when you look at the face of
the law in Akron, Ohio in Hunter, there's nothing in
there that would trigger strict scrutiny.  And so this
Court was searching for another way to -- to strike down
a law that removed an antidiscrimination provision and
made it more difficult to reenact at the higher level of
the political process.  It needed something to fix that.
And our point is you can either construe it
to do exactly that, that only antidiscrimination laws
being struck down and moved to a higher level can
satisfy a political restructuring doctrine, or you can
look at it differently.  You can say, Now that we've got
Washington v. Davis and we all know what the intent was
in Akron, that that is a simpler way to address this --
this problem and we really don't need the political
restructuring doctrine at all anymore.
But the reason why we had the doctrine in
Hunter is because strict scrutiny did not apply.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You said that the
district court found it was clear that there was no --
there was no discriminatory intent, but that wasn't
reviewed on appeal.
MR. BURSCH:  No, it was not.  But it wasn't
a finding.  It was actually more than that.  It was at
the summary judgment stage.  The district court
correctly concluded there wasn't even a question of
disputed material fact as to whether intent was the
primary motivation of the electorate.
Unless there are any further questions, I
will reserve the balance of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Rosenbaum.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MARK D. ROSENBAUM
ON BEHALF OF THE CANTRELL RESPONDENTS
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
Let me begin, Justice Kennedy, with the
questions you raise and then come to the question that
Chief Justice Roberts raised.
To begin, Justice Kennedy, there's no way to
distinguish the Seattle case from this case nor the
Hunter case.  Both those cases have to be overruled.
Here is why the Seattle case is -- is identical to this
case.  Both issues -- both cases involve
constitutionally permissible plans which had as their
objective obtaining diversity on campuses.  Seattle was
a K through 12 case.  This case is a higher education
case.  But in both instances, the objective was to
obtain diversity.  No constitutional mandate to relieve
past discrimination.
Rather, in fact, as the Court said, Seattle,
Tacoma, and WASCO were attempting to deal with de facto
segregation.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Is that an accurate
description of Seattle?  I thought that in Seattle,
before the school board adopted the bussing plan, the
city was threatened with lawsuits by the Department of
Justice, by the Federal government, and by private
plaintiffs, claiming that the -- the previous pupil
assignment plan was -- involved de jure segregation.
Isn't that -- isn't that correct?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  That's correct with respect
to at least one of the districts, Justice Alito.  But in
terms of the program itself, there's no dispute that it
was done pursuant to a plan for de facto segregation.
Moreover, the question you asked, Justice Kennedy --
JUSTICE ALITO:  I don't understand the
answer to that question.  As to Seattle itself, is it
not the case that they were threatened with litigation?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Yes, but there'd been no
finding, Justice Alito, of de jure segregation.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And isn't it correct that
the district court found that there was de jure
segregation?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  That is not correct.
JUSTICE ALITO:  No?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  There was -- there was no
finding whatsoever that there had been de jure
segregation and that there was a constitutional
imperative to correct that desegregation.  It was an
absolutely identical situation.
And regarding the accountability, Your Honor
is correct that in Seattle what we were dealing with was
an elected school board and here, as the Michigan brief
says, as the Wayne State brief says, as the court
specifically found at pages 326A and 327A of the record,
this is a political process in which the regents were
elected, have at all times maintained plenary authority
over the admissions process itself, and that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, there are two
things.  Number one is it delegated to the faculty.  And
number two, they're election -- they're elected only
rarely and in staggered terms.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  That -- that -- that is no
question that that's correct, Your Honor.  But the --
the ordinary process itself is a politically accountable
process.  That's what the district court found when it
looked at how the system worked.  And in fact --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What if the -- what
if the -- the board delegated to the various
universities the authority to develop their own
admissions programs?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  It couldn't alter -- I'm
sorry, Chief Roberts.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm sorry, they did.
And then after several years they decided, you know, we
don't like the way it's working.  They're adopting too
many racial preference programs, we're going to revoke
the delegation.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Absolutely fine.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why is that any --
any different?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Because the difference is
that in the Seattle case, in this case, and in the
Hunter case, what's going on is a change from the
ordinary political process, which Your Honor perfectly
described.  They can change it today.  They can go to
a -- an affirmative action plan today, repeal it
tomorrow, come back.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So if there were a
provision in the Michigan Constitution that says the
board of regents is authorized to enact these programs,
in other words delegated from the people in the
Constitution to the board, and then the people change
the delegation by saying, no, it's no longer -- we're no
longer going to leave that up to the board, we're going
to make the decision ourselves in the Constitution, how
is that any different?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  It is different, Your Honor,
because of the racial nature of the decision.  Under
their theory, under their theory, the people of the
State -- of a State could amend their constitution, put
in the legislature two rooms, one for racial matters,
one for all other sorts of matters, and say to any
entrant who wants to enter that first room, you may do
so, but first you have to pay an exorbitant cover charge
and then you have to mount multiple stairs -- climb
flights of stairs just to begin the process of enacting
constitutionally permissible legislation.
Or think about it in a desegregation case.
A student comes in -- two students come into the
admissions committee.  One says -- and the admissions
committee says, we have one question for you.  One
question for you since you're here to talk about a
legitimate -- a legitimate factor in pursuit of
diversity.
Here's the question, do you want to talk
about your race, your race in the context of other
factors?  And if the answer is yes, that student is
shown the door, told go raise between 5 and $15 million,
repeal Prop 2 and then you can come back to make -- make
the case.
Whereas the student who says, no, I've just
got another legitimate factor, maybe geography.  Maybe
alumni confections -- connections, whatever that is,
that person is permitted to make the case.  It is a
racial distinction.
Now, Chief Justice Roberts, you're certainly
onto something in terms of are there race-neutral
methods to get this done?  Of course there are.  The
State constitution itself could be altered so that a
different committee or a different set of individuals
could -- could make the decision that they don't like
the way the regents are doing it.
Or they could do it the old-fashioned way,
the way that the politically accountable system works,
which is to say, we are going to work at these
universities, that's how affirmative action involving
race happened in the first place.  That's at pages 270
to 271A and 282A to 293A.  They worked for years to make
that happen.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, I thought the whole
purpose of strict scrutiny was to say that if you want
to talk about race, you have a much higher hurdle to
climb than if you want to talk about something else.
Now, you can argue that strict scrutiny
should only apply to minorities and not to students who
are not minorities, but I thought the Court decided that
a long time ago.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Exactly.
JUSTICE ALITO:  So I don't know why that's a
hard question that you asked about the student who says,
I want to talk about race.  What if it's a white student
who comes in and says, I want to talk about race.  I'm
white and therefore you should admit me, you should give
me preference.  The State can't say, no, we don't want
to hear that?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  The State can say, we don't
want to hear that, whether it comes from a white person
or a black person or whomever, if in fact, they are not
doing it on a race-specific basis.
You're exactly right, of course, about
strict scrutiny.  And the programs in this case, indeed,
the only programs in this case that are effective, are
those that have passed strict scrutiny --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, I don't understand
your answer then.  If the student -- one student comes
in and says I want to talk about how well I play the
cello, all right, we'll listen to that.  I want to come
in and talk about why I as a white person should get a
preference.  You have to listen to that because you're
listening to the -- to the talk about the cello, too?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  You do, Your Honor, when the
program has passed the strict scrutiny test that we're
talking about.  And that's the only sort of program that
is at issue in this case.  Of course you're correct.  If
it is a Gratz type program, if it's unconstitutional, if
it's a quota system, you don't have to listen to anybody
talk about race.  But we are only dealing with
constitutionally permissible programs.  Why it is
impossible, impossible to distinguish Seattle?
And this argument about Hunter, page -- page
389 of the Hunter decision is the reason Hunter was
decided.  It's not a Washington v. Davis case.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, I'm not sure I
understood the answer you gave to the Chief Justice's
hypothetical.  Maybe I misunderstood the hypothetical.
Suppose the board of regents have a rule,
it's written, it's a rule, that the faculty makes a
determination on whether there should be affirmative
action.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Five -- and the faculty
votes for affirmative action.  Three years later, the
board of trustees said we're abolishing the rule, we're
doing that ourselves.  Violation?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Assuming that the regents
say that's fine, no problem whatsoever, no problem
whatsoever.  That's the ordinary political process.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So the -- so the regents
can take it away from the faculty?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  The regents have plenary --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But can the legislature
take it away from the regents?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Not under the Michigan
Constitution because the Michigan Constitution --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  No, no.  Hypothetical
case.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Okay.  Under -- who's got
the authority here?  The -- the legislature can take it
away.  That's not a problem in a -- in a situation where
that's part of the ordinary process.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But then the voters can't
take it away.  At what point is it that your objection
takes force?  I just don't understand -- I just don't
understand --
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Where there is --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- the declension here --
MR. ROSENBAUM:  My apologies, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Or the crescendo, whatever
you call it.
(Laughter.)
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Both are music to my ears.
The point, Justice Kennedy, is that the --
the people of the State have multiple options available
to them if they don't like the way the universities are
operating.  But the one option they don't have is to
treat racial matters different from all other matters.
The example that you gave --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  That applies in the Chief
Justice's hypothetical or my revision of it as between
the board of regents and the faculty, or between the
faculty and the legislature.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Exactly.  And the problem --
the problem that the restructuring process gets at
because of the particular concern that this Court has
shown with respect to the political process, that the
political process itself not become outcome
determinative.  That the political process itself be a
place where we can air these discussions, but not create
it in a separate and unequal way to make the -- to
actually make the decision itself through the process.
So --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Why is -- why is the
faculty administration, a faculty decision, any less
outcome determinative than what the voters would say?
I -- I think there would be people that might disagree
with your empirical assumption.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Then I'm not explaining it
clearly.  The first -- the -- when the faculty makes the
decision, Justice Kennedy, that's part of the ordinary
political process.  Nobody's allowed to win all the
time.  No one has to win all the time.  No one has to
lose all the time.  Whatever it is, it is.  That's the
ordinary political process.  That's how we use the
political process.
The problem with -- with mounting a racial
classification within the Constitution itself is that
then -- that takes the ordinary political process to the
extraordinary political process.  That's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So I mean, you could
say that the whole point of something like the Equal
Protection Clause is to take race off the table.  Is it
unreasonable for the State to say, look, race is a
lightning rod.  We've been told we can have affirmative
action programs that do not take race into account.
Socioeconomic diversity, elimination of alumni
preferences, all of these things.  It is very expensive.
Whenever we have a racial classification, we're
immediately sued.  So why don't we say we want you to do
everything you can without having racial preferences.
Now, if the litigation determines that we're
required to have racial preferences, this statute has an
exception and -- and allows that.  But starting out, we
want to take race off the table and try to achieve
diversity without racial preferences.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  The problem, Your Honor, as
this Court stated as recently as last term in the Fisher
case, is that under the Equal Protection Clause race is
not all the way off the table.  And the problem with
Proposal 2 is that the substance and the message that it
communicates is that because of the separate and unequal
political track that is created with respect to the
extraordinary steps that have to be taken, the message
is that even where race is being utilized as one of many
factors in a constitutionally permissible way, the
message that is being communicated is that all uses of
race are illegitimate, all uses of race are -- are off
the table, that "race" itself is a dirty word.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why -- why doesn't the
Fourth Amendment violate the rule you're saying -- or
the 14th Amendment violate the rule that you're
proposing?  I mean, I'm -- I'm a minority and I want
laws that favor my minority.  Not just in university;
everywhere.  My goodness, I can't have that through the
normal legislative process.  I have to get a
constitutional amendment to do it, right?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  That is correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, so I guess -- I guess
that on this subject of equal treatment of the races, we
can eliminate racism just at the -- at the legislative
level, can't we?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Your Honor, the underlying
basis of the entire strict scrutiny doctrine in the 14th
Amendment is to preclude the government, preclude the
Legislative and Executive Branch, from making those
determinations as absolute determinations.
The 14th Amendment sets the standards and
the criteria by which we measure that.  Of course you're
correct.  That's what the 14th Amendment does.  It sets
what the rules are in terms of how race is utilized.
But what the Grutter case said --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And you can't change those
rules by normal legislation, correct?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  That is correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So if you're a minority
that wants favored treatment, you're just out of luck.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  You have to use the ordinary
political process.  And that's all we're saying.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, but the constitutional
amendment is not the ordinary political process.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  But the const…-- but the fact that
it's a State constitutional amendment underscores my
argument, which is that -- that in order for the -- for
a -- the minority or any individual, and white,
minority, whatever -- whatever the individual is, to say
I want the same rule book, I want the same playing
field, the problem with Proposal 2 is that it creates
two playing fields.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If Proposal 2 had been in
the Michigan Constitution before any affirmative action
program was adopted, would the result be the same?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  It would, Your Honor,
because -- because it would be building in this
explicitly facial racial classification into the State
Constitution.  The problem are the separate and unequal
systems that are being used to deal with race.  And
separate and unequal, under the 14th Amendment,
shouldn't come within ten feet of race.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's not a racial
classification.  You should not refer to it that way.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  It is a racial --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's the prohibition of
racial classifications.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Every prohibition of racial
classification is itself a racial classification?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  No, Your Honor.  The problem
with Proposal 2 is that it is -- just as in Hunter, just
as in Hunter -- it is an explicitly facial racial
classification.  It singles out race for different
treatment.
My goodness, this was borne -- this campaign
started three days after Grutter itself.  The author
said the purpose of it was to get rid of racial
preferences.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, if that's how you're
using racial classification, I thought it meant, you
know, it's directed at blacks or Asians --
MR. ROSENBAUM:  No.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- or -- no.  In that
sense, the 14th Amendment itself is a racial
classification, right?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  Well, it sets the
standard --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  In that sense, the 14th
Amendment itself is a racial classification, no?
MR. ROSENBAUM:  I don't agree with that,
Your Honor, because I'm measuring it as a racial
classification by the 14th Amendment.  And that comes
back to Justice Ginsburg's argument.
His argument, his revisionist history of
Hunter, his -- was -- was about motive.  But, Your
Honor, that had nothing to do with the problem in this
case.  When the Court looked -- when the district court
looked -- may I finish my answer, Chief Justice Roberts?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Yes.
MR. ROSENBAUM:  When the court looked at
this particular issue, the concern was the way that it
racially divided the political process itself.  What he
is saying is that, well, there may be all sorts of
motives.  That's a rational basis test, and that has
nothing to do with the racial classification.
The definition I'm using, Justice Scalia, is
this Court's definition of a racial classification, for
which all sorts trigger strict scrutiny.  Thank you very
much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Driver?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SHANTA DRIVER
ON BEHALF OF THE COALITION TO DEFEND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
RESPONDENTS
MS. DRIVER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
We ask this Court to uphold the Sixth
Circuit decision to reaffirm the doctrine that's
expressed in Hunter-Seattle, and to bring the 14th
Amendment back to its original purpose and meaning,
which is to protect minority rights against a white
majority, which did not occur in this case.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  My goodness, I thought
we've -- we've held that the 14th Amendment protects all
races.  I mean, that was the argument in the early
years, that it protected only -- only the blacks.  But I
thought we rejected that.  You -- you say now that we
have to proceed as though its purpose is not to protect
whites, only to protect minorities?
MS. DRIVER:  I think it is -- it's a measure
that's an antidiscrimination measure.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.
MS. DRIVER:  And it's a measure in which the
question of discrimination is determined not just by --
by power, by who has privilege in this society, and
those minorities that are oppressed, be they religious
or racial, need protection from a more privileged
majority.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And unless that exists, the
14th Amendment is not violated, is that right?  So if
you have a banding together of various minority groups
who discriminate against -- against whites, that's okay?
MS. DRIVER:  I think that --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Do you have any case of
ours that propounds that view of the 14th Amendment,
that it protects only minorities?  Any case?
MS. DRIVER:  No case of yours.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Some people think that
there is a difference between the plus and the minus.
Some judges differ on that point.  Some agree sort of
with you, and some agree sort of not.  All right?  Let's
think of those who agree sort of, and then I have a
question.  And you know this area better than I.
So think of Grutter.  Grutter permits
affirmative action.  Think of the earlier cases.  They
permitted affirmative action where it was overcome, the
effects of past discrimination, but probably not
otherwise.
Now, that's what I want to know.  Are there
areas, other than education, where affirmative action
would not be forbidden to achieve a goal other than
overcoming the effects?  Have you got the question?  And
does an answer come to mind?
MS. DRIVER:  I think that affirmative action
programs could -- could be permissible under employment.
For instance --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  So there are a set.
MS. DRIVER:  That's right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Fine.  If there are a set,
what I -- what I'd like you to explain, if -- if you can
take a minute, is think of how a city is set up.  There
are a vast number of administrators.  There are a vast
number of programs.  It could be an administrator
somewhere says he'd like to give a preference, maybe for
good reason.  But then the city council votes no.  Or
because there are other ways of doing it, by, you know,
first come, first served or some other criteria that
doesn't use race.
Are all of those unlawful?  Every one?  Do
you have to leave it up to the -- no matter what the
subject, no matter what the -- or are you going to draw
a line somewhere?  Is there a line that you could draw
that would take your case on the right side from your
point of view, but would say we're not giving power to
every administrator in the city to decide on his own
whether to use racial preferences without a possibility
of a higher-up veto --
MS. DRIVER:  I think --
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- which I don't think you
want to say, but maybe you do.
MS. DRIVER:  No.  I think these are very
fact-based determinations.  And so somebody could make a
decision that they wanted to use what you're calling
racial preferences.  And that could mean a range of
things, and that could be subject to a veto higher up.
Yeah, I agree with you.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So what's the line?  Is
there any line that you can say, look here.  We were
trying to be very helpful, and all of a sudden they put
this thing on the ballot, you can't even get it through.
Okay?  That's your basic point.
But -- but if you think of -- you have to
write something, and that something has tremendous
effect all over the place.  So what kind of line is
there, in your opinion?
MS. DRIVER:  I think Hunter-Seattle provides
the line.  I think it says that if you have a law that
has a racial focus, and that law, part of proving that
it has a racial focus, is that it takes a benefit that
inures to minorities and it removes that benefit and it
restructures the political process and places a special
burden on minorities to re-ascertain that right, yeah, I
think that's a proper rule.  Because it's -- it's --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Can I -- can I come back to
the question that the Chief Justice and Justice Kennedy
were asking before?  Essentially, it's their question.
Let's say that the -- the decision about admissions
criteria across the board is basically delegated to the
faculty.  All right?  And the faculty adopts some sort
of affirmative action plan.  And now that is overruled
in favor of a colorblind approach at various levels
going up the ladder.
So maybe it's overruled by the -- the dean
of -- by a dean, or maybe it's overruled by the
president of the university.  Maybe it's overruled by
the regents.  Maybe, if State laws allowed, it's -- it's
overruled by an executive department of the State.
Maybe it's overruled by the legislature through ordinary
legislation.  Maybe it's overruled through a
constitutional amendment.
At what point does the political
restructuring doctrine kick in?
MS. DRIVER:  I think in this case, the
difference between what other groups can do in order to
get preferential treatment for their sons and daughters
and what racial minorities are subject to, the level of
distinction places such a high burden on minorities.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, that really -- that
really isn't responsive to my question.  Let's say
exactly what was done here is done at all of these
levels.  At what point does the doctrine kick in?  When
it goes from the faculty to the dean?  From the dean to
the president, et cetera, et cetera?  Where does this
apply?
MS. DRIVER:  I think it depends on where it
is that minorities face a heavier and special burden.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  It can't be that because
the normal political process imposes burdens on
different groups.  I thought the line was a very simple
one, which is if the normal academic decision-making is
in the dean, the faculty, at whatever level, as long as
the normal right to control is being exercised, then
that person could change the decision.
So if they delegate most admissions
decisions, as I understand from the record, to the
faculty, but they still regularly, besides race, veto
some of those decisions, and race is now one of them,
then the Board of Regents can do that normally.  So
could the president, if that's the way it's normally
done.
It's when the process is -- political
process has changed specifically and only for race, as a
constitutional amendment here was intended to do, that
the political doctrine is violated.  Have I restated?
MS. DRIVER:  You have, you restated it very
well, and I agree with you in principle.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But I still don't
understand your answer to Justice Alito's question.
Suppose the dean has authority in the bylaws of the
university to reverse what the faculty does, but you
have a dean who just does not like affirmative action.
He is dead against it.  And he makes the decision to
reverse the faculty.  Do you have a remedy?
MS. DRIVER:  I don't think it -- I don't
think Hunter-Seattle applies.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  All right.  Then you have
Justice Alito's question.  Then it's the president of
the university, and then it's the legislature.
MS. DRIVER:  I think you need two things.  I
think you need the decision making -- the decision
making body.  If the University of Michigan regents
decided tomorrow to eliminate affirmative action
programs and there was no Prop 2, they have the legal
right to do that.  They are the decision-making body.
And minorities still could go and lobby the
regents, still could go and talk about the questions of
racial equality difference --
JUSTICE ALITO:  But would that be true --
I'm sorry.  Would that be true if they had never gotten
involved in admissions criteria before?  They have the
authority, but they left that to the university
officials.
MS. DRIVER:  I think if they have the
plenary authority to do that, yeah, I think that, again,
if they wanted to eliminate affirmative action programs
and they had that plenary authority and it was
guaranteed by the Michigan State Constitution and it had
existed for 150 years, and they chose to enter this
area, I think --
JUSTICE ALITO:  I don't see how that is
consistent with Justice Sotomayor's answer to my
question.  Don't the people of Michigan have -- don't
the people of Michigan have plenary authority?
MS. DRIVER:  In this case, the particular --
it's -- they are applying that plenary authority in --
or in a way that is racially focused, and creates a
political process that disadvantage…-is disadvantageous to minorities.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I'm not saying instead of
political process.  Don't let me put words in your
mouth.  Think what you think here.
You say where the authority is divided in a
certain way, and that is true under the constitution of
the State.  So the State government lacks the power.
And then you have to take the power from the people and
change the constitution, and when you do that in respect
to a benefit.  Then, in respect to benefits,
Washington -- you know, Seattle and Hunter kick in.
See, where you’re not dealing with past discrimination.
MS. DRIVER:  This was -- what we're talking
about in terms of affirmative action are
constitutionally permissible programs that were shown to
this Court to be the only way to achieve racial
diversity and integration at the University of Michigan.
And whether you -- whether you explain that
by looking at the reality of the inequality in education
for black and white Michigan or whatever it is that you
come up with that requires that, the university has
shown that this is the only way to achieve diversity in
which racial diversity is a part of the -- is a part of
the quotient.
And so to take away that right from the
university and from the regents -- and I just want to go
back to one of the questions that was answered.  If you
look at the law schools, the medical schools, the
professional schools now in the State of Michigan,
there's been a precipitous drop in underrepresented
minority enrollment in those schools.  We are going back
to the resegregation of those schools because of the
elimination of affirmative action.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  To what extent -- to
what extent does your argument depend -- I thought both
Hunter and Seattle speak in these terms -- that the
policies that are more difficult to enact are beneficial
for the minority group?
MS. DRIVER:  The -- -- say that -- I'm
sorry.  Can you repeat --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  To what extent does
your argument depend upon the assumption that the
programs that you say are now more difficult to enact
are beneficial to the minority group?
MS. DRIVER:  I think it's an important
component part.  Because I think it's in the benefit to
the minority group that it's especially important --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, why do you --
MS. DRIVER:  -- that the political process
be on a level field.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Right.  What if the
question of whether it's a benefit to the minority group
is more open to debate, whether it's through the
mismatch theory that Taylor and Sander I guess have
adopted, or other theories?  Do we have to assume in
your favor that these definitely are beneficial to
particular minority groups?
MS. DRIVER:  Certainly the minority voters
of Michigan believe them to be because 90 percent of
black voters in Michigan voted against Prop 2.  And I
think that that's a clear indication of the popularity
of these programs and the perceived benefit of these
programs.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  There’s a difference- There may be a
difference between popularity and benefit.  In other
words, you want us to assume that the programs are
beneficial to a minority group?
MS. DRIVER:  Yes.  And they are beneficial
to minority groups.  They may -- they may serve to
provide benefits for the population beyond minority
groups, but they are a benefit if they --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Your opponent says
otherwise.  He says that minority students have taken
tougher courses, they have been better qualified to be
admitted, and all sorts of other benefits.  So it's
certainly a debatable question.
MS. DRIVER:  It's a debatable question in
another forum in a different case, and in fact I think
that case was the Grutter case.
This case isn't about -- isn't just about
whether or not affirmative action benefits minorities.
It's also the restructuring of the political process and
the special burden that's placed on minorities.  It's
not -- if you want to go back to debating the – you know, whether
affirmative action --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You're changing your
answer, then.  Your answer to the Chief was it does
depend and now you are saying it doesn't depend on
whether it benefits minorities at all, it's just whether
it places a -- a greater burden on minorities to change
it.  Which is it?
MS. DRIVER:  No, I --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  One or the other?
MS. DRIVER:  I think it's a two-part test.
I think the first, the first thing that you look at is,
is there a racial focus to the law, and is the benefit
that's been taken away something that inures to
minorities.  And I think the second part of the test,
and that's why I think Seattle/Hunter is such a narrow
doctrine, is whether there also has been a restructuring
of the political process and a special burden placed on
minorities.  It requires both.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Bursch, you have 4 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN J. BURSCH
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. BURSCH:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
I'm going to start with a sentence from
Crawford, decided the same day as Seattle, where this
Court defined what a racial classification is.
"A racial classification either says or
implies that persons are to be treated differently on
account of race."  It doesn't say anything about laws
with or without a racial focus.  And we think that is
the test that ultimately should come out of the decision
in this case.
Now, my friends on the other side disagree
with that.  Because if that's the test Section 26 is
constitutional.  And so they draw this false dichotomy
between laws that involve race and laws that don't
involve race.  We will put them in two separate chambers
of the legislature and charge a fee if you want to talk
about -- about race.
And we know that can't be right because of,
Chief Justice Roberts, your observation that the whole
point of equal protection is to take race off the table
when everyone is being treated the same.  That's why
they can't --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You quoted -- you quoted
from Crawford.
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And there is an opposing
quote in Seattle itself on page, what is it, 486?
MR. BURSCH:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  "When the State's
allocation of power places unusual burdens on the
ability of racial groups to enact legislation designed
to overcome the special condition of prejudice, the
governmental action seriously curtails the operation of
those political processes ordinarily to be relied on to
protect minorities."
And it quotes Carolene Products.  So -- and
then the following sentence is:  "In the most direct
sense, this implicates the judiciary's special role, not
of treating the individuals as individuals, but the
judiciary's special role in safeguarding the interests
of those groups that are relegated to a position of
political powerlessness."
So the rationale of Seattle is that notion
that we can't put hurdles in the way of a disadvantaged
minority.
MR. BURSCH:  Justice Ginsburg, there is two
problems with that.  First, that's where the
Respondent's theory most closely knocks up against
Grutter.  Because you are right, under Seattle and
Hunter you've got to have a policy designed for the
purpose of primarily benefitting the minority.  But if
that's the policy, it violates Grutter, which is
supposed to benefit everyone.  But the bigger problem is
if you treat a --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Diversity does, but when
you take away a tool for diversity that's what Seattle
is saying is wrong.
MR. BURSCH:  Right, but the bigger
problem --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You can't take the tool
away simply because it may include race as a factor,
simply because you are changing the playing field.
MR. BURSCH:  But Justice Sotomayor, the
biggest problem with Respondents' test, with applying
the literal language of Seattle, is that as I said, the
Federal Fair Housing Act, the Equal Credit Act, a State
equal protection law that mentions race, all of these
things fall in the category of laws dealing with race.
Some are discriminatory.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Seattle and this case both
involve constitutional -- Seattle and this case both
involve constitutional amendments.  So why can't the
law -- the law be drawn -- the line be drawn there?  If
you change the allocation of power in one of these less
substantial ways, that's one thing, but when you require
a constitutional amendment that's really a big deal.
MR. BURSCH:  Because that would still
invalidate the Michigan Equal Protection Clause which
has a racial focus that says you cannot discriminate
based on race or sex, and yet no one would argue it
should be subject to strict scrutiny.
JUSTICE BREYER:  That's the benefit to a
minority group.  But what I'm thinking is go read the
cases.  You yourself seem to say these cases seem to
apply alike to the benefits or to the discrimination
against it.  I mean, there is lots of language in
Seattle.
MR. BURSCH:  Right.  Here—here--
JUSTICE BREYER:  You come -- now, suppose
you take that and say, all right, it was meant in
context, but the context includes constitutional
amendments.  Because with the constitutional amendment
you are restructuring.  Now, you would lose on that
theory, but there would be a limitation on the extent to
which the people have the right to move powers around.
MR. BURSCH:  Justice Breyer, the limitation
has to be not only that, but also that you are repealing
an antidiscrimination law, not an equal treatment law.
Or again, otherwise the State equal protection clause
has to fall.  So to the extent that I am right, that is
a way that you can narrow Hunter and Seattle, and
section 26 has to survive.  If I am wrong about that,
then respectfully Seattle and Hunter should be
overruled.  Either way, it does not violate equal
protection to require equal treatment.  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel,
counsel.  The case is submitted.
(Whereupon at 2:00 p.m., the case in the
