IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DOYLE RANDALL PAROLINE,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 12-8561
v.  :
UNITED STATES, ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, January 22, 2014
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
STANLEY G. SCHNEIDER, ESQ., Houston, Texas; on behalf of
Petitioner, appointed by this Court.
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondent United States.
PAUL G. CASSELL, ESQ., Salt Lake City, Utah; on
behalf of Respondent Amy Unknown.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
STANLEY G. SCHNEIDER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ.
On behalf of Respondent United States  15
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PAUL G. CASSELL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent Amy Unknown  33
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
STANLEY G. SCHNEIDER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 12-8561, Paroline v. United
States.
Mr. Schneider.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STANLEY G. SCHNEIDER,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER,
APPOINTED BY THIS COURT
MR. SCHNEIDER:  May it please -- Mr. Chief
Justice, and may it please the Court:
This is a case about statutory construction.
Specifically, under 18 USC 2259, must a victim's --
victim's losses be proximally caused by a defendant's
offense conduct before a sentencing judge can award
restitution?  The short answer to the question is all
losses must be proximately caused.
Eleven courts of appeals and the government
agree that this circuit ignored the plain text of the
statute and the enumerated enforcement provisions of
3664 to craft a restitution scheme where the possession
of two images of child pornography resulted in the award
of $3.4 million to Doyle Paroline which was strictly --
jointly and severally liable.
In my time before the Court, I wish to
address, first, why the Fifth Circuit decision is
incorrect, and second, why the government's concept of
aggregate causation conflicts with its statutory burden
of proof contained in 3664(e).
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, before -- before you
do that, could you explain why there is an issue of
proximate causation here?  Why -- why isn't there
clearly proximate cause?  Why is it -- why does it
matter?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Well, I think there has to
be -- in all restitution cases, the issue is whether or
not the person's conduct caused the harm and losses, and
harm and losses are two different things.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Yes.  But why -- why isn't
the issue here a question of factual causation?  What
losses proximately caused -- is proximately caused by
the possession of child pornography?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  That's a fact-intensive
question, and that's what the district court has to
determine, whether on the facts presented, there are
identifiable losses that were caused by the defendant's
conduct, and there can be.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  It seems you're
confusing proximate cause with cause in fact.  They are
two legal requirements, but not the same.  Proximate
cause is foreseeability.
There's no argument, I think, that anyone
who possesses child pornography knows that the
individual depicted is going to feel invaded by that
viewing, so there's no issue that the person is hurt.
The question is a different one, which is
the cause in fact.  I think that's what my colleague Sam
Alito was talking about.  So why do you continue to talk
about proximate cause when it's a different concept
that's at issue?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Is her treatment -- I
think you're arguing that her treatment has to be a
"but-for" this possession.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  I think they go hand-in-hand
because when dealing with proximate cause, would the
conduct -- is the losses the natural sequence from the
conduct and the result?  And what we're dealing with is
would the losses have occurred, but for the conduct.
And in this situation -- in this case, where
the damage model was created six months before the
notice is received, then you don't have the relationship
between the loss and the conduct or the notice of the
conduct.  And it's a real problem.
But the -- the important consideration in
interpretation of the statute is the government's burden
of proof under 3664(e).
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Why do we -- why would we --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Would you agree -- would
you agree that the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Justice Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: -- the losses here were the
proximate result at least of the aggregate actions of
all the offenders?  Would you go that far?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Justice Kennedy, the problem
with aggregate causation does not apply --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Would -- would you agree
that it is the proximate result of the aggregate actions
of all the offenders?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  It would be a harm, but
not --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Pardon me.  A proximate
harm, right?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  But the problem is when
you're dealing with aggregate causation, that conflicts
with the statutory burden of proof that the government
has, under 3664(e), which is made applicable to the
2059, under Section (b)(2), and you'll find 3664(e) at
Appendix 22 to our merits brief.
The --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Why -- why should we get
to that question, when we have what seems to be a clear
order from Congress, and it is in 2259(a).  It says,
"The court shall -- shall order restitution for any
offense under this chapter."
It sounds like that's a direction that, if
there's an offense under this chapter -- which is
undisputed, there is -- the court shall order
restitution.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Only if -- if the losses are
the result of the offense because the government's
burden of proof is that they must demonstrate, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the losses sustained
by the victim are the result of the offense.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, it doesn't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  My question is -- my
question is why isn't it -- and you were going to point
to the statute -- why isn't it at least the result of
the aggregate number -- aggregate offenders?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  It's on the indictment.
Only one person is charged and --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But he is -- he is one of
the offenders in the aggregate.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  He's not -- it's not in the
indictment.  No one else is in -- is in front of the
sentencing judge.  The statute 3664(e) and Section
(f) -- (b)(3)(F), all talk about "the offense," and "the
offense" is normally -- this Court has recognized that,
when you talk about "the offense," it's the offense of
conviction.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Schneider, on your view,
if only one person viewed the pornography, that person
would be responsible for the entire damages, but if a
thousand people viewed the pornography and the harm was
that much greater, nobody would be in -- would be on the
hook for restitution.
How could that possibly make sense?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Justice Kagan, that's not
what -- there are numerous cases where someone who looks
at -- possesses child pornography has been shown to be
liable for losses and restitution and some individual
cases that it's not.  And it's fewer cases than not are,
again, no restitution because there's no losses.  The
losses in -- it all depends on the facts.
In this case, the district judge carefully
weighed the evidence.  In this case, --like un -- unlike any other
case, there are competing experts that the judge,
district judge, played -- acted as a gatekeeper of the
forensic science and with the challenge to the
methodology that was presented by Amy's experts, the
judge left no alternative because there was no
explanation.
And that methodology -- faulty methodology
was part of his decision that he recognized.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, what's the answer,
though, to the problem, forgetting this case?  There's a
problem in child pornography cases.  Congress clearly
wants restitution.  Makes sense to me.
But if a thousand people look at it, then
each one can say, but I didn't cause more than a tiny
fraction at most, and so there virtually is no
restitution; right?  Now, every one of the thousand says
that, truthfully, and so therefore the victim gets no
restitution -- opposite of what Congress wanted.
But their answer in the lower court was,
we'll make each one of those thousand liable for the
whole thing.  The government's answer is aggregate
cause.  It's called a concept that they've sort of
created, but it's there to answer the problem.
What's your answer to the problem?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  It's a -- it's a very
difficult question.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yeah, it is.
(Laughter.)
MR. SCHNEIDER:  And -- and the answer is
to -- is multifaceted because the government's burden of
proof for restitution applies to all restitution
statutes.  It's the same standard.
And you can't carve out one standard of
causation for one crime because it's a heinous crime
and, as repugnant as child pornography is, the standard
of causation has to be the same --
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  All right.  I
suppose that it does.  If you have the same problem, you
have the same problem.  Where there -- you understand.
So how -- how do we answer this problem?  And the
difficulty of saying -- dividing -- the government
doesn't find a thousand -- you know, it only finds two
or three.  And so you're going to be 997 who escape.
And those three, what should they pay?
What -- should they pay nothing?  Should they pay the
whole thing?  Should we do it somewhere in-between?
How -- just restating the problem and -- and you have
experience in this field.
So what do you really think?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Well, in some of the cases,
there's evidence that -- of not -- of the victim having
knowledge of an individual, and in that case -- those
cases, there have been awards of restitution, some of
them 3,000, 5,000, 15,000, 30,000.  But there's some
knowledge and there's some evidence for a judge to base
a finding of causation to the award of restitution.
And it's a fact-based determination.  There
has to be some evidence for which the judge makes his
determination.
JUSTICE ALITO:  But your answer is in a
large category of cases, and this may be -- these may be
the typical cases, where there's a digital image, and
it's out there, and you don't even know that there are a
thousand people who've seen it.  It's impossible to tell
how many people have seen it and certainly impossible to
see how many people will see it in the future.  It -- it
exists, and it apparently is impossible to eradicate it.
Your answer is that, in those cases, the
victim gets nothing.  I mean, that's your honest answer.
And that may be where the statute points, but I think
that's your answer to Justice Breyer's question.  The
victim gets nothing in those cases because it's
impossible to determine what percentage of the harm is
attributable to this one defendant's possession of the
child pornography.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  I don't -- and that's not
what I'm saying.  In the Second Circuit, in Lundquist,
was an Amy case where there was a finding of losses and
restitution.  And the court -- the Second Circuit
specifically addressed how to calculate it.  It doesn't
have to be precise.
We're not saying it has to be a precise
determination, but there has to be some evidence for
which a judge can base a determination that ties the
losses in this case to the conduct.  Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So what exactly -- give
me an example of what you're talking about.  Now, here,
you're saying because she didn't know the name of your
defendant, you win because you can't say any harm was
caused by him because she didn't know his name, correct?
Is that your position?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  No, Your Honor.  My position
is that the district judge made a determination as the
gatekeeper of the forensic science that the government
didn't prove its case.
If you look --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So give me an example of
how the government in the hypothetical that Justice
Alito spoke about and Justice Kagan, you've got -- or --
or Justice Breyer.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Lundquist is a perfect
example, where there are two reports by their expert
explaining how the knowledge of -- of an individual of
Lundquist affected her treatment, affected her
day-to-day life, and their specific report talks about
knowledge of the -- this individual.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The particular individual?
She has to know each individual who -- who has been
viewing her rape on -- on these pornographic items that
have been distributed widely?  She has to know each
individual, or she can't be covered?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  By --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The woman has undergone
serious psychiatric harm because of her knowledge that
there are thousands of people out there viewing her
rape, but you say she can't -- why isn't your client at
least responsible for some of that?
Even without her knowing him, he had two of
her pictures.  He's one of the thousands of people who
viewed -- who viewed her rape.  So why can't she recover
some amount from him?
I mean, the other side says she ought to be
able to recover everything from him.  You say she ought
to be able to recover nothing.  What about something
in-between?  What -- what about figuring out how much
of -- of her total psychiatric damage and all the
expenses and what-not are attributable to this
particular person?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Justice Scalia, the answer
to your question is -- is multifaceted and --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You said that for another
question.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  I understand.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Give me one facet.
(Laughter.)
MR. SCHNEIDER:  And Congress dictated that
all victims who are identified receive notice, and that
notice goes to her lawyer.  And in the later cases -- in
the recent cases, she's been notified of every single
one of those notices that are received, and appropriate
counseling has been given in all the later cases.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Let me ask you.  You're
mentioning this case.  There was another case that also
involved and came up at the same time, the Wright case,
and there was a settlement there, and it was for -- what
was the amount of money?  The amount of damages in the
Wright case?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  I think, in Wright, it was
$500,000, was the court's order, I believe.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Now, but was there something
in the evidence there that made it proper to award
restitution in the Wright case, but not in this case?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  No.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  They're the same?
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Yes.
I'd like to reserve the remainder of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Dreeben.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL R. DREEBEN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. DREEBEN:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
As Justice Breyer indicated, there really
are three stark choices before the Court in this case.
Paroline's position is that, because of a proximate
causation requirement, Amy can obtain nothing in
restitution.
Amy's position is that, because multiple
people have contributed to her single loss, she can
obtain the full restitution for all of her losses from
every criminal defendant.
The government's position is that there is a
solution that tort law has developed for providing some
restitution for Amy, not the entire restitution that
would be owed on account of her entire loss.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes.  Well, now -- not
because tort law has developed that, I mean, I frankly
don't agree with what you say modern tort law is
supposed to allow, and -- and Keeton -- you know,
doesn't really establish that that's what the courts now
do.
But even without agreeing with that, can't I
find that that is the system that this statute intended
to impose?  I mean, we're dealing here with a question
of statutory interpretation.  So the question is not
what does modern tort law allow, but the question is
what, reasonably, could Congress have meant by this
statute?
MR. DREEBEN:  I agree with that, Justice
Scalia.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Because I'm not going to go
along with you on -- you know, modern tort law.  I think
that's nonsense.  I don't think it's true.
MR. DREEBEN:  Okay.  The -- the tort law
issue is not really all that modern.  It dates back to
the Restatement (Second) of Torts in Section 443(a).
And this Court applied that section in the
Burlington Northern case, which was a CERCLA case, to
hold that apportionment of the damages was required in a
pollution case, where all the pollution had merged into
a single --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But how do you square
your position with the statutory language?  The
statutory language requires mandatory restitution order
for the, quote, "full amount of the victim's losses."
It also forbids courts to -- to decline to issue an
order, double negative, but it can't -- a court can't
refuse to issue an order on the ground that the victim
has been compensated by any other source.
It seems to me that that language, as crazy
as it seems, to you or -- to you, compels joint and
several liability because it's saying any -- all losses,
full amount of losses, and you can't offset her
compensation from any other sources.
MR. DREEBEN:  Justice Sotomayor, I think
that the key to reading the statutory language is that
the definition of "victim" refers to a victim of the
offense in this case.  So the term "victim" means the
individual harmed as a result of a commission of a crime
under this chapter.
The government's burden of proof in Section
3664(e) refers to demonstrating the amount of the loss
sustained by a victim as a result of the offense.  So it
refers to the defendant's offense, not to the collective
harm that the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So why isn't that a
but-for cause?  I mean, if you're going to argue that,
you have to be arguing but-for --
MR. DREEBEN:  I don't think so.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- that their damages
have to be the but-for cause.
MR. DREEBEN:  I hope that the Court will
read the "as a result of" language to require causation,
but to interpret it in light of the way causation has
been understood in the unique circumstances that you
have here.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you don't deny
but-for.  I haven't understood your submission to be
that there need not be but-for cause here.
MR. DREEBEN:  There's collective, aggregate
but-for cause.  And the way that tort law dealt with
this is not to accept Paroline's position that, even if
it -- you took me out of the equation, Amy's harm would
be very severe.  Unquestionably true.
What tort law said is that, if a
multiplicity of actors inflict a single harm and one of
them comes forward with a reason that, if accepted,
would exonerate all of them, then that cannot be a
proper test of causation.
The proper test is aggregate causation,
where the aggregate group of offenders is the but-for
cause, and each one of the individuals in that set can
be regarded as --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But doesn't --
doesn't the individual at least cause some harm without
regard to the harm caused by the others?
MR. DREEBEN:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Of course, yes.
Now, why isn't it the case -- why can't the -- why can't
Amy have an expert that comes in and testifies, as a
result of their experience, that the psychological harm
caused by knowing that those images are available to
others, have been viewed by someone else, will require,
on average, whatever, a certain amount of counseling for
a certain amount of time?  So that the one individual is
responsible for that harm, regardless of what else
happens.
Now, he may say, well, it's kind of unfair
to stick me with that, but that's a different question
than the aggregate causation issue that you're
addressing.
If you have expert testimony, and there will
be expert testimony on the other side, that says it
normally requires counseling for someone, when they find
out, without regard to anything else, that an individual
has viewed this, why doesn't that require -- or at least
allow assessment of the -- the whole amount?
MR. DREEBEN:  Mr. Chief Justice, that would
allow assessment of some of the damages.  I -- I don't
think that it would allow assessment of the entire
amount because, again, we regard this -- this statute as
enacted against the backdrop of tort law principles that
recognized you can have aggregate causation, but it's
not appropriate to hold each person in the set
responsible for all.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  My -- I'm sorry.  My
hypothetical is not aggregate causation.  It is that
this individual caused this harm.
MR. DREEBEN:  If there's a specific amount
of harm caused and if Amy could find an expert who would
testify to that respect and it would require, say, six
counseling sessions, and it would set her back in
employment for a year, then I guess a court could, if it
found that credible, conclude that a certain amount of
loss is attributable directly --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you're -- you're
confusing whether there's a specific amount of harm
caused with whether it is easy to measure that harm.
The -- the tort cases you refer to are cases in which
there is a result produced that is not severable.  You
can't say this person is -- you know, accounts for this
much of it, such as pollution, all the pollution there.
The stream is polluted.
That's quite different from this case
where -- where this -- this young woman has been
subjected to psychological harm because of thousands of
people viewing her rape.
Now, this -- she would be subjected to less
psychological harm if it was just one person or ten
people or a hundred people.  In other words, each person
increases the amount of her psychological harm.  It is
severable the way the tort cases you refer to are not.
And so why shouldn't the question in this
case be simply he caused a certain incremental amount of
psychological harm to -- to this woman and he should pay
for it and it's up to the district court to decide what
the proper amount of that payment ought to be.
MR. DREEBEN:  Justice Scalia, I think that
is consistent with the conclusion that the government
reaches, although we take a different route to it --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I understand.
MR. DREEBEN:  -- than Your Honor's position.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, is it consistent with
human psychology?  Are psychologists really able to do
this?  If it's known that this image has been viewed
by -- even if you could figure out how many people have
viewed it, and I think, in the age of the Internet
that's impossible, but if you knew that it had been
viewed by a thousand people, is a psychologist able to
say that her knowledge that it has been viewed by a
thousand people causes this much harm?
And once she learns that it's now been
viewed by a thousand and one people, there's a little
bit of additional harm or some increment of additional
harm, and we can figure out how much that is.  Can a
psychologist do that?
MR. DREEBEN:  Justice Alito, that is why the
government has proposed a different approach to getting
to the same conclusion.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Dreeben, I would
really like you to tell us, concretely, what the
government's approach would be; that is, we have all is
one position, nothing is another position, and the
middle.  The government comes down in the middle, and
what I gather from your brief, you say there should be a
reasonable formula to arrive at a starting point for
further analysis.
So I don't know what you propose as a
starting point.  What is the reasonable formula that the
Court should use for its starting point?
MR. DREEBEN:  Justice Ginsburg, the courts
have approved several different formulas as not being an
abuse of discretion.  One camp of courts approves a view
in which the government submits the number of people who
have been ordered to pay restitution to Amy, and that
number is then divided into the total harm, measured by
monetary means, that Amy has established.  And that
provides a starting point.
So, for example, in this case, that starting
point would be around $18,000, and then courts can
adjust that.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  How do you get to the
18,000?
MR. DREEBEN:  By considering the number of
defendants who have been ordered to pay restitution to
Amy because that provides some certainty in the face of,
as Justice Alito pointed out, the great difficulty in
determining how many people have actually viewed these
pictures --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How does that -- I'm
sorry.
MR. DREEBEN:  -- the number of people who
have been ordered to pay to restitution represents a
judicial finding that, in fact, her picture is involved
in that person's offense.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And so it wouldn't --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How does that work
for -- go ahead.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  It wouldn't include the
people who are not prosecuted, and it wouldn't include
the people who, in the future, are prosecuted.
MR. DREEBEN:  That is correct.  And some
courts, Justice Ginsburg, have, therefore, required that
the formula be adjusted to make some sort of reasonable
estimate of the total pool of violators.  And so I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Can I ask you one --
just one moment.  How does that work for the first
person?
MR. DREEBEN:  It doesn't work very well for
the first person, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  All right.
(Laughter.)
MR. DREEBEN:  And for that reason, I think
there are other approaches that do work.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Can we with ease say, look,
it's very complicated.  I can think of some answers, but
they're too complicated for me to tell you what they
are.  And Justice Scalia has a possible answer.  Justice
Alito, it seemed to me, is pointing out that the second
person to look at the thing, if they're only two,
probably adds a lot of damage, but the 1000th person
compared to 999 is near zero.
Now, do we count this defendant as Number 2
or do we count him as Number 1000?  Very hard to answer,
no answer, really.  But can we say, we can't answer how
you do this in practice.  Leave it to the sentencing
commission.  That's their job.
Now, can we say that?
MR. DREEBEN:  The Court can certainly say
that the statute requires reasonable apportionment --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
MR. DREEBEN:  -- and the districts courts
have jurisdiction to experiment with different
formulations.
JUSTICE BREYER:  But can we say -- can we
suggest that the sentencing commission -- you can't
order them to do it, of course not.
But can we suggest that this is the kind of
problem, very difficult, technically several ways to do
it, that they can go into this.  Is that true, that they
could go into it and recommend or perhaps order?
MR. DREEBEN:  They could recommend a -- an
approach.  What the sentencing commission actually did
was recommend to Congress that it fix it because the
disagreements now pertain to the understanding of the
statute.
Our submission is that there are a variety
of ways to approach this problem.  None is perfect.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, could you say more
about that?  You said that the Chief Justice's question
was right, that it doesn't work for the first person,
and you said there are better ones.  What are the better
ones?
MR. DREEBEN:  The alternative that I would
propose in that instance is to look at other similarly
situated child pornography victims and take a look at
what district courts have been awarding to those victims
in similar types of cases and provide some sort of an
average range.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But -- you know -- I mean,
it struck me, when I read your brief, that it said, I
don't know why these courts started where they started,
whether each violation is worth 1,000 or 5,000 or
50,000.
And it seems as though somebody just plucks
an initial number out of the air and then everything is
pegged to that initial number, but that the initial
number has nothing in particular behind it or am I -- is
it more sensible than that?
MR. DREEBEN:  I hope that it's not quite as
arbitrary as plucking it out of the air, but the reality
is --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But they're certainly
not using your theory.  Even though it's not plucked out
of the air, they're certainly not using your theory.
MR. DREEBEN:  On the first one, it's
impossible to --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes.  So they're using some
theory.
MR. DREEBEN:  They are using some theory.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And you have no idea what
that is and can't suggest one, right?
MR. DREEBEN:  I think that, sometimes, they
articulate various considerations, and other times, they
rely on basically a consensus -- a judicial consensus
that in a world in which perfect information and
mathematical computations are not going to happen, a
reasonable approximation that accords with the judgments
of 200 other Federal judges is a sensible way to do
this.
And I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But that makes no --
I mean, how do you tell the difference --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm not sure what
sensible --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How do you tell --
your model, how does it work if it turns out that the
damages are a million dollars, as opposed to $3.4
million?  Is it still $1,200 per offender?
MR. DREEBEN:  We would, as I indicated,
start with a -- a division problem and approximate
the -- the number of damages that are allocable to that
individual and then adjust it because these defendants
are not all identical.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So you start with --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So you would
expect -- you would expect the defendant in a case where
the restitution sought is a million dollars to pay 50
percent of what he would pay if the damages were $2
million.
MR. DREEBEN:  Not necessarily because, as I
indicated, Mr. Chief Justice, the defendants aren't all
identical.  Mr. Paroline possessed two images.  Some
defendants may possess a hundred images.  Some
defendants may be distributors, as well as possessors,
and courts have taken those factors into account.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  What about taking into
account that the perpetrator, the uncle, that the
restitution was something like $6,000; right?
MR. DREEBEN:  Yes, that's correct, Justice
Ginsburg.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So if there's any kind of
proportionality, it seems that the possessor of two
images should not be responsible for more than the
person who perpetrated -- perpetrated this horrendous
crime.
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, his -- his restitution
may have been predicated on a very early period, where
it was not clear that Amy would be as victimized as she
has turned out to be.  The very vice of child
pornography possession and distribution is that it
continually re-inflicts the abuse on the victim, so that
she cannot make a fresh start and say it's finally over,
I've put this behind me, I can now move on with my life.
The continuing re-victimization of her is
what justifies and creates the increased harms.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I would like you to, to
the extent that you can, to help district judges get a
handle on this, what formula should they use and what
adjusting factors should they take into account after
they have that starting formula?
MR. DREEBEN:  Justice Ginsburg, the -- the
formula that I proposed is the one that the government
has been suggesting to district courts around the
country.
Look at the number of convicted defendants
who have been ordered to pay restitution to Amy, divide
that into the total harm that the district court finds
was the result of the community of child pornography
possessors and then adjust it based on the severity of
the offense.
Courts of appeals have said that other
formulations are also not abuses of the district court's
discretion, and I would emphasize --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And that's wonderful
and -- you know, I -- I want to go along with you.  This
is a bad guy, and -- and he ought to be punished, and he
ought to give restitution, but there is such a thing as
due process of law.
And what you're saying is -- I have no idea
how much he's going to be required to turn over, whether
it's going to be -- what was it in this case, $3
million?
MR. DREEBEN:  That's the amount of money
that Amy has asked for.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I have no idea what he's
going to be socked with, and that's not what we usually
do with criminal statutes.
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, in criminal --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You just can't say leave it
up to the district judge -- you know, and they all come
out different ways, but who cares, it's -- you know, so
long as it's within some --
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- some reasonable amount.
MR. DREEBEN:  Post Booker --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's just not the way we
do law.
MR. DREEBEN:  -- post Booker, that is what
happens in criminal sentencing.  District judges have an
enormous amount of discretion about how much
imprisonment time and fine time to use to apply to a
defendant.  And there is appellate review that helps
establish some norms that can look to sentencing
guidelines as starting points.
But in criminal sentencing, imprecision and
estimation is the order of the day.  And when you're
dealing with --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's because the statute
says so.  It says you get from -- you know, 10 to 20
years, okay?  But the statute here doesn't say -- you
know, you'll -- you'll get between this and this,
whatever the district judge likes.  It doesn't say that.
It says you -- you should compensate the victim for
what -- for what you've caused her.
MR. DREEBEN:  But there are two background
principles that I think reinforce that a reasonable
estimation is better than all or none.  The first
background principle is that, in criminal restitution,
exactitude is not required.  Reasonable estimates are
the order of the day.  Courts have recognized that.
And it's reinforced here by the fact that
this restitution provision is kind of a crime/tort
hybrid.  It's criminal sentencing, but it's enacted
against the background of compensatory tort law.  And in
compensatory tort law, reasonable estimates have long
been accepted.
In the Burlington Northern case that I
referred to earlier, the district court made an effort
to do some calculations, and then, at the end, he
applied a 50 percent "fudge factor" for estimations that
reflected possible calculation errors.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  We have a fudge factor
here?  Can a -- can a district judge use what he calls a
fudge factor -- this is a criminal statute.  It's not a
tort case.
MR. DREEBEN:  It is a criminal provision --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  We're going to be liable
for a fudge factor.
(Laughter.)
MR. DREEBEN:  -- that is -- that is placed
into criminal sentencing with a goal of both
compensating victims and determining that each defendant
comes face to face with the fact that that person has
inflicted some harm on a particular victim.
That's a valuable criminal sentencing
purpose, and to the extent that the only thing that
courts can do in this situation is attempt reasonable
approximations, that will not be exact, it's a better
solution than saying nothing, as Paroline would do, or
saying Amy -- everything, as Amy would do.
That is not proportionate to what the
defendant has done, but zero is also grossly
disproportionate to what the defendant has done.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Cassell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL G. CASSELL
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT AMY UNKNOWN
MR. CASSELL:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Remarkably, this morning, the other parties
have taken a statute that promises Amy she will receive
restitution for all of her losses and interpreted it to
be a statute that has fudge factors, imprecision,
estimation, to produce some kind of an award that, in
the government's view, is fair.
That's not what Congress provided in this
particular statute.  Congress answered the question
presented.  You were asking, Justice Breyer, what's the
amount?  The text of the statute tells us.  It is the
full amount.  Here, Amy has put forward --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Why?  I mean, the person
didn't cause the full amount.  I mean, do you think
Congress didn't intend -- do they want to have people
pay for injury they didn't cause?
MR. CASSELL:  We disagree with your premise
there, with all respect.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, if you think he
caused the full amount, fine.  But, I mean, immediately,
you'll say at least they have four other people that
they prosecuted for this, and those people caused it
just as much, and so let's divide it by five.
MR. CASSELL:  The solution to the point that
you're raising, Justice Breyer, is to recognize that
Petitioner was a contributing cause to all of Amy's
losses.
Amy's losses come from a vast, faceless,
anonymous crowd of thousands of people scattered around
the globe, from Denver to Denmark, who are looking at
pictures of her being raped as an eight-year-old girl.
And that aggregate group of people all contribute to a
loss.
And I'm sure that Your Honor is familiar
with cases from this Court, for example, the Norfolk &
Western case, where asbestos manufacturers all
contributed to a particular loss.  The result in that
case was joint and several liability.  Each person who
contributed to the loss was on the hook for the damages
in their entirety.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So -- so Congress assumed
that this defendant could be liable, in part, for other
people's crimes?
MR. CASSELL:  No, Justice Kennedy.  What
Congress assumed is that he would contribute to a single
loss, and then, at that point, he would be
responsible --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  A single law or loss?
MR. CASSELL:  I'm sorry.  Loss.  He
contributed to the loss, and it's important to
understand --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  He had two pictures.  He
did not distribute at all.  He was not a distributor,
right?
MR. CASSELL:  That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  He was just convicted of
possessing two pictures.  And -- and the statute doesn't
even require intentional possession, just knowing
possession, right?  He could have gotten them by
accident.  He knew he got them, but he never took them
off of his computer, but he's still guilty of the crime.
So I -- he's guilty -- he's guilty of the
crime.  But to sock him for all of her -- all of her
psychiatric costs and everything else because he had two
pictures of her?
Congress couldn't have intended that.
MR. CASSELL:  Congress did intend that, Your
Honor.  They said that he is responsible for the full
amount of the losses.
There's a two-step process here.  First, did
this particular defendant caused harm to this particular
victim?  That's the victim definition found in 2259(c).
And there are findings of fact by the district court in
this case that the defendant, Petitioner, did harm --
did harm Amy.
And then, at that point, the only question
left under this mandatory restitution statute is how
much restitution does she get?  And Congress has
answered that question.  She gets the full amount, for
five itemized categories of losses, psychological
counseling being the most prominent.
She's documented, with detailed submissions,
that she is going to bear --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, but
responsible for those as a proximate result of the
offense.
MR. CASSELL:  That --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The only offense
shown here in this case is the possession of the two
pictures.  So how -- how can all of those amounts be the
result of the possession of two pictures?
MR. CASSELL:  The language you have quoted,
Mr. Chief Justice, is from Subsection (F).  Amy is not
seeking any recovery under Subsection (F).
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, you understand
the statutory principle, that it says, "any other losses
suffered by the victim as a proximate result of the
offense," which suggests that the prior losses are also
limited as a proximate result of the offense.
MR. CASSELL:  No, Mr. Chief Justice, and we
would ask you to affirm the Fifth Circuit's En Banc
decision, which disagreed with that reading.  There are
numerous canons of statutory construction --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why would-- Why would it make
sense to say that he's liable for lost income, whether
or not it's a proximate result, but when it comes to
other losses suffered by the victim, they have to be the
proximate result?
MR. CASSELL:  There are a number of answers
to that question, Mr. Chief Justice.  "Any other losses"
is potentially open-ended.  It includes such things as
emotional distress damages that could be potentially
uncapped.
(A) through (E), however, are all
out-of-pocket pecuniary costs.  They are defined.  And
in this case, we have defined, with precision, what the
course of lifetime psychological counseling costs will
be for Amy.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Does your case fall if
we don't buy your argument, if we read into (F)
proximate causation?
MR. CASSELL:  No, Justice Sotomayor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So why are you wasting
time on the argument if you win either way?  Tell us
without it.
MR. CASSELL:  I think we win either way, and
obviously, I have to anticipate that there may be a
variety of views on this very difficult question.  But
let's assume that the Court wants to read proximate
cause into other parts of the statute where it does not
appear.  At that point, the question simply becomes what
do we mean by proximate cause?
Proximate cause is a legal shorthand for
scope of the risk -- a legal duty.  And Congress has
defined the legal duty here.  For those criminals who
commit a serious 10-year Federal felony, the scope of
their risk is they will pay the full amount of the
psychological counseling costs --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Can I get back to --
your point was that all of the (A) through (E) is
limited, and you don't need -- well, it's not.  One of
the losses that can be gained -- recovered is lost
income.
Now, if you take away proximate cause, the
argument can be, well, I had to undergo counseling in a
particular period, so I wasn't able to get a master's
degree in this.  Because I didn't get a master's degree,
I wasn't able to get a better-paying job, and therefore,
I'm entitled to the income from the better-paying job
that I would have gotten if I had a master's degree, if
I didn't have to take the counseling.
Now, unless you limit that by proximate
cause, it's entirely open-ended.  It's not confined, as
you said.
MR. CASSELL:  Well, there -- you're talking
about the problem of but-for causation, then what kind
of additional limitation will placed on this.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No, no.  I'm talking
about proximate causation.
MR. CASSELL:  Right.  So there would be an
additional cause, which the government argues should be
a proximate cause limitation, but there are other
limitations that could be attached, and that's what the
Fifth Circuit En Banc did.  It said, for example, that
if Amy suffered a car accident on the way to therapy,
that that would not be included.
Why?  Because, contextually and
conventionally, we would not refer to those types of
losses as stemming from child pornography.  That's
proximate cause.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Like Justice Sotomayor and
like the government here, I think, even if there is a
proximate cause requirement, it has been -- it has been
met, once you adopt the aggregate offense notion.  But I
wanted to ask you about Subsection (F).
My -- it doesn't seem to me that you --
whether or not you read the proximate cause element in
(F) into (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E), it seems to me
what you have to read into (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E)
is the portion of (F) which says, "any other losses
suffered by the victim as a result of the offense."  "Of
the offense."
Is it only (F) that is limited to the
particular offense, and (A), (B), (C), (D), and (E)
means those -- those items that come from anybody else's
conviction?
MR. CASSELL:  No.  The linkage -- the
particular defendant's conviction comes from Subsection
(C).  A victim such as Amy has to establish that she's
been harmed as a result of this defendant's crime.  That
establishes -- there's been a reference to aggregate
cause.  We think the way to look at this would be --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And is that another way of
saying as a result of this defendant's offense?
MR. CASSELL:  As a result of this
defendant's offense -- we agree that Subsection (C)
requires Amy to show that she was victimized by this
defendant.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But you -- you are not
claiming, are you -- or are you? -- that she's been
victimized to the tune of 3.4 million, as a result of
this particular defendant's offense?
MR. CASSELL:  We are saying that she -- that
the Petitioner in this case, the defendant, contributed
to all of the losses that she suffered.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, contributed to.
MR. CASSELL:  Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But I take it that the point
of the government's submission is only contributed to,
and now, we have to sort of approximate what the
contribution was.  And you come in and you say, no, it
shouldn't be -- notwithstanding that this particular
offense was responsible for only a part, you think the
defendant should be liable for the whole.
MR. CASSELL:  We think that the defendant
contributed to all her losses.
Let me give you a quick illustration.  Next
week, when Amy goes to her therapist and is billed $100,
the defendant contributed to all $100.  And of course,
all we have when we get to the additional numbers down
the road is simply the fact that she's going to be going
to therapy, not just next week --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I guess I'm just not sure
what that means, contributed to $100.  Does that mean
she's -- the defendant is responsible for the entire
$100 --
MR. CASSELL:  Yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- as a matter of fact?  Or
does it mean that the defendant is responsible as a
matter of fact for some lesser part of the entire harm?
MR. CASSELL:  No, the first.  He's
responsible -- he is a contributing cause of the entire
amount.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I -- I guess I'm -- when I
say responsible, I don't mean as a legal conclusion.  I
mean did the defendant cause the entire $100 of harm?
MR. CASSELL:  He contributed to the entire
$100, just as multiple polluters contribute to
asbestosis --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So he should contribute to
the payment.  You're saying he contributed to the harm,
but he makes 100 percent of the payment.  That doesn't
seem to me to make much sense.
MR. CASSELL:  Well, Justice Scalia, we're
pure textualists on this.  When you look at the text of
the statute, Congress has answered that question.
Congress could have written the statute different ways,
but they said that she is entitled to recover the full
amount of her loss --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, full amount --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  They don't say from that
person.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- from the particular
offense, Mr. Cassell, so that it's the full amount of
whatever the particular offense caused.  But you're not
saying that this Defendant caused the entire 3.4.
MR. CASSELL:  We're saying he contributed to
the entire 3.4 --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, let me give you
this --
MR. CASSELL:  -- along with the other
people.
JUSTICE ALITO:  I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to
interrupt you.
MR. CASSELL:  No, I -- you can't
disaggregate them, and that's the fundamental problem
here.  If you look at, for example, our amicus brief
with the American professional association involved with
the sexual abuse of children, what they say is that you
cannot tease out this particular defendant or this
particular harm.
They all come together to --
JUSTICE BREYER:  So -- so contributed, also,
a person who didn't have a picture of her, but watched
other victims.
MR. CASSELL:  Well, no --
JUSTICE BREYER:  That person contributed to
her, too, because it creates a market for the entire
situation.  So some limiting principle has to come into
play, and the limiting principle that I think people are
driving at is, because there's a terrible crime, we
don't convict the person who didn't do it, all right?
And similarly, because this is a terrible crime, you
don't require a person to pay what he didn't cause.
Now, that's sort of a principle going on.
Now, if you accept that, at least hypothetically, can
you give any answer -- I'm afraid you can't and you're
going to say --
MR. CASSELL:  No, I'm --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But answer to what seems to
be bothering me and a lot of others is, okay, let's
accept the notion of cause, but what is a -- this is
called restitution --
MR. CASSELL:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- it isn't called fines.
And so, given that, what -- how do you do it?  How do
you distinguish, so she gets some reasonable amount?
How do you do it that you're -- I can think of -- we've
had about four different suggestions here.  But what's
your opinion, if you lose on the first?  What's the best
way to do it?
That's what I think people are struggling
for -- with.
MR. CASSELL:  The best way to do it is to
give Amy the full amount of her losses in this case.
JUSTICE BREYER:  That's what I suspected you
would say.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, let me give you --
Mr. Cassell, let me give you this example.  There are
pictures like this, and it's known that they are out on
the Internet, and so therefore, they are probably always
going to be available and who knows how many people are
going to view it.
And so the first person is caught for
possession of some of these pictures and is convicted,
and the psychologist testifies that -- you know, my
client -- that the victim in this case knows that these
things are out there, and there's an unknown -- an
unknown quantity of people are going to view it, and my
estimate is that the -- the treatment she is going to
need for this is going to be $5 million.  All right.  Or
3 million -- $3 million, whatever it is.
Now, the first person is convicted, so the
first person is assessed restitution in the amount of
$3 million, right?  But then, shortly after that, ten
more people are convicted for possessing the same
amount.
They all pay nothing because the first
person paid everything?  That's your answer?
MR. CASSELL:  That's our answer, and that's
exactly what Congress wanted.  Congress wanted to take
these vulnerable victims, of child pornography crimes,
Federal sex offense crimes, and domestic violence, and
get them full restitution as quickly and effectively as
possible.
And then, after that, if there's a need to
send an additional message to a defendant, he can be
fined up to a quarter of a million dollars or sent to
prison for a longer period of time.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  What about at least the
amount of the judgments she has already received?  The
total amount, I think, was 3.4 million that you're
seeking?
MR. CASSELL:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And she has, so far,
collected how much?
MR. CASSELL:  As of yesterday, 1,752,000.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Would you at least deduct
that from the --
MR. CASSELL:  Certainly.  Absolutely.  No,
we're not asking for double recovery.  Amy simply wants
to be made whole.  She wants to recover her
psychological counseling costs and her losses.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Usually, when we approve
joint and several liability, we do so against a
background of a functioning system of contribution,
where one defendant pays the entire thing, but then can
go after --
MR. CASSELL:  Right.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- other defendants and be
pretty well assured that he gets their share.  Now,
here, there's nothing like that, and the question -- I
guess the question is you're asking us to impose that
kind of system without the usual thing that goes along
with it, which is a sharing mechanism.
MR. CASSELL:  We disagree with the premise
here.  The background principle for intentional
tortfeasors is they got stuck with the entire liability
jointly and severally.  That was the common law
approach.  Now, if you want to deviate from the common
law approach and read a contribution action into the
statute, we're certainly not opposed to this.
But the overriding goal of Congress, as it
always is when they deal with criminal, intentional
tortfeasors, is to pay more attention to the victims and
less about some notion of distributing losses among
criminally culpable defendants.
Congress doesn't give you any indication in
this statute that they were concerned that one
particular defendant might pay more than his, quote,
"fair share," or whatever that means.  And the
fundamental problem with the government's position is
that, after four-and-a-half years of litigation, we
still don't have any indication as to how much Amy is
going to receive in this particular case.
What the government proposes to do is to
cast district courts adrift, as they have been for the
last four and a half years, to look at a variety of the
factors, including, remarkably, if we read the
government's brief correctly, one of the factors is the
need to get the victim full -- full recovery.
JUSTICE ALITO:  In my example, suppose that
the first person, who has a restitution order for the
full amount, seems unlikely ever to be able to pay that.
Does that mean that they -- you would impose the same --
keep imposing the same judgment on everybody else, so
everybody would be hit with $3 million?
MR. CASSELL:  Precisely, until -- until the
victim recovers the full amount.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, what about doing --
what you'd say is make the department, you can find out
figures, you could find out from figures what's the
likelihood that X number of people will be caught.  And
say it's 3 out of 1,000.
Then what you do is you divide by three.  I
mean, that way, everybody would be treated fairly, and
moreover, the victim would at least have a shot at
getting --
MR. CASSELL:  But the problem is, in this
particular case, the numbers show that at least 70,000
people have viewed Amy's images.
JUSTICE BREYER:  And how many -- how many
are going to get caught and convicted?
MR. CASSELL:  We have no way of knowing.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, you can find out.
There's no -- it's not an impossible question for people
to come in and use the numbers and figure it out.  My
guess would be a very tiny percent.
MR. CASSELL:  A tiny percentage --
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  Fine.  Then
she's going to get a lot of her -- then she's going to
get from each one a pretty good share, only --
MR. CASSELL:  What you're assuming, though,
is that there's going to be a steady stream of cases,
that criminals aren't going to discover new encryption
techniques to keep their nefarious activities secrets.
We don't know whether there are going to be
convictions next year or the year following.  And
Congress acted against that understanding and said she
recovers the full amount from the very first person, and
if she gets her compensation, then she's out of the
picture.
And one of the beauties of our approach is
that we estimate, within 2 to 3 years, if you affirm the
Fifth Circuit, her restitution requests will be done.
If you adopt the government's approach, you could be
looking at literally thousands and thousands of cases
where Amy will have to -- will have to be filing
piecemeal restitution requests, collecting as little as
$47 under some of the calculation theories that the
government has proposed, and there's no certainty that
she's ever going to get the psychological counseling
costs that she desperately needs and the lost income.
Now, certainly, Congress could have drafted
the statute in different ways, but every single word or
every single phrase of this statute at least indicates
to you that Congress had one goal and one goal alone in
mind, that is, that victims get the full amount of
restitution that they desperately need.
And we're not talking here about reworking
an entire restitution scheme for the broad swath of
Federal crime.  We're talking about three crimes covered
by the Violence Against Women Act, the child pornography
cases, Federal sexual assault cases, and domestic
violence cases.
And it's hardly a surprise to discover, when
you look at the Violence Against Women Act, that
Congress created a particularly expansive restitution
regime for the victims of these particular crimes.
And we would direct your attention, for
example, to the bipartisan amicus brief of a group of
senators who were involved in the drafting of the
Violence Against Women Act, and they indicated that
their overriding goal here was to make sure that these
vulnerable victims --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  This is subsequent
legislative history?  Is that what this is?
MR. CASSELL:  Some of the members of the
Court reviewed --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Even those that like
legislative history don't like subsequent legislative
history.
(Laughter.)
MR. CASSELL:  Well, then, if you want to go
the with the textual approach, this is a simple case,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No, it's not a
simple case.  You said, rhetorical exaggeration, every
word in the statute leads to that.  But the key words
don't.  The key words are "proximate result of the
offense."
And it's difficult to argue that the entire
amount is a proximate result of the offense of two
pictures.
MR. CASSELL:  Well, what happened was the
Petitioner in this case contributed to the entire
amount.
And then the way the statute operates is a
very conventional way.  He becomes jointly and severally
liable for the full amount.  That's not some kind of
innovation.  This Court, for example, in the Norfolk &
Western case unanimously said that joint and several
liability is the traditional approach.
And so what Congress has done here is not
create some newfangled regime.  It has simply taken a
joint and several liability regime that this Court has
routinely applied against negligent tortfeasors and
said, when it comes to criminals who act with scienter,
act knowingly or intentionally and cause harm, that
they're going to have to make sure that the victims are
fully compensated.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But the point has already
been made that it isn't a typical joint tortfeasor
situation, where you can seek contribution from people
who equally contributed.  How would --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You can please
answer.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  How would -- how would
the defendant here go about seeking contribution?
MR. CASSELL:  Well, the defendant would --
if there was a wealthy defendant, who was unhappy with
the share he'd been ordered to pay, he could simply try
to find other wealthy defendants out there and
interplead them in some kind of a case.
We admit that's going to lead to litigation
burdens, that Congress wanted those burdens on guilty
criminals, rather than innocent victims.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Schneider, five minutes.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF STANLEY G. SCHNEIDER,
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER,
APPOINTED BY THIS COURT
MR. SCHNEIDER:  Thank you.
This -- this is a criminal sentencing
problem.  And Congress, in 1996, apparently codified --
codified this Court's opinion in Hughey, in creating a
burden of proof on the government to demonstrate that
the losses sustained by the victim are the result of the
offense and created a number of new mandatory
restitution statutes that apply, and that doesn't
change.
So as the reading -- the plain reading of
the statute point (59)-- with the government's burden of proof,
requires that the government demonstrate that, for
example, the medical services losses of the victim of
child pornography are caused by -- are the result of the
defendant's offense.  And that's what Congress intended
by adopting -- of 3664(e) and placing it as the
enforcement provision of each of the restitution
statutes that it created in 1996.  It codified Hughey.
And what the idea of contribution suggests
that convicted sex offenders across the country are
going to get together and see who pays what to whom.
That's not what Congress intended.  This is a sentencing
proceeding that requires a particularized,
individualized sentence based upon criminal conduct.
And that's what -- what the -- what Congress
intended when it created all these statutes.  The ideal
solution is to say, Congress, make each defendant pay
$1,000 per image.  That would be -- into a fund for
restitution for victims.
And that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, you're right back to
the question Justice Kagan began, that if you have two
offenders, that there's going to be recovery.  If you
have 1,002, there won't be.
MR. SCHNEIDER:  There will always be -- if
there's two offenders that are caught, you may get
restitution from one of them.  But if -- but you're
looking at what a single judge has to sentence someone.
A single judge, like Judge Davis, had one defendant.
He didn't have a defendant in Florida or
Maine or Oregon to see what that person's background
was, doesn't have the benefit of a PSR.  He has to look
at one person.  And in this case, the district court
balanced two experts and the methodology that was
challenged and simply said, I find she was a victim, I
find that she was harmed.
But the government didn't meet its statutory
burden of proof in this case, and in many other cases,
there is losses proved.  And there's a difference
between harm and loss.
In this case, the district court did exactly
what the government wanted them to do:  Weigh the
evidence, listen to the evidence, look at the defendant
and see if the government met its burden.  And we'd ask
the Court to reverse the Fifth Circuit and affirm the
district court.
Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:04 a.m., the case in the
