IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ALBERT A. DELIA, SECRETARY, :
NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF :
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES, : No. 12-98
Petitioner :
v. :
E.M.A., A MINOR, BY AND THROUGH :
HER GUARDIAN AD LITEM, :
DANIEL H. JOHNSON, ET AL. :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, January 8, 2013
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:16 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOHN F. MADDREY, ESQ., Solicitor General, Raleigh, North
Carolina; on behalf of Petitioner.
CHRISTOPHER G. BROWNING, JR., ESQ., Raleigh, North
Carolina; on behalf of Respondents.
GINGER D. ANDERS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
JOHN F. MADDREY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
CHRISTOPHER G. BROWNING, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents 27
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
GINGER D. ANDERS, ESQ.
For United States, as amicus curiae, 45
supporting Respondents
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOHN F. MADDREY, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner 56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:16 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We will hear
argument next in Case 12-98, Delia v. E.M.A.
Mr. Maddrey?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN F. MADDREY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. MADDREY: Mr. Chief Justice and may it
please the Court:
The Medicaid Act requires States to take
reasonable measures to seek reimbursement from liable
third parties and that States require recipients to
assign their rights for -- to payment for medical care.
The Act does not direct how a State must determine what
portion of a recipient's third-party recovery is
properly attributable to past medical expenses. North
Carolina's procedure establishes --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How do you know that ex
ante?
MR. MADDREY: Excuse me?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How could you ever know
that ex ante? I mean, without looking at the individual
facts of the case, the 30 percent is going to be
underinclusive in some circumstances, overinclusive in
others. So how do you deal with our holding that you
are not entitled to the overinclusive portion?
MR. MADDREY: Justice Sotomayor, the -- the
answer to that depends on whether the State has to
predict with certainty the amount --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Life is never certain,
and so I don't even go to that issue. I go just simply
to the question, how can you, ex ante, predict --
particularly with a statute that wasn't based on any
empirical data -- that 30 percent normally is the right
amount?
You just picked it out of the air? You
could pick 40, 50, 60. How do we draw the line?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the -- the statute
doesn't predict; it defines. It tells the recipient how
much out of a recovery they must allocate to satisfy the
repayment obligation. If it were a prediction, that
would make it a presumption and you would have to defend
it as such.
But here the statute defines the portion
that the State, as a condition of extending the Medicaid
benefits, tells the recipient they must allocate --
JUSTICE SCALIA: They must allocate? Is the
State saying, You do not own that 30 percent of the
recovery, so you never get a property right in it, so
that there's never any problem about asserting a lien
against it? I thought that's what's going on here. And
I think that's sort of disguised by talking about
allocation.
I thought the State is saying, as to
percent of the recovery, you have no property right
in it. Is it not saying that? Am I wrong?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the State is
saying that as to the amount of Medicaid benefits
provided, the State has a right of recovery. And it
says that of any third party --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Maybe -- maybe you didn't
hear my -- my question. My question is: Is the State
saying that you have no property right in the
30 percent?
MR. MADDREY: The State has the right to
recover that portion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Let me ask my question
again. Is the State saying that you have no property
right in the 30 percent? I think that can be answered
"yes" or "no."
MR. MADDREY: And -- yes, Your Honor, the
position would be there is no property right in that --
in that percentage that the State has conditioned the --
the extension of benefits on.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Now, how does it have
the right to announce that in a FELA case or in a Jones
Act case where those injured parties, they have a
property right in their protection but this statute
applies to that recovery as well?
MR. MADDREY: If those -- if those litigants
are Medicaid recipients, it applies to them as a
condition of having received the State Medicaid
benefits.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So they can deny a
litigant a property right in that recovery?
MR. MADDREY: As a --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't know how you can
go in and ask for something you don't own. I don't know
how the plaintiff can go in and litigate a case if they
don't have a property interest that they can then assign
to someone else. I've never heard of such a thing, how
they would have standing to sue on your behalf if they
have no property interest in the recovery.
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I'm -- I'm
confused by the question. I was --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How do you sue for
something you have no property interest in?
MR. MADDREY: I don't know how you'd sue for
something you don't have a property interest in, Your
Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So go back to
Justice Scalia's question.
MR. MADDREY: The inner --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: There has to be some
interest in the 30 percent by the plaintiff.
MR. MADDREY: The -- the 30 percent attaches
upon the recovery from a third party. The -- the cause
of action is for whatever sources of injury that
individual would have. To the extent the recovery is
for medical expenses previously paid for by Medicaid,
that's what the State's interest could --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could I just clarify one
point? Does this rule preclude parties, as we said in
Ahlborn, from stipulating to a settlement at all?
MR. MADDREY: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Your brief is not clear
on that. They can still stipulate. It's only if after
the stipulation, it hasn't been allocated that you can
recover?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the stipulation
must include the State as a party to it for it to be
binding. That's --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So what you're basically
now saying is that there can never be a stipulation.
MR. MADDREY: There could be an advance
agreement, Your Honor, but --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: You're saying that the
parties cannot enter into a stipulation.
MR. MADDREY: If the parties are private
litigants, a plaintiff and a defendant in a medical
malpractice action, their -- their stipulation doesn't
bind the State. All parties to this case agree that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You can bind the parties
for other purposes, I assume. There are other purposes
for which the distinction between pain and suffering and
medical expenses might make a difference, right?
What -- what if the parties agreed that it's
50/50? Would the State take 50 percent then, or is the
State still limited to 30?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the statutory
percentage applies in that situation as well. The
33 percent cap would apply.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. MADDREY: Again, the State's interest is
the amount of the Medicaid benefits it provided, capped
at 33 percent of the recovery.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, how do you come up
with 33? Why 33? Why not 10 or 60 or 90? Why -- how
did you come up with the number?
MR. MADDREY: The North Carolina General
Assembly first enacted it as it relates to Medicaid in
1988. It reflects a legislative history in
North Carolina going back to 1935 with a -- a statutory
lien applicable to medical providers in -- in civil
actions. It became specifically applicable to Medicaid
scenario in the 1988 provision.
JUSTICE ALITO: What if this case is tried
to a verdict and there is a special verdict and the jury
says that 10 percent was medical expenses? Would the --
the statute would override that?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I believe the
judge imposing judgment following that jury verdict
would have to conform the verdict to the law. Just as
if the verdict had said, there was 100 -- excuse me,
$1 million in punitive damages when there is a statutory
cap of $500,000 for punitive damages, the judge would
have to conform the verdict to the applicable law.
JUSTICE ALITO: What's the difference
between that case and Ahlborn, where you have -- where
the State has agreed that a certain amount is
attributable for medical expenses, and then this
hypothetical that the jury has determined that a certain
amount constitutes medical expenses? What's the
difference between those two?
MR. MADDREY: In the jury verdict scenario,
the State's not a party to that and didn't commit to
the -- to the portion that -- that was attributable to
medical expenses. The jury doesn't have any authority
to countervene the statute, to enter a verdict in
violation of -- of the statutory requirement. And --
and here the statute tells the Medicaid recipient, in
advance, how much of any recovery, whether that be from
a settlement or a verdict, has to be allocated and paid
back to the State.
JUSTICE ALITO: Isn't the reasoning of
Ahlborn that when we know to a certainty how much the
medical expenses were and what -- what part of the
judgment this represents or the settlement represents
medical expenses, then only that much can be assigned to
the government? And I don't see the difference between
that and the verdict situation.
MR. MADDREY: The verdict situation would
depend upon what -- would be in the hands of the parties
to the lawsuit, what evidence was presented, what --
what theories were advanced. The State would not have
any control over that. It would be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but it can --
it can participate in that process, can't it? Its --
its money's at issue?
MR. MADDREY: The State can initiate a
lawsuit on behalf of its -- its medical claim by virtue
of the subrogation and the assignment of the right. It
could participate in advance or it could participate
afterwards. But that doesn't come without costs
because, of course, if the State participates on its own
in advance, it would be for the full amount of the
medical payments. Here --
JUSTICE KAGAN: I'm sorry.
MR. MADDREY: -- here 1.9 million, and the
percent cap would have no application. That applies
only to amounts recovered by a recipient from -- from a
third party.
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, you were -- you
were telling me a little bit about the history of this
statute. But why 30? Is there any indication of why
the State picked 30?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, historically
33 percent or three times the medicals was the -- the
rule of thumb used in -- in tort actions that -- that
parties used that as the -- the methodology, the way to
come up with a value to the case, with the theory being
33 percent for the medicals, 33 percent for attorneys'
fees and 33 percent to the victim. That was -- that was
the underlying --
JUSTICE KAGAN: If that's where it comes
from, then it does relate to a kind of estimate, doesn't
it?
MR. MADDREY: Historically it does. It's
been the policy of the State of North Carolina for
almost a century, as I referenced the lien statutes that
apply generally to -- to tort actions, to civil
recoveries, to protect the providers of medical
services, in those cases date back to 1935.
JUSTICE BREYER: Can I ask you a somewhat
technical -- and I appreciate your paying attention
because it's hard for me to keep all this in my mind.
All right. It's my understanding of North Carolina,
everyone accepts the rule and North Carolina agrees that
if you in -- in North Carolina advance to the victim
$50,000 in medical expenses -- now, you're never going
to get more than that back and you don't want more than
that back.
Now, the victim and the tortfeasor enter
into a settlement and you have a rule and the rule is
you will never get more than 50,000 or 33 percent,
whichever is less. That's the rule, whichever is less.
So if the settlement is for $100,000, you
are not going to take more than 33, so you have advanced
50. Okay. So you have basically three situations. The
first situation is where a judge has said -- you know
what, I find that only $10,000 of this settlement is for
medical expenses. In that case you take $10,000, no
more. Is that right?
MR. MADDREY: No, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh. I got the impression
that if there was a judicial -- there are three
situations: One is there is a judicial finding that
only 10 percent was medical. And the second is the
situation where they stipulate that only 10 percent is
for medical, and the third situation is this situation,
namely there is no stipulation and there is no judicial
finding.
So my thought, which is wrong I guess, is if
the judge says it's 10 percent you won't take more than
percent, but if in fact it's a stipulation of
10 percent North Carolina courts have not yet decided
that, and this is a case where there is no stipulation
and no judicial finding. Now you're telling me I have
that wrong. So you explain what the North Carolina is
on that because I think it makes quite a difference.
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the statute
applies to settlements or judgments received by a
Medicaid recipient from a third party for --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know, but in the
settlement they stipulate that 10 percent is for medical
and the rest for pain and suffering. Now, I thought
North Carolina courts have not yet decided whether North
Carolina -- which would like more than 10 percent -- can
get it. Is that true or not true?
MR. MADDREY: That is not true, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER: They have decided?
MR. MADDREY: The North Carolina Supreme
Court in the Andrews case said --
JUSTICE BREYER: Said?
MR. MADDREY: -- said that the key point in
Ahlborn was the stipulation --
JUSTICE BREYER: This has nothing to do with
Ahlborn. Ahlborn, we all agree, says you cannot get
more than medical -- the medical expense, okay? The
question here is how to figure that.
So I thought that one way to figure it -- I
will just be repeating myself. One way to figure it is
how much of this $100,000 settlement is attributable to
medical expenses as a judge would say. Now, you're
telling me there is a case in North Carolina which says
if the judge himself says that 10 percent of the
settlement is for medical, that's not what California --
that doesn't matter according to North Carolina law,
and I'd like the name of the case, the State case that
says that.
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I'm not aware of
any such case.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay. So we don't know the
answer to that. We know what you would like, but we
don't know the answer.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Don't you think the statute
may -- may give you the answer? It says: "Any attorney
retained by the beneficiary shall out of the proceeds
obtained on behalf of the beneficiary by settlement
with, judgment against, or otherwise from a third party
by reason of injury or death distribute to the
department the amount of assistance paid by the
department on behalf of...up to 33 percent." It applies
to judgments as well as to settlements.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: You answered the question
with respect to jury verdicts. I suppose it would be no
different if it 's the judge that found the 10 percent
rather than the jury.
MR. MADDREY: I would agree,
Justice Ginsburg. The statute --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I didn't hear Justice
Ginsburg's question.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: The question that
Justice Breyer was asking about the 10 percent has
already been answered because we were told that if a
jury allocated 10 percent to medicals, it would not make
any difference, the statute entitles the State to
30 percent.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Basically you are saying
the judge would be required to give you your one-third
regardless of what the jury said.
MR. MADDREY: Exactly. As we said, he would
either have to conform a jury verdict to the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So all those States that
have jury verdicts, special verdicts that require a
certain amount, they could avoid that by just simply
passing this law and avoid the anti-lien statute that
way?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, it would -- it
would depend how the State could rationally defend their
statute under their experience as consistent with their
jurisprudence. Of course, tort law being primarily the
province of --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: 16 States already have
something close to a presumption of a percentage. Do
you have any evidence that in those 16 States where it's
only a presumption and not a fixed amount, that they are
falling apart because of it?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I -- I don't have
any evidence as to the specific performance in those 16
States. That would leave 34 States that don't have one.
It also would raise the question of how many of those
States -- I believe the 16 States were the ones that had
some sort of procedure, some post-settlement either
hearing or trial to allocate --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: In the absence of this
statute, what did your State do beforehand?
MR. MADDREY: This statute dates back to
1988. Prior to 1988 I don't know how -- from the 1965
effective date of Medicaid how things were handled. But
certainly for the last --
JUSTICE KAGAN: General, on your theory am I
correct that the North Carolina legislature could amend
this statute tomorrow to make it two-thirds?
MR. MADDREY: Certainly a statute could be
amended. Whether it could be defended under -- under
the circumstances --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But that's what I mean. I
mean, on your theory it seems not to matter whether this
statute says one-third or two-thirds. And I'm asking
whether that's correct.
MR. MADDREY: Two-part answer, Your Honor.
As to the anti-lien provision of the Medicaid Act, if
the statute defines the amount of medicals as 230 --
excuse me -- two-thirds, that would present the same
analysis under the anti-lien provision of the Medicaid
Act. The difference would be whether the State could
show a rational basis in its -- in its tort law, in its
jurisprudence.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I guess I'm not sure about
that. In other words, I'm assuming an amendment that
just all it does is it changes one-third to two-thirds.
And so your theory it seems to me would work the exact
same way. Then you say, well, you need a rational basis
for doing that. But I thought you told me that the
one-third really doesn't have anything to do with an
estimate of how much is medical and how much is not
medical. So it seems that you would have the same basis
to say two-thirds as you do to say one-third. Am I
wrong about that?
MR. MADDREY: I would say, Justice Kagan,
the reason it's not the same is that it would treat
Medicaid recipients decidedly differently than other
tort litigants in North Carolina. Given the 1935
history of the allocation of -- of tort settlements and
the liens in favor of the providers of medical care that
preexist the North Carolina Medicaid statute, if you
then change the Medicaid statute --
JUSTICE KAGAN: But you're saying there's a
kind of side constraint, that Medicaid recipients have
to be treated like others, but then presumably, the
State could change everybody's?
MR. MADDREY: I -- I believe that would be
the case, yes. The -- the question would be whether
there was any disparate treatment, any singling out
of -- of a Medicaid recipient. And certainly, we've
demonstrated that under the -- the North Carolina
experience, that is not the case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: I thought -- I thought
your brief said that at some point, if it gets too high,
you do have a problem under the anti-lien provision of
Medicaid?
MR. MADDREY: I -- I believe, Your Honor, in
response to the 90 percent or 100 percent scenario or
hypothetical, I would certainly posit it would be
difficult for a State to defend --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why? I don't understand
that. You see, I think the only way you can defend it
is that -- is that the recipient never -- never had a
property right. Once -- once recovery is given to the
recipient, the recovery does not belong to the
recipient. And if that's true for 33 percent, it can be
through -- true for 100 percent.
Has there ever been any litigation since
35 about takings problems, with -- with the State
requiring 33 percent to go to the medical provider, even
though it may well be that -- that less or more of that
amount went to medical damages --
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, under the general
lien statutes in Chapter 44 of the North Carolina
general statutes, Sections 49 and 50 are the two
provisions that we cite. I'm not aware of any
takings-related challenges to those laws. I am aware of
State supreme court opinions saying that the attorney
had to distribute proceeds in accordance with the
statute.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- can I go back for a
second? Because I want to show you where I got my
perhaps mistaken idea from.
There is a case called Andrews. And there
is a statement in Andrews, which is a South --
North Carolina case -- which says in certain
circumstances, although the statute says just what
Justice Scalia says, the lawyer sits there, he takes
one-third and pays it to the State. Then this case has
this sentence in it: "Ahlborn controls when there has
been a prior determination or stipulation as to the
medical expense portion of a plaintiff's settlement. In
those cases, the State may not receive reimbursement in
excess of the portion so designated."
Now, having read that sentence, I thought
the law of North Carolina was that this statute does not
apply, and that when, in fact, the jury or the judge
finds that only 10 percent was for medical expenses, the
State cannot take more than 10 percent. And the same is
true of a stipulation. That's what those words seem to
say to me.
Now you're telling me I'm not reading
those words correctly, that the case of Andrews does not
affect our case here, and that you -- that the law of
North Carolina is that you get one-third.
Now, what is it? Do you see why I am
confused?
MR. MADDREY: Yes, Your Honor. I will
try -- try, if I can, to explain what I believe to be
the source of the confusion is.
The stipulation in Ahlborn referenced in the
Andrews decision was between the Medicaid recipient and
the State of Arkansas, the lienholder. It came in the
Federal court action to challenge Arkansas's imposition
of its lien.
JUSTICE BREYER: I see.
MR. MADDREY: Therefore, there was a
stipulation binding the State, the lienholder, that
controlled in Ahlborn.
JUSTICE BREYER: They say a prior
determination or stipulation. I took prior
determination to mean a determination by a judge or a
jury. What does it mean, if it doesn't mean that?
MR. MADDREY: I think later in the Andrews
decision, you will see a reference to the parties
certainly had the opportunity to negotiate with the
State a lesser amount than -- that the amount of the
statutory lien. That would be -- that would be the
prior determination, I believe.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Am I correct that what
you believe and what the courts have been doing in your
State, the lower courts, is that they won't approve a
settlement that doesn't have the one-third, and they
won't enter a judgment that doesn't have the one-third?
Is that correct?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, when there's a
lump sum settlement in -- in these actions, the court
directs the attorney for the recipient to enforce the
statute to protect the State --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So I'm right. They just
won't accept the private stipulation that doesn't do
that, and they won't enter into a judgment that doesn't
do that, correct?
MR. MADDREY: Here, the -- the State court
ordered the $933,000 --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Just answer my question.
MR. MADDREY: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right.
Going back to Justice Alito's. The jury
says it's less or more or whatever of -- of the
settlement is medical expenses, it doesn't matter what
they say, the court can't enter a judgment for that
amount, they have to enter a judgment for either the
one-third or the full medical expenses.
MR. MADDREY: They have to enter a judgment,
yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: And that's what they
have been doing.
MR. MADDREY: Yes, Your Honor. And -- and
that is the rationale behind the statute that the jury,
nor the judge, can enter a judgment that's not in
conformity with the statute.
JUSTICE ALITO: Could I ask you how often
this comes up in North Carolina? Do you have any
figures where you have a dispute of this nature, during
the course of a year?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I've tried in the
briefs to indicate the dollar amounts involved. The
numbers of cases are in the hundreds, it's my
understanding because, typically, they involve
third-party payments, not just from medical malpractice
cases, but insurance coverage and other situations that
-- that trigger the repayment obligation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I don't want to take up
too much time talking about Andrews, but it seems to me
that what the North Carolina Supreme Court said in
Andrews is that in those States where there is a prior
determination, that controls, but the -- North Carolina
is entitled to adopt a different procedure and have a
one-third across-the-board rule.
That's the way I read it.
MR. MADDREY: Well, certainly, that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Does -- does that accord
with your understanding?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I think they were
saying two things. Other States have different
procedures --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Yes.
MR. MADDREY: -- and that in North Carolina,
this is the rule, and that the prior determination also
could include an action involving binding the State of
North Carolina.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I know that was argued
before. But I read Ahlborn very carefully, and I don't
see it. I read the amici briefs that reference
different procedures, and not one of them referenced the
North Carolina procedure. So I know that was argued
before. You didn't argue it in your brief here, and I
assume you didn't because you did what I did, which was
to read Ahlborn carefully and read what it cited, and I
don't see it cited.
MR. MADDREY: I'm sorry. I don't know --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't see the North
Carolina procedure referenced in Ahlborn as something
that States could do. It wasn't referenced directly in
the -- in the opinion, and it wasn't referenced
indirectly by the amici. The amici were talking about
substantially different procedures.
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the holding in
Ahlborn said you can't go beyond the amount
represented -- that represents repayment for medicals.
It didn't say how a State has to or could determine
that, and that's the question that's presented.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But my point is, Justice
Kennedy's question was that somehow in that opinion, we
approved the North Carolina system.
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, I think --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is there a direct
reference to North Carolina's system --
MR. MADDREY: Absolutely not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- in that or in any of
the amici brief that talked about different State rules?
MR. MADDREY: Not that I'm aware of.
If there are no further questions, Your
Honor, I would like to reserve the remainder of my time
for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Browning?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF CHRISTOPHER G. BROWNING, JR.,
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
MR. BROWNING: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The -- General Maddrey has steadfastly
argued that the North Carolina statute overrides a jury
verdict. I think his argument is well-grounded, given
the language of the statute, but that illustrates the
very problem here, that this statute takes one-third of
a settlement or judgment regardless of the true facts of
the case. And that is problematic under Ahlborn.
Justice Kagan, you had asked Mr. -- General
Maddrey about the basis for the North Carolina statute.
General Maddrey had referred to it being a rule of thumb
of three times medicals. But if you actually turn to
the Fourth Circuit's decision, which is based on the
briefs that were filed in the Fourth Circuit, in the
petition at page 20A, the rule of thumb is actually
three times specials, which of course is different than
three times medicals because special damages would
include things like lost wages and various other things.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Mr. Browning, let me give
you a different rationale for this statute. It's
different from the one the State suggests, but it would
go something like this:
There is an allocation that has to be made.
In making allocations there are two ways of doing it.
We can do it case-by-case, individualized
decisionmaking; or we can use some bright-line rules.
And the advantage of bright-line rules is that they are
cheap and efficient and sometimes they are not more
inaccurate than individualized decisionmaking because in
individualized decisionmaking you can maker errors, too.
So this is a reasonable way to make an
allocation decision. And nothing that we said in
Ahlborn suggests that a State needs to use case-by-case
decisionmaking rather than bright-line rules to make the
allocation that it needs to make between medical and
nonmedical damages. What about that?
MR. BROWNING: Well, Your Honor, I would
turn to the language of the Ahlborn decision which makes
clear that States cannot lay claim to more than a
portion of a settlement or judgment that represents
payment for medical care or medical expenses.
When you have --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but that doesn't
answer the question. I mean that portion, according to
North Carolina, is one-third.
MR. BROWNING: It is the State saying it is
one-third even though there is no basis and even though
you have cases like this where it's clearly not
one-third --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but what the State
says is the law. I mean, the State says one-third is
for medical.
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, if that is all
North Carolina had to do, of course, the Ahlborn
decision would have been dramatically different if
Arkansas had simply enacted a cap of 100 percent or
50 percent or 40 percent because, in the Ahlborn
decision, the State of Arkansas was only seeking to
recover 39 percent of the tort settlement.
And under North Carolina's theory, if
Arkansas had simply been bright enough to implement a
cap, the Ahlborn decision would have been completely
different. And that makes absolutely no sense. I think
the Ahlborn decision indicates that there has to be a
process in order to fairly and appropriately determine
the amount that the State may --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you need, ultimately you
need an adjudication. You have to leave it either to a
jury to decide what percentage of the total award is --
is medical expenses or have a separate proceeding.
Let's say where there has been a settlement, you need a
separate proceeding to decide how much of it is really
for medical. You know, they may say 10 percent is, but
who believes that? You -- you need a proceeding.
That is awfully time-consuming. And -- and
as Justice Kagan suggests, I'm not sure it's going to be
very accurate. I don't think a jury determination is
going to be -- is going to be accurate on that score.
And I don't know how you go about determining how much
of a settlement is attributable to -- to medical
expenses versus other things, especially when the
settlement itself says only 10 percent is medical
expenses.
MR. BROWNING: Well, Justice Scalia, I think
it is very easy for States to follow that and to put in
practices or procedures that result in appropriate
allocation of medical expenses.
JUSTICE SCALIA: How do you do that?
MR. BROWNING: Yes. There are a variety of
ways that States can do it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: 16 are doing it already.
MR. BROWNING: Absolutely. 16 and the
District of Columbia have a process for appropriate
adjudication. Moreover, it is perfectly appropriate if
a State wants to have a presumption.  The problem is it
can't be an irrebuttable presumption.
JUSTICE BREYER: How does it work? Because
I would imagine at the negotiation you have the -- the
victim's lawyer and the tortfeasor's lawyer and the
tortfeasor's lawyer is interested that the bottom line
number be as low as possible and the victim's number,
that it be as high as possible. And the victim's
lawyer, in fact, would like as little as possible to be
allocated to a source which is going to take that money
away from him.
So they can reach agreement. What they will
do is say 1 penny is for medical expenses and everything
else is for pain and suffering, and that's very good for
the victim. And it's irrelevant to the tortfeasor.
So -- so when you see that on a piece of
paper, what is it you are going to do? What kind of
proceeding are you going to have? And it's a proceeding
about a proceeding. It's a proceeding about the
settlement negotiation. What's it going to look like?
What does it look like in the 16 States? We will have a
plaintiff's lawyer testify. He will say, Your Honor, I
really wanted 1 penny and only 1 penny to be allocated
to pain and -- to medical expense. And the defendant's
lawyer, he's being very honest, he'll say, I didn't
care; if that's what he wants, that's fine with me.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, but it's worse
than that. He does care because the smaller amount
means that the victim is going to actually get to keep
more and that's all the victim's lawyer is concerned
about, and that's fine with the tortfeasor's lawyer
because otherwise he would have to pay more.
JUSTICE BREYER: Exactly. So what does it
look like?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sorry to --
MR. BROWNING: Mr. Chief Justice, if I first
can turn to your point and then respond to
Justice Breyer's question.
JUSTICE BREYER: It's the same point.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's the same point.
(Laughter.)
MR. BROWNING: Well, let me say this at the
outset: That first of all, it is our position that the
parties simply can't stipulate or reach an agreement
that somehow deprives the State of their interest.
There has to be an appropriate adjudication. It's
worked well in the States that have implemented this
process.
JUSTICE BREYER: How does it work in those
States?
MR. BROWNING: Yes, Your Honor, and -- and
Justice Breyer, I don't think it's all of that
complicated.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I don't understand. What
do you adjudicate? What is the issue in the
adjudication? How much of the award should have been
allocated to medical expenses, or how much of the award
was, in fact, allocated to medical expenses? Which is
the issue?
MR. BROWNING: What should be adjudicated --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to me it should be
the latter, shouldn't it?
MR. BROWNING: What should be adjudicated
consistent with the Ahlborn decision is the portion of
the settlement that represents payment for medical
expenses. And that, that is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's right. How much was
allocated, right? It doesn't matter what ought to have
been. The issue is what proportion did the parties in
fact allocate to medical expenses, right?
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, I don't think --
JUSTICE SCALIA: And they say 1 penny. How
are you going to contradict that?
MR. BROWNING: We would not assert that the
parties' subjective belief is necessarily binding.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, no. But that's --
JUSTICE BREYER: But I am asking the same
question. There are 16 States that have this procedure.
How does it work?
MR. BROWNING: Yes, and in most of those --
JUSTICE BREYER: I don't want to know that
they have it. I want to know how it works. We have put
the problem as to why it seems it might not work too
well, and now I would like you to tell us how it really
works.
MR. BROWNING: How it really works in those
States is the States will -- will generally negotiate
with the State Medicaid agency and come to a fair
allocation without the necessity for a judicial
determination that's appropriate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What about fair?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Is that because they
know they are going to be subject to a hearing if they
don't reach an agreement?
MR. BROWNING: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So there is an
inducement for them to do what this State didn't do.
MR. BROWNING: Correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: When told to come in,
they ignored it. In those States, States know they are
going to increase potentially their costs, so they come
in more often.
MR. BROWNING: Exactly, Justice Sotomayor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Exactly what?
MR. BROWNING: It levels the playing field
so that there is an incentive on both sides to come to
an appropriate allocation.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, how is this allocation
not happening?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I was going to say,
how do we know what's fair and appropriate? You come
in -- let's say you have $20,000 in medical expenses and
a claim for pain and suffering. And they come in and
they recover a million dollars, right?
So what's appropriate in that case? The
other side will say, well, we settled on a million
dollars, pain and suffering was really 20 million and we
came down to a million. So what's fair allocation in
the case of the medical expenses? It seems to be an
entitled -- entirely artificial judgment. To the extent
it's not, it depends on the views of the two parties
negotiating and I thought we established that that is
entirely subject to manipulation.
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, it is a process
that the courts can determine based upon the experience
of the judge, that who generally would be very
experienced in the valuation of cases, can make an
appropriate decision, and can consider all the facts,
the equities --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, do judges do
this in non-Medicaid cases regularly?
MR. BROWNING: Oh, absolutely. They do it
in North Carolina in the context of workers'
compensation liens, having to come up with an
appropriate allocation, and there the court has --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Let's deal with what
appears to be many of my colleagues' gut instinct, okay?
This is -- it costs too much, it's too burdensome.
We've already answered why not, but in the end, they
don't believe you could ever figure out the number.
That's really their bottom line, that this number's
artificial no matter what you do, so you might as well
just throw a label on it, reasonable or not, and leave
it alone. How do you answer that argument?
Because that's the essence of their -- of
their belief --
MS. BROWNING: Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- that this bottom line
allocation is always going to be wrong somehow.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: It's -- it's a
little better than that, but go ahead and answer.
(Laughter.)
MR. BROWNING: Justice Sotomayor, the -- the
concern, of course, is that -- forgive me, I've lost my
train of thought here, Mr. Chief Justice.
JUSTICE ALITO: Well, this is what I
envision happening, if the -- if the parties can't -- if
the State and the -- and the recipient of the -- of
Medicaid assistance can't come to an agreement.
Basically, you have to make an estimate of what the
damages would have been if the case had been tried and
then you determine that the medical portion of the
damages would have been 15 percent and so you reduce,
then you take the amount of the settlement, and the
amount of the settlement that is attributable to the
medical expenses is 15 percent. That would be what I
would envision. Is that not correct?
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, that is -- that
is certainly an approach similar to Ahlborn, a
proportionality sort of review. You -- you -- you look
at how much you're able to recover versus the amount --
the amount of the total claim versus the amount of the
settlement and you come to an appropriate --
JUSTICE ALITO: That seems very -- that
seems really very complicated.
MR. BROWNING: Well --
JUSTICE ALITO: How can a judge -- where the
case is settled and the judge doesn't really know
anything about the proof, how is a judge going to be in
a position really to do that?
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, it is a matter of
the parties coming forward, presenting evidence as to
the damages in the case, perhaps an explanation as to
why the case settled for less than full value, and the
court using their experience to determine is this
appropriate, should there be any reductions and of
course --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Is that -- is that what
happens? You said you -- that in North Carolina for
workers' compensation -- for settlements that are
subject to workers' compensation liens, you have this
type of system.
MR. BROWNING: Yes, in the context of
third-party liability.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: How does it work for
workers' compensation recoveries that have the same
thing, they -- they owe the State for the medical.
MR. BROWNING: Yes, Your Honor. The -- the
statute -- the North Carolina statute directs in -- in
that lien situation for the court to consider the
likelihood that the plaintiff would have actually
recovered on the claim, and various other factors that
the court deems appropriate and it puts it in the
discretion of the court.
What we're saying here is that Ahlborn
requires that there must be a determination of the
portion of the settlement that represents payment for
medical --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, in those
proceedings, are witnesses called or is it usually done
on papers?
MR. BROWNING: It's usually done in a fairly
expedited process, yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA: You know, putting --
putting it in the discretion of the court, as you say is
done in the workmen's compensation, is quite different
from what you're proposing here. That seems to me quite
workable -- you know. The -- the court hears the
evidence and he decides how much should be reimbursed
within -- within the court's discretion. But here,
you're -- you're asking a court to decide how much of a
recovery or how much of a settlement was attributable
to -- to the medical portion.
MR. BROWNING: I think it needs to be --
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's a totally different
question.
MR. BROWNING: Justice Scalia, I think it's
an objective determination. I don't think the parties
can skew it one way because of the way they structured
the settlement just because -- just as the State can't
skew it the other way because they have an arbitrary
number, whether it be 100 percent, 90 percent,
75 percent, it doesn't allow for the fact that --
JUSTICE BREYER: Are you satisfied --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You've said several
times that the way you do this is based on the judge's
experience and so on with -- with the cases. And I
think what your -- your friend on the other side is
saying is that's pretty much what's going on here except
over time -- I mean, would it be all right if over time
the judge says, well, typically, sometimes it's
25 percent, sometimes it's 35 percent, over time, it's
sort of 33 percent. And so we're going to have that as
an absolute rule so that we don't have to go through
these proceedings every time just to make sure that it's
30 percent rather than 33 percent.
What's -- I guess it's Justice Kagan's
question -- what's wrong with the bright-line rule here?
MR. BROWNING: There would be nothing wrong
with a rule that creates a presumption. What is the
problem is, you have cases that are on the extremes like
this case where you have absolutely horrendous injuries
and a physician who -- who doesn't have the financial
wherewithal to pay for the extent of the damages that he
caused.
Here, EMA's guardian had no option but to
settle the case for the available funds of $2.8 million.
But that is a far cry from how anyone would objectively
evaluate --
JUSTICE BREYER: So you're -- you're
satisfied with the presumption. Is there any law here
that gives you a leg-up? I mean, is this like Chevron
or Skidmore or something like that?
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, I certainly think
in this case the fact that the United States Department
of Health and Human Services has filed an amicus brief
that points out that this sort of ill rebuttable
presumption, this sort of --
JUSTICE BREYER: I know that's their
position. But my question is, does the law mean that
when we decide this case, I see you have a reasonable
point, they have a reasonable point, that if both points
are reasonable, you get the benefit of some kind of
legal presumption like Chevron, Skidmore, et cetera.
Maybe you can think of another one, I don't know. Do
you or don't you?
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, I think it would
be appropriate to give Chevron deference to the
arguments of the United States --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, we're dealing
with a North Carolina statute. Don't they get deference
along the same lines?
MR. BROWNING: No, Your Honor. I don't
think -- the starting point has to be the Federal
statute, Medicaid's anti-lien provision, which is very
clear that no lien may be imposed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, it can't be
very clear because CMS took the opposite position before
this case, right?
MR. BROWNING: I don't think that they took
the opposite position. With regard to the letter that
was sent to Congressman Coble that that was a -- an
employee who was not within a policymaking decision, who
has to field thousands of these sort of requests for
information coming into CMS. So I don't think we can
put a whole lot of credence on that particular letter
that has been expressly disavowed by the secretary and
the director of CMS.
JUSTICE ALITO: Could I ask you a question
on this different point? Could the -- suppose the North
Carolina legislature passed a statute that says
something like the following: "In any tort action in
which an item of damages sought is medical expenses, the
plaintiff may not recover for any other item of damages
until the full amount of the medical expenses is
satisfied."
Now, there they're just restructuring their
tort law. Would there be a problem with that?
MR. BROWNING: Your Honor, I think in the
case of the anti-lien provision, that that would
effectively circumvent the anti-lien provision and allow
by the backdoor what we would contend would not be --
the State could not do directly. So yes, I do see
potential problems with that. Obviously, it would be
different than the scenario that we have here, but it
does -- the starting point has to be the anti-lien
provision, which is no lien may be imposed.
This Court in Ahlborn assumed without
deciding that there would be an implied exception to
that statute. But that -- that exception is very
limited. It has to be in the context of, as this Court
recognized, a State can only lay claim to that portion
of the settlement that represents payment for medical
care. So until you have --
JUSTICE ALITO: Does Federal law -- did
Federal law require your client to seek compensation for
medical expenses?
MR. BROWNING: No, Your Honor, I don't
believe that there is a requirement that Medicaid
beneficiaries would have to file a suit and try to
recover medical expenses.
JUSTICE ALITO: So you could have -- could
you have filed suit and disclaimed any -- any claim for
medical expenses, you only want to be compensated for
other things?
MR. BROWNING: If -- first of all, there
would be some medical expenses that wouldn't be
Medicaid, medical expenses that were incurred by the
family. But moreover, even in that scenario, I think
given the language of the North Carolina statute, the
State would still be seeking one-third. So, if one were
to take that route, it would be an extremely treacherous
route that you would be -- not being able to -- to get
full -- full recovery from the defendant, but still
having to be paying a third to the State of North
Carolina.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But it would be the
defendant who's -- who's -- who's jiggering the system,
I mean, not suing for the medical portion simply because
the defendant knows that at least some of that portion,
if not all of it, would -- would go -- would go to the
State. So, in a situation, such as yours, where the
total recovery is -- is not going to suffice to cover
both pain and suffering and medical expenses, it'd be
very intelligent to do what Justice Alito proposed. And
that seems to me a real, I don't know, gaming -- gaming
of the system.
MR. BROWNING: I don't think it would be a
gaming of the system, Justice Scalia, if the State,
based upon the statute, based upon its previous
directives would expect the Medicaid beneficiary to seek
recovery of those claims and to remit one-third to the
State. Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Ms. Anders?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GINGER D. ANDERS,
FOR UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING THE RESPONDENTS
MS. ANDERS: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
To start with the types of procedures that
States may use to allocate medical damages, I think the
States have a broad range of discretion to determine
what should be an appropriate allocation.
They're not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you move the
microphone so it's a little closer to you?
MS. ANDERS: Sorry.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Thank you.
MS. ANDERS: Is this better?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes. Thanks.
MS. ANDERS: So the States are not
determining, they're not trying to reconstruct what the
plaintiff's and the defendant's intent was in entering
into the settlement. Often, there will be no shared
intent. What -- what the States are doing is
determining what the appropriate allocation should be.
And the States that have individualized determinations,
which is what we think is required here, have developed
a number of different procedures for doing that.
For instance, a district court in
Pennsylvania, in McKinney --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Excuse me. I have a -- I
have a theoretical problem right at the outset. I mean,
what the statute forbids is asserting a lien on recovery
that is for medical expenses. And you're telling me
that the States aren't even trying to find out what
portion of the recovery was for medical expenses.
They're looking to determine what proportion should have
been for medical expenses.
How does that tie in with the -- with the
prohibition of the lien?
MS. ANDERS: Well, I think this Court
established in Ahlborn that the beneficiary and the
State, they respectively have interests in the
settlement that arises from the fact that in the tort
case the plaintiff has asserted claims for medical
damages and for nonmedical damages.
And so Ahlborn establishes that we need to
divide the two in order to determine what the State may
recover. Ahlborn also establishes that the beneficiary
has an interest in the settlement that arises from her
nonmedical claims that can be allocated away by an
allocation method, such as one that gives -- that says
that 100 percent of the settlement must always be
allocated to -- to medical damages.
JUSTICE SCALIA: So -- so you're saying that
the State can, in making this determination, in fact
take away from a plaintiff who has recovered a -- a
greater amount in medical expenses, or a lesser amount
in medical expenses, can take -- take away that by
determining how much should have been allocated to
medical expenses, right?
MS. ANDERS: The State does have some
discretion to determine what the appropriate allocation
is --
JUSTICE SCALIA: So you're messing up the
lien law anyway, no matter which way you play it.
MS. ANDERS: Well, I think Ahlborn
establishes that we have to make some kind of division
of the settlement, and when the parties haven't done it,
there's no jury determination. We don't know ahead of
time before the allocation has been done what precisely
the amount the medical damages should be. But we do
know because the plaintiff, the beneficiary, has
asserted nonmedical claims and she has compromised them,
we do know that she has an interest in the settlement
that arises from her nonmedical claims.
So for instance, you can imagine the
situation in which a plaintiff has a claim -- a claim
that is 10 percent medical damages and 90 percent lost
-- past lost wages. So they're both equally concrete.
In that situation, when the plaintiff settles for
pennies on the dollar, I think we -- we would have
serious questions about whether a one-third allocation
to medical damages in that case would be appropriate.
But without an individualized determination,
there would be no way to know whether this is a case in
which the -- the blanket rule that the State has is
actually overestimating the amount that should be
appropriately allocated to medical damages.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Ms. Anders, could you
please finish your response, when you said various
States do various things. Could you describe some of
them?
MS. ANDERS: Certainly. So for instance, in
McKinney v. Philadelphia Housing Authority, this is a
district court case in Pennsylvania, what the court did
was it said, we have the settlement; we know how much
the past medical damages were because we know what the
medical bills were; and we can -- we can assume that the
jury, had this case gone to trial, would have awarded
100 percent of the medical damages because they were
provable and because there weren't disputes about --
about that.
And so the court then said, I'm going to
then apply a discount rate for the uncertainty that the
defendant would have been held liable at all.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Is that a
reasonable -- this is the Federal district court?
MS. ANDERS: That was the Federal district
court.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So it's not a State
Procedure?
MS. ANDERS: Pennsylvania law. That case
happened to be in Federal court. Pennsylvania law
provided a -- a rebuttable presumption, and so the court
determined --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: What if -- what if
the other -- the parties I guess are coming in and
saying, well, that's not how juries work. They don't
care that this measure of damages is particularly
calculable. They come to a general view. You've got
medical expenses, you've got pain and suffering. They
make a judgment about that. Would that be a good
argument to make?
MS. ANDERS: I think the Court could take
that into account in allocating, yes, so some --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So how would it take
it into account? You said, well, because the medical
expenses are readily calculable, we assume that that's
what the jury meant first, and then the other stuff is
extra so the State can get it. But maybe sometimes they
just come to a -- a total figure and they don't care how
it's allocated. You say, well, that's an argument they
can make.
Well, what's a judge supposed to do in a
particular case?
MS. ANDERS: Well, I -- this is positing a
situation in which there's been a settlement rather than
a jury determination.  So I think that the -- the court
that's doing the allocating has some discretion here.
And so one thing it can do is say I'm going to
essentially prioritize medical damages because I think
juries usually will award them. But a State could also
provide that the inquiry should be more equitable and
open-ended.
So, for instance, Illinois and Missouri have
provided simply that -- that the court shall make an
equitable allocation. It can take into account the fact
that the -- that the plaintiff may receive a double
recovery.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Do you agree -- do you
agree that the only flaw in the North Carolina statute
is that it's a fixed amount, and that if it were a
rebuttable presumption it would be okay? If the North
Carolina law says 30 percent is the cap, but in a
particular case you can show that that's not a fair
allocation?
MS. ANDERS: That's absolutely right. And
-- and to return to one of Justice Kagan's earlier
questions, I think a one-third allocation may be in the
mine run of cases a reasonable presumption. But there
will be some cases, like my 90 percent, 10 percent
example, where it isn't a reasonable allocation.
JUSTICE KAGAN: And in those rebuttal
presumption States, can both sides come in and try to
rebut it? So the individual beneficiary can try to
rebut it, but the States could as well? Or is it just a
right for the beneficiary to try to rebut the
presumption?
MS. ANDERS: I think in those States, it's
just a right for the beneficiary to try to rebut the
presumption. Some of those States start with a
rebuttable presumption of full reimbursement. So that
the presumption starts at the full amount that the State
paid.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: So this is a real,
significant increase in the burden on the State under
the Medicaid program. You're saying yes, you can try to
recover recovery from third-party tortfeasors, but if
you do that you've got to set up this apparatus where
everybody can come in and you've got to prove what the
allocation was and all that.
So -- I mean some -- 34 States haven't done
that, right?
MS. ANDERS: Well, I think what's more
significant for our purposes is that 16 States plus D.C.
have, and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, yes, for your
purposes. But I'm interested in -- in my purposes. And
I'm trying to figure out whether or not that's a
significant financial burden on the State -- if they're
going to go about trying to recover this money, that
they've got to provide some apparatus, administrative,
judicial, whatever, to make a calculation that I still
don't understand what it's addressed to.
And -- and not only that, but even if you do
know what it's addressed to, you just take into account
all these things and come up with an equitable.
MS. ANDERS: I don't think that these States
have found that it's a significant administrative
burden. One reason is that once the allocation rules
are in place, it's our understanding that most of these
cases settle. The beneficiary and the State agree as to
what the allocation is, so this doesn't go to a hearing
in the first place. But even -- even when there are
hearings, I think States can take significant measures
to lessen the burden.
For instance --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How many States have
North Carolina's rule? Do you know?
MS. ANDERS: There are -- there are five
other States like North Carolina that have an
irrebuttable presumption with a cap. There are 10
others that have an irrebuttable presumption, we think,
of full reimbursement. But -- but I should caveat that
by saying that we simply don't know in those States what
they do, what their practices are.
JUSTICE BREYER: Why isn't -- the missing
part here -- maybe I just missed it -- we're
interpreting a statute, and the part that trumps the
lien provision is the part that says the State is
entitled to payment that has been made for medical
assistance for health care items -- and some other
similar language is in the statute.
They think their one-third rule is a good
way of measuring that. You think that the one-third
rule as a rebuttable presumption is a better way of
measuring that. Now normally, or often, I would see
government arguments like that where they'd say, and, by
the way, we're interpreting very technical language in
our statute, and Chevron and/or Skidmore means that you
should give us particular weight.
Is that part of your argument here, and if
it isn't, why isn't it?
MS. ANDERS: Well, I think -- we think that
-- the position reflected in our brief is HHS's
considered position, and we do think that it's -- it is
persuasive. Now, HHS presumably could regulate, it
could go through notice and comment rulemaking and
establish rules that --
JUSTICE BREYER: My impression is that you
get Chevron deference on the basis of whether
Congress -- and there's a lot of rules and so forth, but
--
MS. ANDERS: We haven't claimed Chevron
deference.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- you haven't claimed it.
And I -- so that puzzles me -- and I don't --
MS. ANDERS: -- there aren't regulations on
this.
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm not -- you argue what
you want to argue, but I -- this is awfully technical
language. It's a minor interstitial point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm not sure that HHS
has -- has authority over -- over how a State recovers.
I don't see that it's part of the administration of the
statute committed to HHS. So I -- you know, I admire
you're not citing Chevron.
(Laughter.)
MS. ANDERS: Well, HHS has -- the statute
requires the States to -- to enact reasonable measures
for recovery. HHS thinks that a measure that
circumvents the anti-lien provision like North
Carolina's wouldn't be a reasonable measure, but there
aren't regulations on that subject.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
General Maddrey, you have three minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOHN F. MADDREY
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. MADDREY: We have heard a lot about what
a State could or maybe should do, but what must a State
do under the Medicaid Act to fulfill its obligations?
The Fourth Circuit and respondents and apparently the
United States say they have to have a post-settlement
trial, I guess a trial to settle the settlement. And
that, while an available option, is not a mandatory
requirement under anything that I can see in the
Medicaid Act.
JUSTICE KAGAN: Well, General, how about
this, and I am having a little bit of trouble here
because I think a State could come in, or I think there
is a reasonable argument that a State could come in and
say -- you know, we've made an estimate, and here's our
best estimate, and we don't think there is a need for an
individualized decision-making on top of that.
But as I understand your argument, that is
not what you are saying. You are making a very
different kind of argument, suggesting that you can peg
this number any place, no matter what the relationship
between the number and the actual allocation that
cases -- that allocation of medical and nonmedical
damages in the real world.
So if that's the case, what do I do?
MR. MADDREY: Your Honor, the statute --
North Carolina's statute defines the amount that must be
included for the repayment by the Medicaid recipient.
It's not guessing after the fact, but instead providing
in advance, the recipe as to how to put the settlement
together. It tells the parties what they have to do.
And that makes it a bright-line rule, which I think you
need to compare to the alternative, which is this --
this, what the Fourth Circuit called a true value
hearing after the fact, after the settlement, how did --
how did they get there? Is it what they did or what
they should have done or what they could have done?
In this case you've got a $42 million damage
claim settled for 2.8 million --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So how do -- what do we
do with the Federal statute that says, You are not
entitled to a lien of any amount that is greater than
your medical expenses? And using the Solicitor
General's Office example, everybody knows that the true
value of medical expenses in a particular case was only
10 percent, you are still getting 30 percent. How do
we -- how do we honor the terms of the Federal statute?
MR. MADDREY: Because the State statute says
the State never recovers more than its actual medical
expenses. If in that hypothetical the medical expenses
were 100,000 or 10 percent, the North Carolina statute
would say North Carolina gets up to one-third of the
settlement but never more than they paid.
So by definition it can't be for something
that was not medicals. And that's the bright-line rule
that the North Carolina statute creates.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the case in the
