IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
DAVID LEON RILEY,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 13-132
v.  :
CALIFORNIA  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 29, 2014
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:34 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JEFFREY L. FISHER, ESQ., Stanford, Cal.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
EDWARD C. DUMONT, ESQ., Solicitor General,
San Francisco, Cal.; on behalf of Respondent.
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
JEFFREY L. FISHER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
EDWARD C. DUMONT, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent  27
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
MICHAEL R. DREEBEN, ESQ.
For United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Respondent  46
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JEFFREY L. FISHER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  56
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:34 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 13-132, Riley v. California.
Mr. Fisher?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JEFFREY L. FISHER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. FISHER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case involves applying the core
protection of the Fourth Amendment to a new factual
circumstance.  It has always been the case that an
occasion of an arrest did not give the police officers
authority to search through the private papers and the
drawers and bureaus and cabinets of somebody's house,
and that protection should not evaporate more than 200
years after the founding because we have the
technological development of smartphones that have
resulted in people carrying that information in their
pockets.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Just -- just to test the
principle for why the police can search and seize
some -- some objects.  Consider a gun.  The arrestee has
a gun on his person and the police take the gun.  Is
part of the reason for that seizure to obtain evidence
of the crime or is it just for the safety of the officer
and the safety of the community?
MR. FISHER:  Well, what this Court said in
Robinson at Page 235 is the reason supporting the
authority for a search incident to arrest are the two
Chimel factors, which are gathering evidence to prevent
its destruction, and officer's safety.  Now --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  What about gathering
evidence in order to make the case?  For instance, with
the gun, could they take fingerprints?  The -- the gun
is in the police station where the arrestee is being
booked.  A, could they take fingerprints?  B, could they
copy the serial number?  C, could they see how many
shells were left in the chamber?  They obviously have to
empty it for safety purposes.  All for the purpose of
building the case, of -- of obtaining evidence?
MR. FISHER:  Yes, of course that's done
every day.  Once the gun is in the police -- the police
department's lawful possession, I think Edwards says
that they can do all that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So -- so if -- if the
proposition then, if the principle then is that some
objects that are obtained from the arrestee can be
examined in order to build the State's case, is that at
least a beginning premise that we can accept in your
case, although, obviously, there are problems of the
extent and intrusiveness of the search that are -- are
in your case, but not in the gun hypothetical.
MR. FISHER:  Well, Justice Kennedy, the
Court has never described that as one of the things.  If
you want to think about this case the way you thought
about the automobile search in Gant, it would be a
beginning premise; but I think you're right, that even
if that were a beginning premise, it would be only that,
a beginning.  In Footnote 9 in Edwards, this Court said
that any search incident to arrest still has to satisfy
the Fourth Amendment's general -- general
reasonableness.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I think you're right that
Gant is probably the best statement in support of the
principle that I've -- I've suggested, and then you
might say, well, that's limited to automobiles --
MR. FISHER:  Right.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- and then we're back
where we started.
MR. FISHER:  Right.  And there's important
things to understand if you want to start thinking about
Gant, because both in terms of its history and its
modern application, it's dramatically different from
what we have here.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, Mr. Fisher, before we
do that, have you been accurate in what you said about
Robinson and about the Court's cases?  In Weeks, which
was quoted in Robinson, the Court said:  "The right,
always recognized under English and American law, to
search the person of the accused when legally arrested
to discover and seize the fruits or evidences of crime."
Is that historically inaccurate?  Do you want us to
repudiate that?
MR. FISHER:  No, Your Honor.  What Weeks
said, you quoted it, fruits and instrumentalities of the
crime have always been something that could be seized
from a person.  Now, Weeks, of course, as this Court
said in Robinson itself, was dicta.  And there was that
historical authority to take fruits and evidence -- I'm
sorry -- fruits and instrumentalities of the crime.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Did it say
instrumentalities or evidence?  Which did it say?
MR. FISHER:  Weeks used --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Because Justice Alito said
evidence.  You -- you changed it to instrumentality.  Is
one of you wrong?
MR. FISHER:  Weeks uses the word "evidence,"
but, Justice Scalia, because it was not at issue in that
case, the -- the Bishop treatise that you cited in your
Thornton concurrence talks about tools and
instrumentalities.
Now, I don't think we have to debate that
here, because even if we're in a world where the police
can seize some evidence and keep it and use it for the
prosecution simply for that reason, even if they don't
fear destruction, there are still very, very profound
problems with searching a smartphone without a warrant,
because even under the Robinson rule, this Court has
recognized, for example, when it comes to blood draws,
search -- something like a strip search that might occur
at the scene, there are limits even to the Robinson
rule.  So it brings us --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, smartphones --
smartphones do present difficult problems.  But let me
ask you this:  Suppose your client were an old-school
guy and he didn't have -- he didn't have a cell phone.
He had a billfold and he had photos that were important
to him in the billfold.  He had that at the time of
arrest.  Do you dispute the proposition that the police
could examine the photos in his billfold and use those
as evidence against him?
MR. FISHER:  No.  That's the rule of
Robinson, that any physical item on an arrestee can be
seized and inspected and then used as evidence if it's
useful evidence.  We draw a line.  --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Yes.  What is the difference
between looking at hardcopy photos in a billfold and
looking at photos that are saved in the memory of a cell
phone?
MR. FISHER:  The difference is digital
information versus physical items.  Physical items at
the scene can pose a safety threat and have destruction
possibilities that aren't present with digital evidence.
What is more, once you get into the digital world, you
have the framers' concern of general warrants and the --
the writs of assistance.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, how does that apply --
how does that apply to these hardcopy photos in the
billfold?  They don't present a threat to anybody.  And
I don't see that there's much of a difference between --
the government argues there's a greater risk of the
destruction of digital evidence in a cell phone than --
than there is in the photos.  So I don't quite
understand how -- how that applies to that situation.
MR. FISHER:  Well, let me take those one
thing at a time.  I take it the theory of Robinson, this
is the theory the government itself propounded, is that
any physical item, because it contained a razor blade or
a pin or anything, needs to be inspected to be sure.
And so you have a categorical rule because of the ad hoc
nature of arrests that police don't have to distinguish
physical items one from the other.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, but the -- but in
the wallet -- we'll just stick with Justice Alito's
hypothetical -- they find a business card or something
which shows a car rental service.  Can they turn the
card over and read it?  They're not looking for a pin or
an explosive.  They're trying to read what's on the
card.  Can they do that?
MR. FISHER:  I think they can, if nothing
else, under plain view once it's in their hand, Justice
Kennedy.  But I really don't want to fight --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  No, they turn -- they turn
the card over.
MR. FISHER:  I think that is fine under the
categorical rule.  I think what you have in Robinson is
a categorical rule that obviates these exact difficult
case-by-case determinations.  You can make an argument,
and if I needed to, if it were a diary case or a
billfold case, you might be able to make an argument,
but I think the Court wisely decided under Robinson that
we need a categorical rule that's easily administrable
in the field.
Now, when you have digital evidence, the
categorical rule, we submit, cuts exactly in the
opposite direction.  Because digital information -- even
the notion of flipping through photos in a smartphone
implicates vast amounts of information, not just the
photos themselves, but the GPS locational data that's
linked in with it, all kinds of other information that
is intrinsically intertwined in smartphones.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Including
information that is specifically designed to be made
public.  I mean, what about something like Facebook or a
Twitter account?  There's no real -- there's no -- any
privacy interest in a Facebook account is at least
diminished because the point is you want these things to
be public and seen widely.
MR. FISHER:  Well, Mr. Chief Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So I guess my
question would be:  Could you have a rule that the
police are entitled to search those apps that, in fact,
don't have an air of privacy about them?
MR. FISHER:  I think that would be
extraordinarily difficult to administer that rule.  And
let me tell you why.  Because most of the information on
smartphones is private.  Much of it is just, like the
photos in this case, just kept on somebody's phone and
not shared with anybody.  Even a Facebook account is a
limited universe of people who have access to it.
You're right that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  More -- more or less
limited.  I mean, you know, maybe it's 20 people; maybe
it's a hundred people.  But it's certainly not private
in the sense that many of the other applications are.
MR. FISHER:  I think it's fair to say you
have a sliding scale and there's some stuff on a phone
that might be posted on the Internet, for example.  The
difficulty with that case, if you wanted to address it
in a future case, would be the intertwined nature of
information on a phone.  So looking at those photos in a
smartphone account will be linked to the contacts inside
the phone; it will be linked to GPS information inside
the phone.  All of this information is intertwined and I
think you'd have a difficult administrability problem if
you wanted to create some sort of rule like that.
Now, remember, the government might try to
deal with that problem differently by saying information
in the cloud, so to speak, is not accessible to
officers.  We submit that just further would compound
the difficulty of applying a rule in this circumstance.
JUSTICE ALITO:  But do you think in this
case we have to decide whether all the information that
may be available in a smartphone can be examined by the
police when the owner of the phone is arrested or can we
just focus on the particular evidence that was admitted
in your client's trial?
MR. FISHER:  Well, the way you've phrased
the question, I think that's what -- that's the first
cut at this, is looking at the particular pieces of
evidence here, which are photos and videos.  But we
don't think you can write an opinion that would
distinguish those from anything else on a -- almost
anything else on a smartphone.  I mean, the State's
argument here is that those are not, quote,
"fundamentally different" from other things that people
would carry around.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Do you think you could
have obtained a warrant -- or that the police could have
obtained a warrant in this case?
MR. FISHER:  In all likelihood, yes, Justice
Kennedy.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  All right.
MR. FISHER:  And they had plenty of time to do
so.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, then the evidence
that's seizable under the warrant is -- is reasonable,
and Justice Alito points out the fact that some of this
evidence is -- is reasonable.  If there's a -- there's a
limitation with reference to the way the police behaved,
as Justice Alito points out, it's limited just to this
evidence.
MR. FISHER:  Well, let me say a couple
important things about the warrant requirement and then
return to Justice Alito's question.  This Court has said
time and again that the mere fact the police could have
gotten a warrant but didn't does not excuse a Fourth
Amendment violation.  Let me say a couple things about
the warrant requirement and then return to Justice
Alito.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, but it -- it just
goes to the fact that this -- that this is searchable
under Fourth Amendment standards.
MR. FISHER:  With a warrant, Justice
Kennedy.  And let me talk about why a warrant is so
important.  First of all, it interposes a neutral
observer in between the citizen and the police officer.
Perhaps more importantly, it does two very big things.
One is it can trigger the Fourth Amendment's
particularity requirement so that the magistrate can
say:  This is what you can look at and what didn't.
Remember, in this case the prosecution ultimately
introduced photos and videos, but that's not what the
detective testified to at trial as to the scope of his
search.  He said, at JA-11, we looked at a whole lot of
stuff on the phone and that's just what, in his words,
"caught his eye."
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So how -- how would it
work with a magistrate?  You recognize -- you just told
Justice Kennedy -- that a warrant could be obtained.  A
warrant for what?  What would the police have to show?
And let's take your very case.  So they -- they have
seized, which is proper, seized the phone, they've
secured it, and now they want to search it.  So they
apply for a warrant.  And what would the warrant have to
say?
MR. FISHER:  We give an example of a warrant
in the footnote in our reply brief.  I believe it's
footnote 3, Justice Ginsburg.  And there are many more
available on the web from States that already require
warrants.  What they do is they say -- the police
officer testifies, perhaps somewhat like he testified
here at the suppression hearing, I suspected this fellow
was in a gang and -- and I believe gang members keep
certain kinds of things on their phone, this is the kind
of crime that we're investigating, and therefore these
particular files within the phone are likely to obtain
evidence.  And then what happens is the warrants say
with particularity:  Here's the things you can look at;
here's what you can't.  More importantly, Justice
Ginsburg, a warrant requirement --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, I thought you say
that's very -- you've told us that that's -- that's hard
to figure out, what you can and what you can't.  But
it's easy for a magistrate, but -- but impossible for
a -- for an arresting officer?
MR. FISHER:  I think much easier for a
magistrate at some remove than an officer under the --
under the stresses in the field.  Now, Justice Scalia --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, but --
MR. FISCHER:  -- I agree, it's not going to
be perfect.  And so let's look at what happens under our
world --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  If I could just --
MR. FISHER:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- on the same lines
as -- as Justice Scalia.  The point you make elsewhere
in your brief and argument is that the cell phone or
the -- the smartphone has everything.
MR. FISHER:  Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  It's got the
person's whole life.  Well, if you're arresting somebody
on the grounds of suspicion that he's a gang member and
you have evidence to support that, what part of the
smartphone is not likely to have pertinent evidence?
What application is not?  I mean, here you've got
pictures, you've got videos, you've got calls.  I just
-- I guess it's similar to what other issues have been
raised.  I don't know what a magistrate is supposed to
put in the warrant.
MR. FISHER:  I would say his banking app,
his online dating app --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You don't think his
banking app -- his banking app is going to say on this
day he deposited $10,000 into his account, and then
that's going to coincide with a particular drug deal.
MR. FISHER:  Well, Mr. Chief Justice, those
arguments can be made on an app-by-app basis.  But what
happens is -- this is the benefit of our rule as opposed
to the government's.  What the government says is let
the officer look and then have a back-end hearing where
you just suppress all the stuff that he wasn't supposed
to look at once you apply particularity requirements.
Under our rule, once the officer has the
warrant, Leon kicks in and so you don't have to have all
these hearings in district courts, because once an
officer does a proper search according to the corners of
a warrant, you don't have to have the kind of
suppression hearing.
And there's one other very important thing
that goes into a warrant which might have been glossed
over too quickly in the briefs.  It's not just what can
be looked at; it's how it can be kept.  The retention of
information raises extraordinary Fourth Amendment
concerns.  My understanding in California is, at least
for some crimes, it's not just that they're downloading
the information and looking at it for the crime of
arrest, but they're keeping this information in
databases, ever-growing databases of every cell phone
that they've ever seized.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What if you have a
device that doesn't have the broad information that a
smartphone has, but only a very limited, like a Fitbit
that tells you how many steps you've taken, and the
defendant says, I've been in my house all afternoon, and
they want to check and see if he's walked 4 miles.  It's
not his whole life, which is a big part of your
objection.  Is that something they can look at?
MR. FISHER:  I think probably not.  And I
think this is the way the categorical rule in Robinson,
where it sweeps in the kind of hypotheticals we were
talking about in one direction.  I think a categorical
rule in the other direction for digital information
would sweep in the Fitbit.  I mean, obviously, I don't
have to win that argument today, but I think that's how
you would approach that question.
Remember, the Fitbit -- and this is true
even more so of smartphones -- tells you just the kind
of information the Court was very concerned about in
Kyllo.  It tells you -- modern smartphones work the
inside of people's house.  They work the appliances
and -- and they have cameras.  They also monitor the
inside of people's bodies.
JUSTICE ALITO:  What if the phone in this
case was an old-fashioned flip-phone?  So it had the
capacity to take pictures, but a much more limited
memory.  Would it -- would it be a different case?
MR. FISHER:  Well, I think you may want to
-- that will be part of your conversation in the next
case perhaps.  I think the easiest way to decide the
case right now in 2014 is simply say:  Digital evidence
kept on modern cell phones are different than physical
items.  I don't think it's really worth going back in
time to the most rudimentary device and having that
argument.
JUSTICE ALITO:  What if the person had on
his person a compact disk with photos saved on that?
MR. FISHER:  I think that might be the same
kind of case as you have now.  Remember, the -- the
phone in this case had a removable memory card, as many
still do, which by the way we were going to talk about
the destruction of evidence.  That's one answer to the
destruction of evidence problem.  It couldn't possibly
have arisen with respect to the evidence at issue
because it was on a removable memory card that couldn't
be erased remotely or password protected.
Now, we've given lots of arguments in the
brief that explain why the government's arguments as to
wiping simply don't stand up.  And --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Mr. Fisher, would you --
an earlier question, you didn't finish the answer.  You
were describing a difference between the downloading by
police into databases that they keep forever.  What
happens with materials that are returned pursuant to a
search warrant?  Are they precluded from doing that?
MR. FISHER:  No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I wasn't sure I
understood your --
MR. FISHER:  Right.  So I take it that the
ordinary rule is if the police lawfully seize evidence
in the physical world, if it's a -- if it's a physical
item, it might at some point have to be returned to the
owner of it.  But if it's something that can be made a
photocopy of or a photo, it remains in police files as
lawfully obtained information they can use indefinitely
into the future.
You have real problems, however, when you
apply that typical rule to digital information, because
now -- again, what I understand -- and the government
itself -- the Federal Government in Footnote 3 of its
reply brief in Wurie acknowledges that it's keeping in
an ever-growing Federal database at least some of the
information seized from smartphones.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  I don't know
that you've answered my question.
MR. FISHER:  I'm sorry.  Maybe I didn't
understand it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Which -- can they do the
same thing once a search warrant is --
MR. FISHER:  Oh.  No.  Well, not
necessarily, because the beauty of a search warrant is
it can delineate retention rules.  It can say here's --
here's how long you're allowed to keep the information,
here's who's allowed to look at it and who's not.  And
it can --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Frankly, I have to tell
you, I don't ever remember a prosecutor coming to me
with that kind of delineation.
MR. FISHER:  Well, I think that, Justice
Sotomayor, that is what is starting to now happen in the
digital world, because we just have new and different
concerns that had arisen -- than had arisen in the past.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Fisher, would there be
exigencies that would allow police to look at cell
phones?  And if so, what would those exigencies be?
MR. FISHER:  Absolutely.  There -- there
would be times at the scene where exigencies would allow
it.  First of all, the two officer safety arguments the
other side makes about a hypothetical bomb or a
confederate ambush, as this Court already recognized in
Chadwick, would give exigent circumstances.  The concern
about remote wiping we think, and as the experts have
described in the amicus brief filed by EPIC and many
others, we don't think would ever arise -- give rise to
a situation where that was a legitimate concern, but in
a very odd world, yes.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't understand your
first exigent circumstances.  When there is a bomb, but
you can't -- you don't know whether there's a bomb until
you look in the phone.  Whether -- whether his
associates are on the way to, you know, to kill the
officer and -- and release their confederate, you don't
know until you look into the phone.  So how -- you know,
how can that possibly be an exigent circumstance?
MR. FISHER:  Well, I think surrounding facts
and circumstances -- in Footnote 9 in Chadwick, what the
Court said, dealing with a locked briefcase where you'd
have the same problem, Justice Scalia, surrounding facts
and circumstances might indicate.
There's a hypothetical, I believe it's on
page 1 of the amicus brief filed by the State
investigative agencies, that I think gives a classic
textbook example of how exigent circumstances might
apply.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It seems to me it would
almost never -- you would never be able to say, you
know, surrounding circumstances give me reason to
suspect that there's a bomb in the phone.
MR. FISHER:  No.  I --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Give me reason to suspect
that his confederates are on the way.
MR. FISHER:  I think you're right that
that's going to be an extraordinarily rare circumstance.
All I'm saying is if you had that extraordinarily rare
circumstance, you would not need to get a warrant.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  There -- there is not much
authority that I could find, if the lawyer is arrested
and -- and they want to read his whole briefcase or you
want to read a year's diary.  And you cite -- I think
it's page 7 of your brief -- the Learned Hand 1916 case.
Is that about the best discussion you -- you can find?
I didn't find anything much different.
MR. FISHER:  Justice Kennedy, we looked high
and low as well --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Right.
MR. FISHER:  -- and did not find cases
involving briefcases full of documents.  And there's
only one or two stray mentions of a diary.  Judge
Friendly also mentions the diary situation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Because it's important if
we're going to try to formulate some standard which
limits the extent of the search, and that's one of --
that's one of the problems in this case.  If -- if say
we rule for the government in its case, maybe it's not
quite fair to ask you, but if we rule for the government
in its case in Wurie, for the Federal case --
MR. FISHER:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- and there's no -- it's
not an exigent circumstances, is there some standard
where we could draw the line which would still result in
a judgment in -- in your favor?  Maybe that's not quite
a fair question.  You're not -- you're not answering --
you're not arguing the -- the government's case.
MR. FISHER:  I don't want to tread on both
lawyers in that case, but certainly in my case, we have
an exploratory search where not even the State has
contended the amount of information looked at is
equivalent to what somebody could have carried around in
the old days.
Can I say something?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm going to say
something first.
MR. FISHER:  Okay.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  If -- if the phone
rings, can the police answer it?
MR. FISHER:  There are cases on that,
Mr. Chief Justice.  Obviously, this Court hasn't
addressed them.  All the cases we've found are cases
where the police already had a warrant in hand and
they've been held that, yes, the police officers can
answer the phone in that circumstance.  Unquestionably,
the police officers could look at the screen.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me.  A warrant for
what?  A warrant for examining the phone?
MR. FISHER:  For somebody's arrest.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  For somebody's arrest.
Well, how does that extend to your ability to answer his
phone?
MR. FISHER:  No, I'm sorry, Mr. Justice
Scalia.  I think also in -- to -- to effectuate an
arrest and -- and an immediate search of the area.
Now, certainly you could look at the caller
ID coming through because that would be in plain view.
But if I can return to Justice Kennedy's question about
the diary.  Because there's a couple of important
aspects to that I hope to be able to draw out.
The reason I think that you don't find diary
cases when you look for them is because people hardly
ever carry a diary outside the home with them.  It was
kept in a private drawer in the bedroom or wherever it
might be kept, and in the highly, highly unusual
circumstance where somebody did, you might have a hard
case.
This is an -- this is the opposite world.
The modern reality of smartphones is that it is an
indispensable item for everyday life of a modern
professional and, indeed, most anyone.  You can't leave
the house without it and be -- consider yourself to be
responsible and safe.  And so you take -- to take a
world where the police might try to say, we can get the
stray diary because of the importance of the categorical
rule under Robinson and try to apply that into a world
where everybody has everything with them at all times --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, including the
criminals who are more dangerous, more sophisticated,
more -- more elusive with cell phones.  That's the --
that's the other side of this.
MR. FISHER:  Well, Justice Kennedy, the
Fourth Amendment has -- has a balance already built in
in that respect.  We're not saying they can't look at
digital information.  We're just saying that when they
seize it, they can freeze the contents and then go get a
warrant and search what they're allowed to search and
keep it under the rules of that warrant.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Is it significant
in -- in this case that the information was not
protected by a password?
MR. FISHER:  No, I don't think either
side --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  That doesn't -- that
doesn't affect the expectation of privacy?
MR. FISHER:  If the other side were making
an argument that this wasn't even a search, then I think
that might be an argument they would deploy.  But I
think, and I don't want to speak for the government, but
I think that they also agree that password protection
doesn't matter.  And it certainly doesn't matter under
their argument as to what information they get.  I mean,
their position is if we seize a corporate executive's
smartphone at the scene that is locked and protected
under password, if we can get that information out back
at our lab, we get it all and we don't have to ask for a
warrant and we can keep it as long as we want.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No.  I know they
argue that it doesn't matter, but I'm just wondering if
your position is weakened by the fact that the
individual did not seek the greater protection of a
password.
MR. FISHER:  No, I don't think so.  People
don't lock their homes, they don't lock their
briefcases.  Simply having it inside the smartphone
protected on the person is enough to trigger the Fourth
Amendment, and I think to sustain the arguments I've
advanced.
If I could reserve the rest of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Dumont.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF EDWARD C. DUMONT
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT
MR. DUMONT:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
As Mr. Fisher has said, if Mr. Riley had
been carrying physical photographs in his pocket at the
time of his arrest, there's no dispute that arresting
officers could have looked at those photographs to see
whether they contained evidence of crime.  Now, what
would have been reasonable in that situation does not
become constitutionally unreasonable simply because
Mr. Riley instead carried his photographs in digital
form on a smartphone.  The shifted digital format does
not make the photographs any less his papers or
effects --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Counsel, in one of our
Court decisions in the past, a series of justices
asked -- or noted that many of our rules were based on
practical considerations.  Practically speaking, a
person can only carry so much on their person.  That is
different because carrying a billfold of photographs is
a billfold of photographs.  It's, you know, anywhere
from one to five generally and not much more.  But now
we're talking about potentially thousands, because with
digital cameras people take endless photos and it spans
their entire life.
You don't see a difference between the two
things?  What -- what has now become impractical.  A GPS
can follow people in a way that prior following by
police officers in cars didn't permit.
MR. DUMONT:  We certainly see a distinction,
and we certainly see the possibility that in some cases
there could potentially be a constitutional difference.
What we don't see is that in this case -- on the facts
of this case or anything like it, like the ordinary
case, there is a constitutional difference from those
phenomenon.  The theory --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  By the way --
MR. DUMONT:  The theory, even if I'm
carrying only five photographs or if I'm carrying two
letters as was the case in the Chiagles case, for
instance, that Judge Cardozo decided in the '20s, they
are likely to be very personal, very private
photographs.  So I'm not sure that the expansion of
volume increases the invasion of privacy.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Dumont, on your argument
and on the government's -- the Solicitor General's
principal argument, too, a person can be arrested for
anything.  A person can be arrested for driving without
a seat belt.  And the police could take that phone and
could look at every single e-mail that person has
written, including work e-mails, including e-mails to
family members, very intimate communications, could look
at all that person's bank records, could look at all
that person's medical data, could look at that person's
calendar, could look at that person's GPS and find out
every place that person had been recently because that
person was arrested for driving without a seat belt.
Now, that strikes me as a very different
kind of world than the kind of world that you were
describing where somebody has pictures of their family
in a billfold.  Doesn't it strike you that way?
MR. DUMONT:  I think the answer there -- one can
always think of marginal cases where there might be
concern.  It is not the core case, it is not the
typical --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I don't know why this is a
marginal case.
MR. DUMONT:  It is not the --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Your argument and the
Solicitor General's principal argument applies to any
arrest.  And it applies to everything on a cell phone.
People carry their entire lives on cell phones.  That's
not a marginal case.  That's the world we live in, isn't
it?
MR. DUMONT:  We hear that repeatedly.  The
facts of this case are not somebody's entire life on a
cell phone.  This cell phone had a handful of contacts.
I don't think this is in the record, but what we understand
is there were 250-some odd contacts, there were about 59
photos and there were perhaps 42 videos that ranged from
30 to 45 seconds.  Maybe a minute each.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  The Court is to make a
rule not for this particular case, but for this category
of cases.  And I think what Justice Kagan pointed out is
very nervous concern.  That is, take an offense like
failing to buckle up, even driving under the influence,
not gang crimes, which is what we have in this case.
It's your rule, then, that the cell phone is fair game
no matter what the crime, no matter how relatively
unimportant the crime.  Is it all misdemeanors, all
misdemeanors and that opens the world to the police.
MR. DUMONT:  It is true that the Court
typically and properly, in this area, draws categorical
lines and that is what the Court said in Robinson it was
doing.  Now, it also is true the Court has repeatedly
said that those lines are drawn based on the generality
of cases.  They are not drawn based on the marginal case
where the hypothetical potential problematic -- and this
case is in the heartland.  It's a violent crime.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, Mr. Dumont, I guess
what I'm trying to suggest to you is that you call it
marginal, but, in fact, most people now do carry their
lives on cell phones, and that will only grow every
single year as, you know, young people take over the
world.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I mean, that's not a
marginal case.  That's what -- they're computers.  They
have as much computing capacity as -- as laptops did
five years ago.  And -- and everybody under a certain
age, let's say under 40, has everything on them.
MR. DUMONT:  I think you need to look at the
generality of cases.  And in the generality of cases,
first of all, you will not be dealing with minor crimes.
You'll be dealing with serious crimes.  And second,
you'll be dealing with police who are trying to do their job
by looking --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Are you saying we're just
resting on the discretion of the officer?  Because if
that's so, then that leads to the next question.  Well,
if that's so, then we'll get a warrant.
MR. DUMONT:  I'm saying that you're -- you
are trying to draw lines that can be applied by the
officer in the field and often when there's not time to
get a warrant either because there's a need to know the
information now or because --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, let's leave -- let's
leave exigent circumstances out of it.  That -- that's
an easy case.  You're not arguing for exigent
circumstances here.
MR. DUMONT:  What I'd say is that -- to go
back to Justice Scalia's point -- our argument is that
the same things that Mr. Fisher concedes, the same
interests that Mr. Fisher, I think, concedes justify the
search of the person and the seizure of the phone, which
are the exigent circumstances type arguments.  In other
words, they are the need to protect officer safety and
the need to preserve evidence.  And the fact is you
don't know with a phone.  The officer doesn't know with
a phone whether there's a safety concern or whether
there's an evidentiary concern without looking at the
phone.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Have there ever
been -- is there any basis for the generality that
there's a safety concern?  Do you have a case where the
-- certainly not where the phone exploded, but when the
phone was used to trigger a device or anything like
that?
MR. DUMONT:  We don't have a specific case.
What I can point you to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Do you have a
general case?
MR. DUMONT:  What I can point you to,
here's a case from California.  I don't think it's cited
in the briefs.  It's called Natoli.  There's one where
there's a late night arrest.  It -- it starts with a
speeding ticket, and it -- off the highway late at
night.  It develops that, you know, maybe there's more
going on and the person looks to be under the influence.
Taken out of the car.  Then it looks like there might be
a gun.  The officer looks at the cell phone.  The first
thing he sees when he turns the phone on is a picture of
what appears to be the driver standing with two assault
rifles, arms akimbo like this, posing with his assault
rifles.  Now, I would say that that changes the
situational awareness of the officer in that situation
and provides valuable information that was necessary at
the time and could not have been gotten later at the
station house with a warrant.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What does that have
to do with my question about a bomb?
MR. DUMONT:  I'm merely saying that it has
to do with safety.  So no, I can't point you to a case
where they stopped Timothy McVeigh, looked at his phone
and saw some notes about bomb making.  I can't give you
that case.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I would assume you need
to operate the phone to set off the bomb, so that once
the police have the phone the bomb is not going to be
set off.
MR. DUMONT:  That is true. But it's also true
of all the objects in all the Court's prior cases.  In
other words, once in Robinson the police had secured the
cigarette pack, there was no question, whether there was
a razor blade in it or just heroin --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Could I just ask you --
MR. DUMONT:  -- that neither the evidence --
the evidence was not going to be destroyed and the
weapon was not going to be used.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Could I ask you a
question about the extent of your theory?  We're talking
about smartphones, which are minicomputers.  But your
theory would apply to iPads, computers, anything that's,
for example, sitting next to a person in a car, at their
desk if they are arrested at their desk, anywhere if
they are carrying it in their hand because you see a lot
of people carrying the iPad or something comparable, a
tablet of some sort.  Your theory would permit a search
of all of those things.
MR. DUMONT:  Our theory extends to objects
that are on the person or immediately associated with,
for instance in a purse.  It doesn't necessarily extend
to things that are sitting nearby.  The Court has drawn
a clear line there.  It's a line, like any other line--
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, how would you?
What is the rule?  You're saying on the person.  Suppose
it's in the car in a holder or suppose it's in the
passenger's seat?  Are you saying that's -- you don't
want to express an opinion about that?  You only want to
talk about what's in somebody's pocket?
MR. DUMONT:  I'll say I think the Court has
drawn different rules for that situation.  If it's on
the car seat and if the person's been removed from the
car, then under Gant if there's reason to think there
might be evidence of the crime of arrest on the phone
they can search it and if there's not they can't.
That's the rule the Court drew, but it's a different
rule Under Robinson.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, suppose I'm carrying
my laptop in my backpack.
MR. DUMONT:  And if your backpack is on your
back when you're arrested, yes, we think that's -- we
think that's included.
So let me go back to this volume question,
because there are two things about a cell phone that
might justify some sort of a special rule.  There's the
volume question and then there's the connectivity and
networking question.
Now, as to the volume question, first of all
we don't really have it here, but I concede that we
could have it in other cases.  And what they seem to be
really concerned about is the idea that if you have
enough information of enough different kinds on this
device and the police spend enough time looking at it,
they could build the kind of near-remarkable portrait
that some of the Justices alluded to in Gant, or, sorry,
in Jones, that -- that really would be qualitatively
different from what has ever been done before.
Now, there are differences from Jones.  That
was government surveillance and this is some choice the
person has made to keep a certain amount of information
on a phone and then to have it in his pocket.  We think
there's a possibility you could get to that kind of
qualitatively different search, but it is miles away
from this kind of case and from the heartland case.
JUSTICE BREYER: Okay, so what’s your rule? So there are three
possibilities:  Possibility one, smartphone, no, get a
warrant, unless exigent circumstances.  Possibility two,
yes, it's just like a piece of paper that you find in
his pocket.  Or possibility three, sometimes yes,
sometimes no.  All right, which of those three is yours?
MR. DUMONT:  Our possibility -- our position
is that the core information like this -- that is
contacts, photographs --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, no, I mean of my three
choices.  I mean, call the first choice never except
exigent without a warrant; always, you don't need a
warrant; or three, somewhere in between.  Which of the
three choices is yours?
MR. DUMONT:  It's in between with an
explanation.
JUSTICE BREYER:  In between.  Okay.  Now
we're in between.  Then I get to my follow up question.
MR. DUMONT:  The explanation --
JUSTICE BREYER:  My follow up question is,
please tell me what your in-between rule is?
MR. DUMONT:  Right.  And my in-between rule
with the explanation is that for information that is of
the same sort that police have always been able to seize
from the person, that includes diaries, letters, all
other kinds of evidence, purely evidentiary,
photographs, address books, for evidence of that same
sort, the same rule should apply.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, I don't understand
that, Mr. Dumont.  Everything --
MR. DUMONT:  The digital format should not
make a difference, and I would leave for --I would leave
for a different day -- sorry, but the last explanation
to this is I would leave for another case --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Dumont --
MR. DUMONT:  -- the question of whether the
volume --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm sorry.  Justice
Kagan has a question.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Dumont, I guess I just
don't understand.  You said if it could be.  I mean,
everything could be reduced to a piece of paper.  All
your bank records, you could have them on you.  All your
medical records, you could just happen to have them on
you.  I mean, that would be so of absolutely everything,
wouldn't it?
MR. DUMONT:  The bank records, of course,
the police can get from the bank because they're the
bank's records, right, with a subpoena, not with -- not
with a search warrant.  So to the extent that a lot of
people --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, I think that the
notion that you could get them legally in some other way
has never justified an illegal search otherwise.
MR. DUMONT:  No, but I think it goes to the
question of how sensitive is this information that we're
being told is now routinely stored on --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Your rule is sometimes.  So
I say:  Sometimes; what's that?  And you say if it is
the kind of thing that the police could have searched
for if it wasn't on the computer, then they can search
for it on the computer.  Now, since they can search for
everything in your pockets before when it isn't the
computer, then why isn't yours everything?  I mean, by
the way, they don't know whether a call is or is not
going to turn out to be evidence when it's in your trash
box if that's, or wherever you put it, I don't know.
They don't know that 'til they read it.
So I guess what you're saying is I thought
it was category two, sometimes, but really it's category
three, always.  Now, why am I wrong?
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I think he inverted two and
three, but --
JUSTICE BREYER:  That gives you time to
think.
MR. DUMONT:  If the police are looking for
-- have a legitimate investigative purpose, they're
looking at the information on the phone to see whether
there is evidence of the crime of arrest or of another
crime, it seems to us that they should, at a minimum, be
able to look at the same kind of information they could
have looked at in any other previous context, the
address book, the contacts, the phone numbers, the notes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So but that's a
significant concession on your part, isn't it, because
the smartphones carry a lot of information that would
not have been the sort of thing police could look at
before.  GPS tracking information, the police could
never have gotten that before.  So you are saying that
is protected?
MR. DUMONT:  I'm not saying it's protected.
I'm saying I think it raises a different set of issues.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  It seems to me that in
order to try to give some answer to Justice Kagan's
concerns that maybe the distinction ought to be between
serious and nonserious offenses -- offenses.  I don't
think that exists in our jurisprudence.  Correct me if
I'm wrong.
MR. DUMONT:  I think that's correct.  The
Court has previously declined to draw that line.  Now,
another --
JUSTICE BREYER:  By the way, GPS
information, I don't want to admit it, but my wife might
put a little note in my pocket".  Steven, remember, turn
right at the third stoplight, proceed three blocks
forward.  Of course you could have looked at information
that showed where you had been and where you were going
as long as it was on paper.  Now it's in a GPS.  So how
does your rule help?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The GPS would see if
he did, in fact, turn right at the thing or had gone
somewhere else.
MR. DUMONT:  I think the -- again, we can
conceive of situations in which the amount of
information and the kind of search would lead to a
qualitatively different result.  We think that it --
JUSTICE ALITO:  You could amend your answer
and it's -- the answers are for you, not for us.  But
you could amend your answer to say not just anything
that somebody could have had.  The person could have had
a diary that records every place the person has ever
gone in the last year, it's theoretically possible.  But
you could say something that has a realistic analogue in
the predigital era.  We have a similar -- a problem here
that's similar to the problem in the Jones GPS case.
You have a rule of law that was established in the
predigital era and now you have to apply it in the
digital era or you're asked to apply it in the digital
era where the technology changes a lot of things.  But
if there is a close analogue in the digital era to
something that would have been allowed in the predigital
era, that may be a different story.
MR. DUMONT:  We certainly think that's right
and we think that that covers, you know, the information
that was at issue here, the photographs, the short
videos.  It certainly covers address information,
contact information, messages, text messages.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But you're not willing to
limit -- you're not willing to limit your position to
searches that either are in order to protect the officer
or in order to preserve evidence or, number three, in
order to find evidence of the crime of arrest.  You're
not willing to limit it that way?  You would say
whatever is on the person, you can -- you can search.
MR. DUMONT:  We think of the available
limits that is by far the best historically based and
the most plausible one.  So to say that -- and because
the cases, the old cases, you pointed out that --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But that gets you into the
arrest for, you know, for not wearing a seat belt, and
it seems absurd that you should be able to search that
person's iPhone. And you can avoid that if you -- if
you say, look, in the vast majority of cases, this is
not going to be a problem, unless the officer can
reasonably be looking for evidence of the crime of
arrest.  That will cover the bad cases, but it won't
cover the -- you know, the seat belt arrest.
MR. DUMONT:  We think that that could be a
perfectly reasonable ruling, and there's precedent in
the Court, obviously, for that rule.  There's two things
we would say about that.  First, it ought to be an
objective standard in line with all of this Court's
Fourth Amendment jurisprudence.  It shouldn't depend on
what exactly was written down on the -- on the booking
sheet.  It should be was there probable cause to arrest
or what crimes was there probable cause to arrest for,
and it also should include a plain view concept --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Or how -- there's an
analogue with photos.  The arrested person has photos,
pre-digital age.  Of course you can look at them.  On
the phone there are photos.  Absolutely analogous,
except there are 10,000.  It's indeed his entire life
history in photos.
MR. DUMONT:  All right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  On your rule, can the
policeman look at the photos by analogue or not, because
there are 10,000.  Okay?  What's the answer?
MR. DUMONT:  In theory, yes, the police can
look.  In practice --
JUSTICE BREYER:  What we have is, by the
way -- you understand where I'm going.  I think there
are very, very few things that you cannot find in
analogue to in pre-digital age searches.  And the
problem in almost all instances is quantity and how far
afield you're likely to be going.  Do I accept your
rule?
MR. DUMONT:  The fundamental doctrinal
basis, rational basis of the Robinson rule, I think, is
that the fact that arrests -- this is what Justice
Powell said and Justice -- well, the fact of the arrest
necessarily and legitimately largely abates the privacy
interest of the individual and his person and anything
he or she has chosen to carry on the person.
Now, modern technology makes it possible for
people to choose to carry a great deal of information.
But that doesn't change the fact that the reasonable
expectation, if a person is subject to custodial arrest,
is that the police will search the person and look at
things that they find --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Dumont, is -- are you
saying, essentially, that nobody has any expectation of
privacy, or that somebody has a dramatically reduced
expectation of privacy in anything that the person
actually wants to keep on them at all times?  In other
words, one has to keep one's cell phone at home to have
an expectation of privacy in it?
MR. DUMONT:  No, we're not saying that at
all.  But what we are saying is that people do make
choices, and those choices have consequences.  And the
consequence of carrying things on your person has always
been that if you are arrested, the police will be able
to examine that to see if it is evidence of crime.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Dreeben?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MICHAEL R. DREEBEN
FOR UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE
SUPPORTING RESPONDENT
MR. DREEBEN:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I think that it may be helpful to the Court,
before exploring possible alternatives to a categorical
Robinson rule, to at least briefly understand why there
is a categorical Robinson rule and how cell phones
implicate many of those concerns.  The categorical
Robinson rule responded to the fact that when a person
is carrying something on their person and they are
subject to a legitimate probable cause arrest, their
expectations of privacy are considerably reduced.  Not
eliminated, but considerably reduced.
And the government, on the other hand, has
several very compelling interests at the moment of
arrest that are vindicated by conducting a thorough
search of the person and the things he has.  It avoids
the destruction of evidence.  It protects officer
safety.  And it allows the discovery of evidence that's
relevant to the crime of arrest to enable prosecution.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But, Mr. Dreeben, if
the -- the understanding was, when there's time, get a
warrant.  So here, you can seize the phone and you can
secure the phone, and you could go to a magistrate and
within an hour get permission to search.  But what is
the reason for cutting out the magistrate here?  It's
not -- the instrument itself is not going to be in any
danger because the police have taken it and they've
disabled it.  So I don't understand why we cut the
warrant out of this picture.
MR. DREEBEN:  So several answers to that,
Justice Ginsburg.  The first is that you could probably
say the same thing about almost everything that is
seized under Robinson and Edwards.  Once it's in the
police's hands, they can throw it in the back of the
patrol car in the trunk, and it would be safe and they
could go get a warrant.  But the balance has always been
struck at the moment of arrest to allow the officers to
fulfill the compelling interests in the matters that
I've previously described.
The second, and I think very critical thing
about cell phones is they do differ in the amount of
information that a person can carry on them and the
amount of revelation about a person's life.  That is
true.  They also differ in that they greatly facilitate
criminal activity.  They contain a great deal of
evidence, and most critically, they are subject to
destruction in a way that ordinary physical items are
not.  Even if an officer has a cell phone in his hand,
he cannot guarantee, unless it's disconnected from the
network or somehow protected from the network, that
there won't be a remote wipe signal sent to the phone
that will wipe its data.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Do you have cases
where that has happened?
MR. DREEBEN:  I have anecdotal reports from
the F.B.I. that that has happened, that they have looked
into the question of to what extent can you protect a
phone through the use of things like Faraday bags.  I
think one of the important things to notice, if you
throw a phone into a Faraday bag, which is supposedly
going to be able to block network signals, when you open
it up, it has to be similarly shielded or it will pick
up a signal from a cell tower, and that will wipe the
phone.  And the F.B.I. tried to build a Faraday room in
a building that they later discovered Verizon had put up
a cell tower on it, and that cell tower put out a strong
enough signal to go right through the Faraday room.
JUSTICE BREYER:  We've had a couple of
States where this has been so, where they've had a rule
that you can't search, for Michigan, I think, and
Vermont.  And are there any instance out of those States
where these scenarios have taken place?
MR. DREEBEN:  I can't speak, Justice Breyer,
for the experience in those States.
JUSTICE BREYER:  You don't know of any.  I
take it you don't know.
MR. DREEBEN:  I don't have any access to the
information about that.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  So isn't this a
problem that might be postponed because we have warring
technologies, et cetera?  And is it -- you're saying now
we should allow searches of all cell phones because
there might be a technology that hasn't yet in fact been
used in any of the States that have this rule.  That
sounds a little hypothetical.  I'm not quite sure how to
handle it.
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, I think that there is
clearly the technology available and growing technology
to wipe phones remotely.  But the other critical problem
that comes back to Justice Ginsburg's point about
getting a warrant is encryption technology is
increasingly being deployed in cell phones.  That is
something that clearly is on the rise.  And when a phone
is turned off or the lock kicks in and the phone
encrypts, it can be almost impossible to get into it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  How about putting -- let
me stop you, because you were making that argument in
your brief, and I have three related questions.  Okay?
Why can't you just put the phone on airplane
mode?
MR. DREEBEN:  Can I answer that one first?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Yes.
MR. DREEBEN:  First of all, it is not always
possible to find airplane mode on all the 500, 600
models of phones that are out there.  The officer has a
lot of things to do when he arrests suspects.  Say he
arrests five suspects in a car and they each have three
cell phones.  Trying to find and put each one of them
into airplane mode and then go the further step and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You're -- you're
confusing me, because if you haven't searched on the
scene, then the wipe is going to happen.  If you've had
enough time at the precinct to put it on airplane mode,
the wipe hasn't happened.
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, that's not necessarily
true, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm a little confused
about what this argument is.  Either you do it at the
scene and you protect the phone --
MR. DREEBEN:  Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- or you do at the
station, and you have enough time to get the warrant by
putting it on airplane mode.
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, you don't necessarily
have enough time to get the warrant if you do it at the
scene.  That -- that's certainly true.  I think even --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I don't disagree.  Put
it on airplane mode.
MR. DREEBEN:  Even if you bring it back --
the assumption that we're going to have airplane mode
and that the Court should craft a constitutional rule
around airplane mode assumes that cell phones are not
going to be able to be used in airplanes in the next
five years and that manufacturers will continue to make
an easily available button for airplane mode.  I don't
think the Court should found a constitutional ruling on
that assumption.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I -- I don't disagree
with you, but you're asking us for constitutional
principle based on technology that might or might not do
something in one or more cases, but not in the
general --
MR. DREEBEN:  I think what I'm trying to
suggest, Justice Sotomayor, is the traditional
justifications for search-incident-to-arrest include the
potential for destruction of evidence.  That is very
real today.  It's Petitioner who's asking for a new
rule.  We're asking for the application of the Robinson
rule, and if the Court is not willing to apply the
Robinson rule, then primarily, I think the best rule to
apply would be the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, but that's not --
that's not quite accurate.  What would you do under the
Robinson rule with an attorney's briefcase?
MR. DREEBEN:  The attorney's briefcase may
present particularized problems because of
attorney-client privilege.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And -- and doesn't that
present the exact problem that every cell phone has?
MR. DREEBEN:  No.  I was referring --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So I don't think that
quite works for you.
MR. DREEBEN: I -- I was referring -- I was referring to the
privilege rule.  The lower courts that have looked at
it; this Court has not.  Lower courts that have looked
at the question have said that if a person is arrested
holding a briefcase, the police can open the briefcase,
whether locked or unlocked, and look at its contents.
They can't just go through the contents for prurient
interest.
They can look, however, for evidence that's
relevant to criminal activity, and they do that in a way
that is minimally invasive of privacy.  They're not just
doing it for the sake of doing it.  They're looking for
evidence.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, the tax return
that's on -- some -- some cell phones have tax returns,
so you have the tax return of the jaywalker, looking for
a crime.
MR. DREEBEN:  Yes, and I -- and I -- I would
acknowledge, Justice Kennedy, that if the Court is
looking for a rule that limits the ability of police to
search cell phones, because cell phones are different
from paper items in some respects, but not all, that the
most reasonable rule to apply would be one that says
when there is reason to believe that there's evidence of
the crime of arrest on the phone, the officers can look
for that.  When there is not, they can't.  That will --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Can I ask you a question
about that, Mr. Dreeben, because given the variety of
things that these cell phones have in them, it seems as
though that's -- you know, it sounds good as a limiting
principle, but it ends up you can imagine in every case
that the police could really look at everything.
So I'll give you an example.  It's sort of
like this case.  Somebody is arrested for a gun crime
and now we're going to look at all the various things
that might be related to a gun crime.  So whether he's
bought guns, whether -- you know, what -- what --
whether he's done searches for gun stores.  His e-mails
might something say something about gun possession or
gun purchase.  He might have photographs of him with a
gun.  You know, the whole range of things could relate
to that crime, couldn't it?
MR. DREEBEN:  Justice Kagan, I would
acknowledge that your reasoning is correct in certain
circumstances and for certain crimes.  It would not be
the case for a jaywalking crime or a bar fight or many
other of the minor crimes, seat belt violations, that
are posited on the other side of the equation for
Respondent's or Petitioner's narrower approach to cell
phone searches.
But I do think that a couple of things are
worth thinking about.  First, in a serious offense like
a firearms offense in this case, a drug offense in
Wurie, if the police didn't -- went, got a warrant, they
would be looking at all the same things, because the
only way to execute the warrant on the phone would be to
engage in at least a cursory search of everything on the
phone to see whether it related.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, they would be looking
at the same things, but the whole idea of a warrant is
that a neutral magistrate tells you that you can look at
those things and has an opportunity to limit it in
whatever way the neutral magistrate feels is
appropriate --
MR. DREEBEN:  Well, I --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- and that's a protection.
MR. DREEBEN:  I -- I'm not sure that I would
go so far as to say the neutral magistrate can narrow
the warrant in any way that he sees appropriate.  This
Court's decisions in Grubbs and Dalia say that it's not
appropriate for the magistrate to prescribe the manner
of executing the search.
But I think the more fundamental point, and
this is why I tried to start with the basic bedrock of
Robinson, is that there is a different balance --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Go ahead, please.
MR. DREEBEN:  There is a different balance
at the moment of the arrest.  At that moment society's
interests are at their apogee in locating evidence
relating to the crime of arrest and apprehending related
suspects, and the suspect has a highly reduced privacy
interest.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
4 minutes, Mr. Fisher.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JEFFREY L. FISHER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. FISHER:  Thank you.
I think I heard about four or five different
proposed rules that I want to just go through, each of
them, one at a time.
First, the State talked about a, quote,
"fundamentally different rule," and I think Justices
have already figured out what we say at page 17-18 of
our reply brief, which is that would sweep in virtually
everything on the phone.
To the extent it wouldn't, you'd have a
really difficult struggle on a case-by-case basis to
answer the very difficult question whether any
particular app had fundamentally different information
that existed in the nondigital world.
I also heard a suggestion, that, well, if a
laptop or a smartphone is on somebody's person, that's
different than if it's sitting next to them.  That's not
correct if what the government says about its Chimel --
about passwords and wiping satisfies Chimel.  Remember,
Chimel gives authority to search and seize without a
warrant anything in the grab area if there's a
destruction argument.  So the person who's arrested
sitting at his desk at the office, in reaching area from
his computer would be open to a full search under the
government's rule.
There was also discussion about the
exigencies at the scene of an arrest, needing to prevent
a remote wipe, preventing a password from kicking in.
The first thing to make sure you understand is those
arguments can apply only at the scene.  They don't apply
in this case, where an officer takes the phone back to
the police station and 2 hours later searches through it
as his -- at his leisure.  So all the arguments about at
the scene and what the officer needs to be able to do at
the scene can be left for another case.
And I think Justice Breyer is exactly right.
At the very best what the government has shown is that
there may be certain tightly limited circumstances where
exigent circumstances would apply.
And I want to say a just quick thing on the
password question in particular, which we didn't talk
about but may come up in the next argument.  Pages 12 to
14 of our reply brief, we outline how highly unusual as
a factual matter it would be for a smartphone to be
seized while it's still unlocked and for an officer not
to be able to address concern at the scene that it might
lock later.  And it's also worth noting that in a
footnote we attach, the government is arguing in lower
courts that even if it does lock, that the Fifth
Amendment does not give the person the opportunity to
refuse to divulge the password in -- in response to a
warrant.
So the password argument doesn't have any
play if the government wins the argument its making in
the lower courts.
Justice Kennedy, you suggested the
possibility of distinguishing between serious and
nonserious offenses.  I think, with all due respect,
this Court's decisions in Robinson and Atwater, where
that issues was squarely presented, preclude that kind
of a -- a determination for all the reasons the
government argued in those cases.
And then finally, Justice Scalia, you, I
think, had mentioned a couple times the Gant principle
as applied to this case, evidence that you think you
might find on a phone.  Well, there's two profound
problems with that.  The first is, as the Court
recognized in Kyllo, you need to be sure to protect the
amount of privacy people had at the founding.
And as I said in my opening, the fact that
somebody might incidentally have an item on his person,
even in the rare case, diary or address book, are
leagues away from the kind of information people have
now that were stored in the home and that were
sacrosanct at an arrest, and that's what the thread
throughout history says is an arrest cannot be an
occasion to do that kind of a search.
And, Justice Kagan, you're exactly right.
If you run the Gant test through the world of crimes,
the government might be able to identify a crime here or
there that would be difficult to make an argument about.
But lots of minor crimes, like speeding, as we point out
in our brief, DUI, littering, all kinds of minor crimes,
the person can make a fairly convincing argument
sometimes that evidence on the phone would be relevant
to that crime of arrest.
And so I think that brings me to where I
want to end, which is understanding what the rule the
government propounds would do in terms of just ordinary
police work.  Remember, this case starts with a traffic
stop for an expired license plate.  It is everyday
police work that traffic stops are the beginning of
criminal investigations and a leverage point into
searches.
If you adopt a rule that says, even a Gant
rule, that says if you can make an argument that
evidence on the phone would be relevant to the crime of
arrest, take the suspended license, you may have an
e-mail from the DMV telling you you better come in and
renew.  If that opens up every American's entire life to
the police department, not just at the scene but later
at the station house and downloaded into their computer
forever, I think you will fundamentally have changed the
nature of privacy that Americans fought for at the
founding of the Republic and that we've enjoyed ever
since.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the hearing was
