IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
TONY HENDERSON,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 13-1487
v.  :
UNITED STATES.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, February 24, 2015
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:09 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DANIEL R. ORTIZ, ESQ., Charlottesville, Va.; on behalf
of Petitioner.
ANN O'CONNELL, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
DANIEL R. ORTIZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ANN O'CONNELL, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent  16
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DANIEL R. ORTIZ, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  46
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:09 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 1314-87, Henderson v. The
United States.
Mr. Ortiz.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DANIEL R. ORTIZ
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. ORTIZ:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case asks whether the felon in
possession statute prevents the court from ordering the
government to transfer firearms in its possession that
are owned by a felon to -- to a suitable third party.  The
government now concedes that a court can order transfer
to a licensed gun dealer, who will then sell the
firearms on the owner's behalf.
That concession alone requires reversal.
Neither court below understood that it had such power.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why isn't -- is that
enough for your client?  He wants to sell the firearms
to -- the government is willing to let a licensed
firearms dealer sell them for him?
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.  He -- that's
not his preferred remedy, but that is an acceptable
remedy for him.  In fact, it is one of the remedies that
he -- he suggested below.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Did -- I didn't -- I
thought that before the district court there was only
first, his friend, then his mother, and then another
friend.  Where -- where did he ask the court to allow
the guns to be sold by a licensed gun dealer?
MR. ORTIZ:  Your Honor, you can see the
references on page 71, 170, 132 and page 195 of the
joint appendix.  On page 71 in his renewed request for
disposition of property, Mr. Henderson said that the --
said that the owners  quote, “have property interest in
the firearms which must be accommodated by the sale,
transfer, or storage of the firearms in spite of his own
possessor rights having been curtailed.”  On page 170 --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But that doesn't mention
anything about a gun dealer, and he had been quite
specific about the persons to whom he wanted the guns
transferred.
MR. ORTIZ:  Well, Your Honor, the -- in
the -- in the Miller case, which he cites there for the
proposition that a sale would be an appropriate remedy,
the sale was through -- license -- one of the
possibilities was sale through a licensed gun dealer.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Is there any point in the
references that you made where he said to the court, "I
would like these guns to be consigned to a licensed gun
dealer?”
MR. ORTIZ:  He, twice, Your Honor, did
not -- he did not mention the word licensed gun dealer,
but he said transfer for sale, did not limit it to any
particular person.  And on page 132 in his objections to
the magistrate judge's report and recommendation, he
asked the court to grant the request that this Court
ordered that a person lawfully titled-- entitled to own
the subject firearms collection be awarded possession
and control and direct that the payment --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Wasn't he on a futile
mission in this circuit?
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor, he was on a
futile mission in this circuit.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Because this circuit had
already ruled that any kind of sale by anyone was
prohibited, because he was a felon.
MR. ORTIZ:  That is clear, Justice
Sotomayor.  It is also --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And when he went up on
appeal, he cited the Brown case to the court -- to the
circuit court, which had held that a court-ordered sale
was okay.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And despite him citing
the Brown case, the Eighth Circuit continued with its
own precedent and said no one can sell it, not even the
court.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.  He – he -- he
did make that clear to the Eleventh Circuit, but nowhere
in his request for sale or transfer below did he
specifically limit it to someone who was not a licensed
gun dealer.  This request at the end of his objections
to magistrate judge's report is broad enough to
contemplate that.  He --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I would have
thought -- I would have thought you would oppose the
notion that that would be an adequate -- adequate
relief.  If we're talking about an attribute of
ownership, the owner gets to decide who -- to whom he's
going to sell what he owns.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.  It is -- it
may, in this particular case, because it was one of the
remedies that he actually requested be possible, but it
was not his preferred remedy.  This Court should have
the power to approve sales and transfers so long as the
recipients are not under the control or influence of the
owner, so long as they themselves are legally entitled
to own and possess the guns, and so long --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  How do you -- how does
one tell -- let's take the two people -- two friends
that you opposed -- suggested transferring them to, or
his wife so they could stay within the family.  How does
the Court know whether that transfer will give him
access to the guns so that he will have possession?
MR. ORTIZ:  Your Honor, it's up to the
district court to hold a hearing on the issue.  The
standard is reasonableness.  There's no equitable
analysis.  The court can notify the suggested
transferees that they are giving the -- allowing
Mr. Henderson any access to the guns would constitute a
criminal violation.  The court can, as the Seventh
Circuit suggested, resign-- required signed statements
from the proposed transferees that they will never let
the owner again have control or influence over the use
of the guns.
There are example -- it's a case-by-case
determination however.  In some cases the court may be
persuaded that such transfers would be appropriate.  In
other cases, the court may well not, and that begins --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And under what statutory
rule or authority does the court hold that hearing?
MR. ORTIZ:  This is under its traditional
equitable principles or authority, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Is there a black-letter
case you can cite for the proposition that the court has
this general equitable authority?
MR. ORTIZ:  Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Because I'm wondering if
the government wants to sue under the Tucker Act or
something.  That's what I'm asking.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.  No.  The lower
courts that have done this, Your Honor, have cited in
cases like Wilson and Wright from the D.C. Circuit
before Rule 41 was amended in 1989, pointed out that
they had ancillary jurisdiction to this, and since which
does not violate Kokkonen or Peacock v. Thomas because
in this case, the -- Mr. Henderson was ordered to give
up the guns as a condition of his release.  The court's
returning of the property can be seen as its giving
effect to its own orders and decrees.
JUSTICE KAGAN: You agree that --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And 41(g) is too much of a
stretch?
MR. ORTIZ:  No, Your Honor, we believe that
Rule 41(g) would also work here.  The government takes a
much narrower view of the course.
Mr. Henderson did not actually ask for
relief under 41(g) himself.  He asked for it under
general equitable principles, which other courts have
allowed.  It is the government that tried to narrowly
characterize his request as one under Rule 41(g) and now
takes a ver-- narrow approach towards the word return,
and suggests that he is unable -- he should be unable to
seek transfers of his guns for that reason.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But it's not just return;
right?  It's return the property to the movant.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  So how does this fit under
41(g)?
MR. ORTIZ:  Well, it's a kind of complicated
transaction under Rule 41(g), Your Honor.  He is asking
for the guns to be transferred, and as part of that
transfer, for him to receive payment.  He is not asking
for the gun itself, admittedly.  But he is asking the
court to structure the transaction in such a way that he
would receive the economic benefit.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  He's asking for the stick
and the bundle that's called ownership and -- and the
funds from the transfer.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.  He is asking
for the ownership; in particular, the right to transfer.
And that -- the Eleventh Circuit held that the right, by
transferring the property, he was necessarily receiving
constructive possession of it.  And that holding is
wrong for at least six different independent reasons.
It violates the plain language of the statute.  It
violates traditional understanding, common law
understandings of what possession entails.  It violates
the statutory structure and at least two canons of
statutory interpretation.  It violates the statutory's
purpose by preventing felons from completely alienating
their interest in their guns.
It also allows the government to accomplish
a forfeiture without any due process at all.  And, Your
Honors, it raises serious takings, due process, Fourth
Amendment, Second Amendment, and Eighth Amendment
concerns.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Just so I understand the
scope of your position, you say that the district court
has discretion to figure out, you know, whether a
particular person whom your client or someone else wants
to sell the gun to is an appropriate recipient of the
gun.  But in the absence of that, does the district
court just have discretion or must the district court
ensure that the gun is sold through a gun dealer?
In other words, if -- if your client says
really I want it sold through a gun dealer, is that
discretionary on the district court's part or is that
required?
MR. ORTIZ:  That would be required, Your
Honor, although there might be some argument about the
particular gun dealer.  Maybe the one is -- one is
proposed that petitioner believes would be inappropriate
for some reason.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry, would you
repeat that?
MR. ORTIZ:  Sorry.  The court -- lower
court, Your Honor, would be required under those
circumstances that Justice Kagan had proposed to order a
sale by a licensed gun dealer.  It's possible that there
might be some argument about a particular -- whether a
particular gun dealer would be appropriate or not.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Can I ask you a question
about your argument that a district court would have the
discretion to prevent the transfer of a gun from the
convicted felon to a third party who has some
acquaintance with the convicted felon?  A friend, let's
say.  Let's say it's a friend who lives two blocks away.
Now, if this friend doesn't -- is not himself a
convicted felon or doesn't have some other aspect of his
record that would prevent him from buying a firearm, he
could go to a licensed firearm dealer, presumably, and
purchase it directly; right?
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO:  So why should the
situation -- and that would be true even though he is a
friend of the convicted felon, and there might be some
risk that he would allow the convicted felon to use the
firearm.
So why should the situation be different
when the district court is considering whether the
firearm can be transferred from the convicted felon to
this individual?
MR. ORTIZ:  It shouldn't be any different.
JUSTICE ALITO:  But I thought you
understood -- I thought  you were saying that the district
court would have the discretion to prevent that transfer
if the district court thought there was some risk that
this individual would allow the convicted felon to have
access to the firearm.
MR. ORTIZ:  If, in its hearing, the district
court is not -- insufficiently convinced that there is
independence between the owner and the transferee, it
might, as an exercise  of its equitable
discretion because it is a question of equity, refuse
the direct transfer and put it up for -- put the
firearms for sale through a licensed gun dealer.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And then that individual
could go to the --the licensed firearm dealer and buy
exactly the same gun.
MR. ORTIZ:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO:  So I don't see how the two
positions are --
MR. ORTIZ:  Well, at -- at the extreme -- at
the extreme, Justice -- Justice Alito, imagine a situation
where someone in this position is proposing transfer to an
unindicted drug kingpin, something like that.  The
government presumably would object to the transfer, not
because the person is indicted, the drug kingpin hasn't
yet, but because they have suspicions about his
activity.  The drug kingpin, in that position, could
presumably go to a gun dealer and buy whatever firearms
the drug ping -- kingpin wanted.  But it is not outside
of the court's authority to take that fact  into account.
Those circumstances, I believe, would be
very few and far between.  In most cases, so long as
the -- the transferee is not under the owner's control
and the transferee has the legal ability to own and
possess the guns, the district court, normal course,
should approve the transfer.  But there may --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And who -- who makes the
arrangement?  Who selects the gun dealer and makes the
arrangement for the consignment?  Does the court do
that --
MR. ORTIZ:  I believe --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- or does Henderson do
it?
MR. ORTIZ:  In the cases where the district
courts have -- or the courts below have taken this
approach, Your Honor, it's usually a matter of
negotiation between the government and the felon.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And, Mr. --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, I would assume it
ought to be the gun owner's first preference.  I mean,
why -- why wouldn't that be the normal situation?  His
first preference is that it -- it should be sold to --
to individual X.  And if the court cannot reject that,
it should go there.  And his second preference is, well,
if you reject that, give it to Y.  Wouldn't that be the
normal?
MR. ORTIZ:  That would be the normal, Your
Honor.  We certainly believe that Petitioner should have
that right and the Petitioner's nominee of the gun
dealer should be accepted.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I think Justice Alito's
question is basically why would the district court have
equitable power to turn down any named buyer so long as
it is an actual buyer.  Meaning I can understand he
can't just designate someone who's himself, okay, but if
he's making a good faith sale, why should the district
court have any power to turn that person down?
MR. ORTIZ:  Justice Sotomayor, the district
court shouldn't have that power unless the public
interest, which is always a concern in equity, would be
violated by it, and those cases would be few and far
between.  The one I mentioned, the sale -- the proposed
transfer to an unindicted drug ping -- kingpin might be
extreme enough for that to be possible, but ordinarily,
the district court should have -- not have that power.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And, Mr. Ortiz, why -- why
is it required that the court arrange for some transfer,
whether to a gun dealer or otherwise?  Is it principles
of equity that require that?  Is it something else?
MR. ORTIZ:  Well, Your Honor, there's no
statutory bar to it.  There's always --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Right.
MR. ORTIZ:  -- principles of equity and
there's no --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  There -- there's no
statutory bar, but I guess I'm asking a further question
because you said in response to my earlier question it's
not just discretionary, it's required, you know, at
least to a gun dealer.  And -- and I guess I'm asking:
What is the source of that requirement?
MR. ORTIZ:  Well, that requirement has
several sources.  Part of it is the Due Process Clause
where the government can't basically effect a forfeiture
without affording any process, which the Eleventh
Circuit rule would allow.
There are also concerns under the Takings
Clause.  There's -- there also may well be an
unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment.  There
are Excessive Fine Clause issues.  In fact, this Court
has all of those constitutional doubts and concerns that
argue in favor of the remedy that Mr. Henderson
requested.
If there are no further questions, Your
Honor, we'd like to reserve the remaining time for
rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Ms. O'Connell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANN O'CONNELL
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MS. O'CONNELL:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
If a convicted felon selects a recipient of
his firearms and negotiates the terms of a transfer but
then relies on someone else to deliver the firearms, he
still has the power and intention at a given time to
exercise dominion and control over those firearms, which
amounts to constructive possession.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Where did it -- the
ability to sell something depends upon ownership, not
possession.  If I leave my car with a garage for a
month, the garage has possession, but they can't sell
the car.  I don't have possession, but I can sell the
car.
In other words, I don't see how it gets to
be constructive possession.  All he's asserting is a
right to ownership, which carries with it the right to
sell.
MS. O'CONNELL:  The definition of
constructive possession, which everybody agrees is
included within the word "possession" in 922(g), is when
a person has the power and intention at a given time to
exercise dominion and control over the property, either
directly or through others.
And it's our position that if he is
selecting the recipient, excluding others from receiving
it, and negotiating the terms of the sale, that he has
the power and intention at that time to exercise
dominion and control over those firearms.
We've cited some papers --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But he doesn't -- he
doesn't have much control when the government is holding
them.  He's -- he's just trying to sell them.  He
doesn't want to control them.  He doesn't want to use
them.  He doesn't want to possess them, constructively
or otherwise.  In fact, he wants to get rid of them,
which is what the statute is supposed to accomplish.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.  So we agree that the
convicted felon can sell the firearms.  They can be
sold.  There's a question of who should be selling them.
On our end, we think that they should go to a licensed
firearms dealer, a Federal firearms licensed dealer, or
an FFL, who is licensed and expected to sell firearms.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But do you think that the --
the person can pick the firearms dealer?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yes.  We think that's fine.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, then your -- your
position is internally contradictory, right?  You think
he can pick the firearms dealer.  Well, that's -- that
fits within your very broad definition of control.
MS. O'CONNELL:  I -- I don't think so, and
let me explain why.  When he picks the firearm dealer,
he is not exercising any control over where the firearms
land.  The firearms dealer is an expected and a licensed
seller of firearms, so we don't expect him to keep them
or be subject to the convicted felon's control at all.
If he's nominating someone or selling them
to a specific person, then he has exercised control over
where they're going.  He has excluded others.  And we
think that amounts to constructive possession.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, then suppose his
friend comes forward and says, I don't really intend to
possess this.  I'm going to sell it.
That wouldn't be control?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Well, I think there's -- so
as I was saying, there's a question over who sells it.
We think the FFL.  The Petitioner thinks he can sell it
himself to -- to a friend, and we think that amounts to
constructive possession.
In the middle, there's a question of can a
neutral third party sell them.  And as -- as we think
the -- the Federal firearms licensed dealer is the right
one to sell.  But on my theory of constructive
possession I've just laid out, you point out, yes, any
third party could, if the Court determines that they are
not subject to the felon's control, execute this sale.
However, a Court sitting in equity should
not be required to accept the convicted felon's
designation of somebody who's going to sell --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why -- well, why do you say
that constructive possession only consists of being able
to decide where they go?  Why isn't it constructive
possession to be able to decide who gets them for later
transfer?  Why doesn't -- why isn't that an exercise --
MS. O'CONNELL:  I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- of -- of dominion over
them to some extent?
MS. O'CONNELL:  I think it's harder to say
that you're exercising dominion and control over
something by saying, I want to get rid of these and
please -- please do it.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I want so-and-so to sell
them.  I -- I don't know why that isn't exercising
dominion and control.  It seems to me you're drawing a
very artificial line.  You only -- you -- you can only
exercise dominion and control when you determine where
they end up, but I -- I don't see that that comes
within -- within the term "constructive possession."
MS. O'CONNELL:  If he is just -- if there is
just a party that's appointed to sell the firearms for
him, and we -- we have to get rid of them somehow, and
so we think the best way to do it is to give them to a
licensed firearms dealer.
And -- and, Justice Scalia, you know --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I'm not saying it doesn't
make sense.  I mean, it may make a lot of sense and may
be a very good policy had it been written into this
statute.  But you're building this whole -- this -- this
whole palace upon the word "constructive possession."
And I don't see how constructive possession makes --
makes that distinction.  It really doesn't.
MS. O'CONNELL:  We -- it -- it's just
more -- it's -- it's harder to say he's exercising
dominion and control when they are just being given to a
neutral third party who's going to sell them in an
arm's-length transaction to the entire universe of
buyers that are eligible to --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't think it's harder
at all.  He's deciding where they go for sale.  Why
isn't that exercising dominion and control?
MS. O'CONNELL:  We think you can draw a
distinction.  I think it's also -- the -- the reason
that we think it's okay -- a practical reason why we
think it's okay for the felon to suggest or say where
he -- which firearms dealer he thinks they should go to
is because the government, when we -- when we said, how
about if we just select it, we've said we -- we don't
really have the resources and the power to be going out
and finding firearms dealers, so we're happy if the
felon wants to appoint one.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What if -- what if
he wants to donate them to someone?  He wants to donate
them to the Texas National Guard?  Could he do that?  I
mean, the -- the Federal firearms dealer doesn't help
you there.
MS. O'CONNELL:  No.  I mean, I think any --
when it comes --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No, I mean, no, he
can't do it or --
MS. O'CONNELL:  He cannot.  I think anything
that it comes -- where it comes down to he is exercising
dominion and control over the firearms through the sale
amounts to constructive --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  To the Federal
government he says, I -- I'm sorry about the conviction.
I want to give these to the Federal government.
Can he do that?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Well, I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I -- I guess that's
what he's doing.
MS. O'CONNELL:  He -- he -- he's not.  He
could abandon them to the Federal government, and -- and
he's chosen not to.
But I think in that situation --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why isn't that exercising
dominion and control?  I mean, he says, I'm not going to
propose anything.  I'm going to let the Federal
government have them.
Why isn't that exercising dominion --
MS. O'CONNELL:  The reason why is because we
already have them, frankly.  So he doesn't have to
transfer possession to us in order for us to have them.
All he would be doing is abandoning any interest in
them.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, lucky you.
(Laughter.)
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.  We don't -- and --
and let me -- I also want to make clear --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Ms. O'Connell, can I ask
why -- why it is that we're looking at it in terms of
the sale?  I mean, this is -- this constructive
possession question, it would seem to me to make a lot
more sense to ask the person who's going to end up
getting it, is there a chance that the original owner
can control what that person does with it.
In other words, you know, I give it to my
wife, I give it to my best friend, and I'm really in a
position where I'm controlling the use of the firearm.
And that seems to me to make perfect sense, not the
question of, like, who controls the sale mechanism.
MS. O'CONNELL:  I -- I agree with you,
Justice Kagan, that it makes perfect sense to look at
whether the felon has control over the person that gets
the firearms, but I think there's a separate time period
that we need to look at during the sale to determine
whether he's exercising dominion and control over the --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Where does all this come
from?  I mean, to me, when somebody uses the word
"constructive X," that just means it's not X and -- and
it's a way of pretending that it's X when it isn't.
So I start with that and say what you're
worried about here -- of course, he doesn't have any
possession of it.  You have possession of it.  And what
he wants to do is he wants to put it somewhere so he
can't get ahold of it as long as the law prevents him
from having it.  And you took it from him.  You made him
give it to him.
So what's wrong with his saying, you go give
it to somebody?  Now, if it's too much trouble, the
judge can say he can't make you go to a lot of trouble.
If it's giving it to somebody who might really do
everything he wants, we'll guard against that.  That's
the job of the district judge.  End of case.
Now, what -- what's -- what's -- simple,
realistic, preserves the government's interest.  What's
wrong with it?
MS. O'CONNELL:  I think, Justice Breyer,
that we are not pulling our constructive possession
position out of thin air.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I --
MS. O'CONNELL:  If there are --
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- things like that, and I
don't understand any piece of it that has something in
that like it.
MS. O'CONNELL:  We have -- the cases we've
cited -- I want to draw your attention to the cases
we've cited on pages 25 and 26 of our brief that involve
convicted felons who are out in the world and they are
negotiating sales of firearms.
And they are saying, Hey, buyer, do you want
to buy this firearm?  Let's negotiate the terms.  And
then since I can't possess them, I'm going to have
somebody else drop them off.
And courts have concluded in those
circumstances that's constructive possession.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Okay.  So we don't want
them.  So we'll say to the district judge, Judge, use
some common sense.  Don't let this gun get into the
hands of the crime boss of the area.  Don't let the
things that you were just talking about happen.
And you look to see how much trouble it is,
what's likely to happen, and where it makes sense.  And
if it isn't likely for these bad things to happen, fine.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Those cases, though, are not
concerned with we -- we want to double check on who the
buyer is and see if that buyer is going to be subject to
the convicted felon's control.  They are looking at the
felon's ability to move guns around throughout the
world.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But that seems to me very
different than the situation here, Ms. O'Connell,
because in that case, what the gang leader has is a
situation where somebody else is holding a gun for him
and he can say anything to that person.  He can say, Use
the gun.  He can say, Keep the gun in your closet.  He
can say, Sell it to Person A or Person B or Person C.
He has total freedom over it.
And that's very different from the situation
here where the only thing that a person would -- a
person in Mr. Henderson's position can do is to sell the
gun to a person whom the court approves.
MS. O'CONNELL:  I don't -- I don't think
that any of the cases that I was just referring to
involve situations where the convicted felon has control
over the person that's receiving the gun.  All of them
just have to do with the convicted felon's ability make
a gun appear somewhere when he says to and to show that
he -- he -- he's exercising dominion and control over
the guns by negotiating the terms of their sale and
identifying buyers for them.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yeah, but he doesn't -- he
doesn't have to get anybody to approve the buyer.  I
think what Justice Kagan is saying, it's -- it's a lot
harder to say you have dominion and control when you
have to come before an equity court and say, Please, may
I, you know -- please may I have -- have the gun given
to my best friend or to somebody else.  That doesn't
sound much like dominion and control to me.
MS. O'CONNELL:  We -- we acknowledge that
because the guns are in our possession and the
Petitioner needs a court order in order for them to go
somewhere, that the court is exercising, also, some
control over the weapons; but by reserving this right to
nominate somebody to receive them, the convicted felon
is also exercising control over the weapons.
I'll point out that in the Petitioner's
opening brief when he described the main attributes of
possession, he said the right to control and the right
to exclude.  And his theory in the reply brief that, oh,
I'm just nominating somebody, is certainly an exercise
of the right to exclude other people from getting their
hands on the firearms.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, the reality is --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Is this --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The reality is that the
world is not going to know the guns are there, so -- but
there's no exclusion.  If I wanted to go into that case
and ask the court to consider me rather than the
nominee, it's a court of equity.  And the court could
say I'm the better owner than the person they nominated.
So I don't know what this -- why this
nomination becomes control over the sale if it's the
judge who's approving the sale.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Well, I think because -- I
don't -- I don't know that it's true that any other
person could just come in and ask for the firearms.  I'm
not aware of that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, you're saying the
court is the one who decides whether the person who's
nominated is appropriate or not.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.  The court -- the
court can say yes or no after weighing equitable
factors; but if it says yes, then the felon is
exercising a right to control and to exclude --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But what is it you want to
have happen; that is, the gun was taken away from him.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  He can't possess it
anymore.  It's in the hands of the court, I guess, or
the government.  Okay.
Now, it's his.  It's a 1891 collector's
item; he's a gun collector.  Nobody is claiming it's
forfeitable, or anything.  Okay.  What do you think
should happen?
MS. O'CONNELL:  We think it should go to a
Federal firearms licensed dealer for a sale.  And I -- I
want to make clear that if the -- if the Court disagrees
with our constructive possession theory, I think that's
probably where Justice Scalia is and I don't know how
many other people are in that boat, but I think the
Court should certainly make clear in its opinion that
because the -- the district court looking at this relief
is sitting in equity, it is not required to broker a
sale between a convicted felon and his friend.  The
court could still order that the firearms instead be
sent to an FFL.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But the idea -- the
idea that it should be sold through a Federal firearms
dealer is a late idea.  This was not something the
government proposed at any stage below until the case
came here, right?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.  We certainly didn't
propose it, but I -- I also don't think it's correct to
say that the Petitioner was -- was proposing this as
relief that he wanted.  He did say in the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, what did you
anticipate -- what was your position before you changed
it here in this Court about what should happen to the
guns?
MS. O'CONNELL:  I mean, I think in the
Eleventh Circuit, Federal law enforcement officers that
have these guns and are trying to decide what to do with
them when they get the request coming in from the felons
were -- were certainly under the impression that Howell
controlled and that they certainly couldn't give it to
somebody that was selected by the convicted felon, but
also that they couldn't sell it.  And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Has the Federal
government ever used these guns?
MS. O'CONNELL:  No, and if we --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Not these particular
ones but guns that were forfeited by a convicted felon
and someone who couldn't sell them to anyone, at least
until you changed the position and said they could sell
them to a firearms dealer?  They just sat around
gathering dust?
MS. O'CONNELL:  They -- they do, because we
don't -- if the opinion is affirmed, if there's, you
know, nothing to do with these guns, we don't gain title
to them.  I think there would need to be an extra step.
In a lot of the court of appeals cases that present this
issue, when the convicted felon filed his Rule 41(g)
motion, the government filed, in response, a motion to
prefer permission to destroy the firearms, or something
like that.  But there is nothing like that in this case.
We wouldn't gain title to them.
But -- but we think -- we do agree that our
position, maybe not necessarily in this case, because
the relief that Petitioner was asking for was always to
have it transferred to somebody in specific; but I
completely agree that we have said in briefs before, we
understood Howell to also prohibit a sale.
So what I think the appropriate relief for
this Court to -- what the Court should do to dispose of
the case would be to affirm the Eleventh Circuit's
holding that the convicted felon cannot select somebody
to receive his firearms, but then remand for -- if the
Court adopts our Federal licensed firearms dealer
position, to determine whether that relief --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, that wouldn't --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But the same trap that
you're -- I'm a little bit upset at your brief, frankly,
because in that circuit, he couldn't know that there was
any permissible sale, because that circuit had said
none.
And so to come back and say to us that we
should leave it in their discretion as to whether it
should go to a -- a Federal -- a federally licensed
firearms dealer seems as if the government has set a
trap for a pro se litigant.
MS. O'CONNELL:  We are -- we are certainly
not trying to do that.  The position that I think I've
just articulated was if the Court agrees with what we've
said in our brief and our view of constructive
possession, it should affirm what the Eleventh Circuit
said with respect to he cannot transfer the firearms to
a person of his choosing.  But we -- we would not oppose
a remand for the court of appeals to -- or the district
court to look at this at that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  That's not -- that's
not going to get it done.  You still have the problem of
the court below's view of the Unclean Hands Doctrine.
Do you have a position, the Federal government -- does
the Federal Government have a position on that doctrine
now?
MS. O'CONNELL:  We do not think the Unclean
Hands Doctrine applies in this case.  I'm sorry if that
was not clear from the footnote in our brief, but we
disavowed that holding of the Eleventh Circuit.  We are
perfectly fine with you writing an opinion, and you
should, saying that the Eleventh Circuit should not have
relied on that doctrine.  The Unclean Hands Doctrine
typically requires the -- the uncleanliness of your
hands, to be tied to the equitable relief you are
seeking.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Is that going to be your --
your position -- I mean, because I'm getting away from
the -- what I call the legal mumbo-jumbo.  Looking at
the word "possessed" there, fine.  It's a question of
interpreting that.  And now where I thought, well, he
can't just have it sold to anybody.  I mean, it could be
sold -- you don't want it sold to somebody who's going
to do his bidding every five minutes.  I mean, maybe
he'd even agree with that.
And that now you're taking the opposite
extreme.  You're saying the only way to administer this,
is the only thing really you can do with it, is you can
sell it to a Federal -- through a Federal firearms
dealer.  And there are probably intermediate positions.
You know, I mean, somebody has a very valuable antique
weapon the Normans used to shoot or something.  And he
says, I don't want to sell it.  I'm going to be able to
possess it again in ten years.  They'll forgive me for
whatever it is, and maybe you should accommodate that,
or maybe you shouldn't.
I have no feeling for how important it is to
have an absolute rule.  You've given some good reasons
for it.  What am I supposed to do?  Just say everybody
agrees here you can't sell it your best friend who will
keep it to you, so they're wrong on that rule.  The
government's position's is now let's do something else
with it.  Maybe absolute.  Maybe not.  Go work it out,
Eleventh Circuit.  Go work it out, lower court.  What
should we do?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yeah, I think that's -- that
is a perfectly fine solution.  I think whatever the
Court is going to hold with respect to constructive
possession, we certainly hope that the Court will agree
with us that a transfer to a person selected by the
convicted felon is an act of constructive possession.
But we are totally fine with the licensed firearms
dealer option, and I don't -- it's not something we
could have worked out with him now, because he is still
presenting in this Court the -- the preferred option
that they be given to his friend.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Is this Federal license --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Sold -- that is -- is it
the government's position that it's the licensed firearm
dealer or -- in effect, forfeited to the government?  Is
there any other transferee in the government's view that
would be appropriate?
MS. O'CONNELL:  No.  We think it would have
to be sold, and that the -- he could obtain the economic
value of it because 922(g) only extinguishes his
possessory interest.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But it would have to be
sold, but the sale would be -- or the consignment would
be to a licensed dealer.  You're rejecting the friends.
You're rejecting the wife.
MS. O'CONNELL:  I'm -- I'm rejecting his
ability to decide who to sell it to.  I think I -- I
tried to explain in a -- in response to a question from
Justice Kagan earlier, I don't think it's -- it's
necessarily true that the firearms dealer is the only
neutral third party that can sell firearms.  And under
our theory of constructive possession, he wouldn't be
controlling the destination of the firearms if they were
given to somebody other than a licensed firearms dealer,
who was not subject to the control of the convicted
felon.  But we certainly think that given the statutory
backdrop where firearms are typically sold through an
FFL, that we think that is what Court should do.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Can he select the FFL?  Can
he select the Federal -- I mean, you know, suppose the
government says we want it sold by a firearms dealer in
San Francisco and he says, what?  You know, they don't
sell any guns in San Francisco.  I want it -- you know,
I want it in -- in Dallas.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Can -- can he pick the
firearms dealer?
MS. O'CONNELL:  What we have said is yes, he
can -- the district court has to figure out who's going
to sell these firearms.  And maybe the parties can
nominate firearms dealers.  What I -- what I tried to
say before was that I don't -- the Federal government,
certainly the agencies that I am here representing, have
said they don't necessarily have the resources to, in
every case like this, go out and try to find a firearms
dealer to do this.  So we don't -- and we don't think
it's an act of constructive possession for him to pick
the neutral third party that's going to make an arm's
length transaction to the entire universe of eligible
buyers.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Justice -- Justice
Alito.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, what would happen if
someone is on trial for a felony and has in -- in his
house a number of firearms and then the person is
convicted?  So what -- how can that person deal with the
firearms in the house without exercising constructive
possession in your view?
MS. O'CONNELL:  So, this is probably the one
scenario where somebody like -- I don't know that he
couldn't have made arrangements beforehand, but we don't
really expect him to because he could be holding out
hope he's going to be acquitted.  I think if he has
firearms in the house and then he is convicted and he
becomes a convicted felon, I mean, maybe he's -- I
presume he's going to jail.  Maybe he will stay home
first.  But you're right.  That does propose sort of a
dilemma where we're saying he can't tell somebody else
what to do with the firearms.
I think if courts were looking at that
below -- and, of course, it's not something that is a
problem in this case because this Petitioner pleaded
guilty.  And he acknowledged in his plea agreement that
he was about to become prohibited from possessing
firearms.  But I think that if courts determined in a
particular case that it was a problem, like all of a
sudden I am in a status where I can't possess firearms
and if I go home, I'm immediately in violation of the
statute, that courts could determine that there's like a
statutory background principle that you have a
reasonable amount of time to come into compliance with
this.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, then why can't we do
that here?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Well, because that -- that
is not the type of -- a petitioner who pleads guilty is
not in that position.  He knew when he pleaded guilty
that he was about to lose his ability to possess
firearms.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I mean, your whole
argument -- the reason I took it that the government
wants this firearm thing, firearm dealer, is they say,
look, there are a lot of guns and these guns should be
safe and we're afraid he'll give them to a friend, and
we're afraid maybe the gang boss will get them, and the
only safe thing to do is really the firearms dealer.
Okay.  But now we think of a similar kind of
case.  It's just happened that the government didn't get
the guns first, they're in his house.  And then you say
well, the solution there is it's a reasonable time.  He
has a reasonable time to do with them what he wants.
MS. O'CONNELL:  No.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  As long as he gets them
out of his possession.
MS. O'CONNELL:  I think if he --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Are you going to say he
has to give them to a firearms dealer?  This is very
complicated, more so than I ever thought, and it seems
to me that it might best be worked out by lower courts
under the principle that we don't want these guns back
in the hands of either his control or people who might
misuse them.
MS. O'CONNELL:  I think if he is a person
who pleaded guilty, and so he -- he had advance
knowledge that he was about to become somebody who
couldn't possess firearms, including constructive
possession where he couldn't exercise dominion and
control over them, then he should be required to -- to
get rid of those firearms before he pleads guilty.  And
if he still has them in his house after he does so,
there is no reasonable period of time for that person
to, you know, exercise his own control over what he
wants to do with them.  I think those do have to go to a
firearms dealer.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Can you tell me -- it's
not this case, but suppose -- somewhat like Justice
Alito's hypothetical -- a man's living at home with his
wife.  Wife owns the firearms.  The firearms are in the
bedroom.  He's convicted of an offense where 922(g)
controls.  Is he in constructive possession of those in
violation of the statute?
MS. O'CONNELL:  There is a whole body of
case law on that, Justice Kennedy, where the -- the
answer is can the convicted felon exercise dominion and
control over the firearms in -- in their location.  So
if they're in like the master bedroom and they're not
locked up and he has access to them any time he wants
it, then he would -- he would be a felon in possession
of a firearm.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But the mere fact that his
wife has them is not enough --
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- for constructive
possession.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But you say that in this
context, the mere fact that a friend of his would have
them is enough for constructive possession.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yes.  And it's because --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why is that?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Because he is the one that
is selling the firearms to the friend.  He is selecting
the friend.  He's excluding other people from owning
them.  He is exercising control over the sale or the
transfer to his friend.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Ms. O'Connell, I think it's
implicit in what you're saying, but I just wanted to
make it clear.  Although you say that Rule 41(g) is not
the appropriate mechanism, you have no doubt that courts
do have the equitable authority to do this.  Is that
correct?
MS. O'CONNELL:  That's correct.  And I -- I
mean, I hope that, Justice Sotomayor, that it's not the
case that people are upset with -- with the government's
brief.  I think that in our brief, we tried to correct
some wrongs that had happened in this case.  We have
abandoned that 41(g) argument, we have abandoned the
Unclean Hands argument.  The weapons that are not
firearms were -- have been returned to Mr. Henderson.
And we think we've come up with a solution transferring
the weapons to a Federal licensed firearms dealer that
allows him to obtain the economic value of the firearms
without exercising control over them.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Would you agree that the
Unclean Hands part, that should not remain the law of
the circuit?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Right.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So we should -- we should
address that and reject it?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yes.  In our footnote on the
unclean hands, we did describe that if these are – if
the -- obviously, if the – if the property that we have
is contraband, it's not being returned to anybody.  But
we also would reserve the right to make arguments in cases
where the property we're holding is derivative contraband,
like it's a firearm that's been used to shoot somebody or
it's something that is used to for drugs --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But you have to file for
forfeiture in those situations.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Well, what I'm saying is, if
we miss those deadlines or something like that, we would
reserve the right in a derivative contraband case to
make an unclean hands argument --
JUSTICE BREYER:  What about just forgetting
the words "dominion" and "constructive" and just look to
the word "possession" and say that that sometimes
includes control?  And what you want to prevent is that
he disposes of these arms in a way that allows him,
possibly, to control them in the future or control them
now in a way that likely puts them in the hands of bad
people for the future.
Now, that way, all we have to do is look at
the word possession.  We have to add that it includes,
for purposes of this statute, certain kinds of control.
And then you have to say this is the simple rule, and
this will prevent two bad kinds of control.
Now, is there something wrong with that?  If
so, we then send it back so that you can argue to the
district court why your rule is necessary to prevent
these two bad kinds of control.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Justice Breyer, I think
your -- your second part we would go a little bit
further under the government's theory.  Surely we think
that if the firearms are given back to somebody over
whom the convicted felon is going to exercise control,
that would be constructive possession.  But we also
think that regardless of the person who's on the
receiving end of the firearms is a good person or a bad
person, is an exercise of dominion.
JUSTICE BREYER:  I know, that's the part
that it's hard for me to accept.
MS. O'CONNELL:  Well --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Because you're willing to
allow that control in the case that Justice Alito put
where he was convicted and it's in his house.  And I
don't see anything bad that flows from that kind of
control.  And I don't see why you have to read the
statute to include that kind of control to achieve any
purpose that the statute has.  So therefore, I tend,
tentatively, to reject that kind of control as falling
within what the statute forbids.
MS. O'CONNELL:  If you are going to reject
that kind of control --
JUSTICE BREYER:  What bad will happen?
MS. O'CONNELL:  -- then we would just ask
that the Court, you know, make clear in its opinion that
a district court acting in equity is not required to
accept the convicted felon's choice or direction about
where he wants the firearms to go, and that, instead of
having to broker that transaction between a convicted
felon and his friends, that the Court say, you know --
JUSTICE BREYER:  That might be another way
to do it, you know.  All right.  You have a difficult
conceptual case.
MS. O'CONNELL:  And I don't think, you know,
even if you don't think that it's bad to have firearms
go to necessarily anybody or maybe there's a very good
person that the convicted felon knows and wants to have
it, the line is drawn when you become a convicted felon.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Would the firearms dealer
charge a commission for selling these guns?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yes.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And who would pay that?
MS. O'CONNELL:  It would -- it would come
out of the -- the sale price.
JUSTICE ALITO:  So that if the -- if the
convicted felon could sell this without going through a
dealer for a certain amount, then that person would lose
the commission by having it sold through a firearms
dealer?
MS. O'CONNELL:  Yes.  And we simply think
that that's -- I mean, if the economic value is, you
know, that we're selling them through a firearms dealer
and he's going to charge a commission, then that's just
part of determining what the economic value of the guns
is.  But -- but we certainly think -- I mean, this is --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You can finish your
sentence.
MS. O'CONNELL:  There's Montana -- or
State v. Fadness, one of the Montana Supreme Court
cases, includes a fact scenario where the person wanted
to designate their father to sell them and the court
said, I'm not required -- the father has no plan to sell
them, I'm going to give that, the felon said.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Ortiz, you have 14 minutes remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DANIEL R. ORTIZ
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. ORTIZ:  Your Honor, just four very quick
points:
First, on the question of whether
Mr. Henderson asked with sufficient particularity for
relief, please remember that he was proceeding pro se.
And second, the law is clear that post-conviction
motions for return of transfer of property are treated
as civil actions.  Under Rule 54(c) of the Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure, he's entitled to whatever relief is
appropriate even if he did not request it. Second --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You -- you started off --
you were going to give us five pages in -- in the record,
and you only got to two of them, I think.  You want --
MR. ORTIZ:  Oh, sorry .
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Just in case I'm
unfortunate enough to get assigned this opinion.
(Laughter.)
MR. ORTIZ:  Justice Scalia, on page 71 and
on page 170.  The first was a reference to his renewed
motion for return/disposition of property, and the
second was the motion hearing itself.  He said that
he -- he claimed -- he argued that he had a property of
some firearms which must be accommodated by the sale,
transfer or storage of the firearms.  But Justice
Ginsburg is correct, he did not particularly reference a
licensed gun dealer.  His objections to the magistrate
judge's report and recommendation which appears on
page 132 of the joint appendix, he asks the court for
the relief -- to grant the request that this Court
ordered that a person lawfully entitled to own the
subject firearms collection be awarded possession and
control and direct the payment for the firearms be
awarded to Petitioner or his wife.
And finally, in his Eleventh Circuit brief,
he said, "Alternatively, I request the court recognize
my continued ownership interest in the property value
and order its sale for my benefit or my wife's or adult
children's benefit or allow me to designate a neutral
third party to take possession as his own."
Second, remind the Court that the
government's proposed Federal  firearms dealer
remedy would allow an owner's friend to take -- to buy
the firearms without the lecture and warning from the
district court that might be a criminal offense.
Third, in this case, the firearms were
turned over long before Petitioner pleaded guilty.  They
were turned over by order of the court setting the
conditions of his release, pretrial.
And finally, despite my friend's suggestion,
Petitioner firmly does not believe that affirmance is
appropriate relief here.  Thank you.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Mr. Ortiz, you do
understand -- I thought it was clear from what the
government said earlier, that it's waived any claim --
that you waived the request for this relief.
MR. ORTIZ:  No --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So that's not at issue.
You think there's still --
MR. ORTIZ:  Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- they're going to go
back down and say that you're not entitled to the relief
because you didn't ask for the right relief?
MR. ORTIZ:  That's one fear .  If this Court
were to dispose of the case other than by reversal,
there's also the other problem that -- not only would
that not resolve the circuit conflict, because the
government is taking a very different view of the
Eleventh Circuit's role than the Eleventh Circuit itself
does, but there is also the issue of unclean hands,
which would still be out there.  And that would bar
going forward anyone in Petitioner's position from
taking advantage of the government's new position.
If there are no further questions, we rest
our case. Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 10:58 a.m., the case in the
