IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ROBERT MITCHELL JENNINGS,  :
Petitioner  :
v.  :  No. 13-7211
WILLIAM STEPHENS,  :
DIRECTOR, TEXAS  :
DEPARTMENT OF CRIMINAL  :
JUSTICE, CORRECTIONAL  :
INSTITUTIONS DIVISION.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, October 15, 2014
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:04 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
RANDOLPH L. SCHAFFER, JR., ESQ., Houston, Tex; on behalf
of Petitioner.
ANDREW S. OLDHAM, ESQ., Deputy Solicitor General,
Austin, Tex.; on behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
RANDOLPH L. SCHAFFER, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ANDREW S. OLDHAM, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent  29
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
RANDOLPH L. SCHAFFER, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  54
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:04 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We will hear
argument next in Case 13-7211, Jennings v. Stephens.
Mr. Schaffer.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MR. RANDOLPH SCHAFFER, JR.
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SCHAFFER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court.
Ninety years ago, this Court held in
American Railway that an appellee need not cross-appeal
to raise an argument in support of the judgment that
does not seek to enlarge his rights.  Petitioner, who
prevailed on an ineffective assistance of counsel claim
in the district court, did not have to cross-appeal here
for two reasons.
First, he did not seek more relief than the
new punishment hearing granted to him in this -- in the
judgment.
Second, he raised an argument that the
district court rejected as an alternate basis to affirm
the judgment, and if he did not need to cross-appeal, he
did not need a COA.
We made --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  He -- I
don't know if this is a new argument or a new issue.
And the reason I raise that is when the judgment issued
here by the district court, it specified two errors that
had occurred and basically told the State court, fix
those two or you have to release the defendant.
Let's assume they fixed those two, and then
could you come back and say release him anyway because
they didn't fix the third that I lost on?
MR. SCHAFFER:  No, not under those
circumstances.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So how is it not more
relief?
MR. SCHAFFER:  I beg your pardon?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  How is it not more
relief or different relief?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Because the single error is
that he was denied the effective assistance of counsel.
That is a single claim, and it was based on three
allegations of deficient performance.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, now, wait a minute.
I -- you know, I have -- we -- we don't evaluate whether
you had good counsel or bad counsel.  You may have
Clarence Darrow and still be denied effective assistance
of counsel if Clarence Darrow makes one mistake.  I
mean, when -- when we find that there has been
ineffective assistance of counsel, I think that means
counsel failed to do one thing that he should have done.
But there's -- there's no such general finding that
counsel was -- was, in gross, ineffective.
You're -- you're -- you're describing it as
though -- as though that's what the finding is.  That --
that's not what we hold when we find ineffective
assistance of counsel.  We find that this particular
counsel made this mistake.  That's it.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, let's take that a step
further.  What the Court does to analyze an IAC claim is
to first isolate the errors of counsel.  It could be
one; it could be a hundred.  It doesn't matter.  You
accumulate them and consider them together to determine
prejudice.
If the deficiencies in performance
constitute sufficient prejudice to undermine confidence
in the verdict, then counsel was constitutionally
ineffective, not because of A, B, C, or D, but because
the totality of his representation did not meet the
constitutional standard.
So it's not a matter of fixing any
particular error of counsel.  And that's where I believe
the -- the State's position is a little awry because a
Federal court judgment in a habeas case is different
than a direct appeal judgment.  On a direct appeal
judgment, the -- the court tells the district court,
We're sending the case back to you, do A, B, C, and D or
don't do X, Y, and Z.
A Federal habeas judgment is a lawsuit
against the warden having to do with the body of the
prisoner.  The Federal court doesn't have authority to
tell the State to do or not do any particular thing.
The effect of the Federal court judgment is to basically
say release the prisoner unless within, in our case, 120
days you resentence him to life or you give a new
punishment hearing.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Would your argument be the
same if all of the claims in this case were not
ineffective assistance of counsel claims?  Let's take an
example that's in the briefs --
MR. SCHAFFER:  Sure.
JUSTICE ALITO: -- where there's
ineffective assistance -- of -- there's a ineffective
assistance of counsel claim and there's a coerced
confession claim.  And so the -- the petitioner wins on
the ineffective assistance of counsel claim, loses in
the district court on the coerced confession claim.  The
judgment is that he's entitled to resentencing or, let's
say, it's resentencing due to the ineffective assistance
of counsel, but there will be not be the opportunity to
introduce -- to exclude the coerced confession.  So would
you -- does your argument apply in that situation as
well?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Assuming the coerced
confession involves the punishment phase as opposed to
the guilt/innocence phase.
JUSTICE ALITO:  The same phase, yes.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Okay.  I think that's a
situation where the State has a decent argument that
because it's a different claim, that would perhaps
entitle you to more relief under the judgment, that is,
not just a new punishment hearing, but a new punishment
hearing without the unconstitutional confession, that on
the state of the law today, I would file a cross-appeal
and move for a COA on a separate claim because I think
that would be Pfeiffer, Alexander, El Paso Natural Gas,
where you're seeking to modify the judgment and obtain
more relief than it would be American Railway.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If you say that --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, why do you -- go
ahead.  Sorry.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, if I -- yeah, just a
follow-up on that.  If you say that, could not the same
situation arise with respect to different ineffective
assistance of counsel claims?
Let's say that in this case, you won on your
Spisak claim, things that were said during the closing.
You lost on the Wiggins claim.  Let's say the Wiggins
claim was that there was money available from the
court -- from the State to hire experts, but the
attorney didn't apply for the money, didn't do an
investigation, that was ineffective assistance of
counsel.  So if you win on the -- on the Spisak claim,
you'll -- you'll get a new sentencing hearing,
presumably, free from the errors in the closing, but you
won't get the opportunity to -- to go back and do the
time or the money to -- to do the investigation.
MR. SCHAFFER:  I would respectfully disagree
with that.  Because if you get a new sentencing hearing,
you get to do whatever you want to do at the new
sentencing hearing.  And for our purposes, if you now
know for -- in Federal court that the lawyer didn't
investigate mental history and discover X, Y, and Z, you
now know it.
JUSTICE ALITO:  But on -- on remand, they --
they say, well, that -- you lost that claim.
MR. SCHAFFER:  No.  It --
JUSTICE ALITO:  You lost it, so there's
no -- there's no need for more money.  There's no need
for more time.  Let's do it over with what -- you know,
with a -- with a proper closing.
MR. SCHAFFER:  And that's the thing.  The
Federal habeas judgment cannot direct the State court
what to do or not do at a retrial.  All it can do is
tell them we're releasing this person unless the
constitutional error is fixed.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, that's not true.
It -- it can tell them what to do.  The -- the basis on
which the conviction was set aside cannot be repeated by
the State court.  You're -- you're saying that the State
court can -- is -- is free to make the same mistake
again?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, it's actually not me
saying.  It's this Court's opinions have said that on a
Federal habeas judgment does not decide what a State
court may do or not do on remand.  We just direct them
to fix the constitutional error.  We don't tell them how
to do it.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But -- but -- but once you
say we direct them to fix the constitutional error, that
is something that they have to do on remand, isn't it?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Or -- or the Federal court
will release the prisoner.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Fix that constitutional
error.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But this other
constitutional error, which we didn't rule on in the
habeas thing, they don't have to fix.  It's up to them.
MR. SCHAFFER:  But let's remember, in an IAC
claim, it's different than a freestanding admission or
exclusion of evidence claim because a Federal court
habeas judgment cannot -- for example, in this case, the
State says, we sought to enlarge our rights under the
judgment by asking the Federal court to order the State
to fix any closing argument error and require a new
trial free of this error.
We didn't ask that.  We could not have asked
that.  A Federal court cannot order a State court to fix
any error of defense counsel or tell defense counsel how
to try the case, what to offer, what not to offer, what
arguments to make.  All the Court can do is provide a
remedy for the petitioner if he does not have effective
counsel at the retrial.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And that remedy is a
new -- a new trial.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Or a new punishment.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What if -- what
if -- what if one claim is the ineffective assistance
and the other claim is a violation of the confrontation
clause?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Separate.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And you -- and
you -- when -- when you go back, they can repeat the
error or they can choose not to call their witness,
either way.  And it would seem to me that if you didn't
file a cross-appeal, that the Federal court decision
would be an advisory opinion on the confrontation
clause.
MR. SCHAFFER:  And so in that circumstance,
if you were seeking additional relief, i.e., keep out
the non --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Right.
MR. SCHAFFER:  -- constitutional admission
of evidence, then in that situation, I would file a
cross-appeal and move for a COA because I would be
seeking to enlarge my rights under the judgment.
The judgment that we got here didn't really
give us anything more than the Constitution gives any
citizen the day that he walks into a courtroom, which is
the right to a trial with the effective assistance of
counsel.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, no, no, no.  The -- the
right to a trial that did not have this -- this failure
of counsel, this particular failure.  You're not
entitled to -- to competent counsel.  You're -- you're
entitled to counsel who doesn't make a mistake.  He
could be the dumbest counsel around so long as he
doesn't make a mistake.  And he could be the smartest
around, and if he does make a mistake, that's
ineffective assistance of counsel.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Respectfully, it's not by
itself.  The mistakes may be mistakes, but unless the
totality of those mistakes constitute sufficient
prejudice to undermine confidence in the verdict --
JUSTICE BREYER:  But was that an issue here?
I mean, I -- I -- looking at the blue brief and the --
and the red brief, it seemed to me that the issues here
have turned on a mistake, how many mistakes are there.
It wasn't a question of prejudice.  That is, the lower
court said, even if you're -- if you're right -- and
they thought you were right --
MR. SCHAFFER:  Correct.
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- that these two errors in
failing to investigate the background created prejudice.
So I don't think there was an argument on
appeal about whether there was enough prejudice.  It was
a question of was this a mistake.
Am I right or not?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, my position on appeal
was I'm --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, I know.  I'm just
saying was there an argument about that?  Did they
disagree about that?
MR. SCHAFFER:  I think the State certainly
disagreed with --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Did they -- and they argued
that before the court.
MR. SCHAFFER:  They -- they disagreed --
JUSTICE BREYER:  They said even if their --
they said the issue before the -- the Fifth Circuit is
whether all together these three things amount to
prejudice because our view of the State's view was, all
right, even if there were errors here, it didn't amount
to prejudice?
MR. SCHAFFER:  What they basically said is
that the district court didn't defer to the State court
findings and conclusions regarding those matters.
So -- but let's -- let's play the State's
argument out to its logical conclusion.
Under their theory, let's assume the same
thing happened to the district court.  We win on
A and B, we lose on C, and they say we're not going to
appeal.  Go back to State court, we'll give you a trial,
and you can introduce the evidence of alleged mental
deficits and disadvantaged background.  We'll give you a
chance to save your guy's life by laying it all out to a
jury and letting them decide.
And I say, nope, I'm going to appeal the
closing argument to the circuit.  And so I file a notice
of appeal and move for a COA.  And the district court --
let's see how that would play out.  The district judge
would say, did you read my opinion?  You won.  Why do
you need a COA?  Why do you want to take this up?  And I
would say, Judge, because I need an order for you to
tell me that I cannot argue to a jury that I would agree
with the death sentence.  I need that order to keep me
from doing that.  And the judge would say:  You are out
of your mind; COA denied.
I would appeal to the circuit.  The State
would take the exact opposite position they are taking
here.  They would say this is a frivolous appeal, he
got all the relief he wanted in the judgment, which is a
new punishment hearing, he doesn't have the right to
appeal this, this is an example of death row inmates
abusing the system and filing frivolous appeals to delay
things.
JUSTICE ALITO:  The predicate of the
argument is that again that ineffective assistance of
counsel claims are different.  You wouldn't think that it
was crazy in the situation where you've got the ineffective
assistance of counsel claim and the coerced confession
claim.  You win on the ineffective assistance of counsel
claim, they don't reach the coerced confession claim or
the confrontation clause claim.  It wouldn't be crazy
for you to appeal the loss on either of those things
because if you don't get relief on that then you are
going to have the same thing when you go back, right?
MR. SCHAFFER:  That's right.  And in that
situation I would be seeking to enlarge my rights under
the judgment by having evidence excluded at a retrial
that's beyond the scope of the judgment.  In this case
the judgment gave me everything I wanted.  There is not
a word in that judgment that's adverse to me.  There's
not a thing I could have asked for.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  The argument is that what
the judgment was is the relief that you got is a new
sentencing hearing shorn of the particular errors the
district court found and those particular errors did not
relate to the Spisak or closing argument.  So you are
trying to say we had a judgment, we won, and ordinarily a
judgment winner can appeal if they won and if there is an
argument that was made on which the judgment won or
lost, that is not preclusive because he didn't have a
chance to appeal.  A judgment winner can't appeal.  But
this is peculiar because the -- there were -- the -- the
order is you are entitled to a new trial shorn of these
particular errors.  The court of appeals says they are
not errors.  And then you want to bring up another
error.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, I want to -- let's --
let's break down the way IAC is analyzed.  The issue in
this case was, was Petitioner -- denied the effective
assistance of counsel at the punishment phase.  In the
vernacular, we made an IAC claim.  We made -- an IAC
claim, this Court said in Strickland, has two
components:  Deficient performance and prejudice.  We
made three arguments in support of deficient
performance.  We won two; we lost one.
We won the claim.  We got the new punishment
hearing.  So at the new punishment hearing -- let's
assume we got one, and I was -- it doesn't mean I would
have to put on the evidence of mental health history and
disadvantaged background.  I could make a strategic
decision based on the landscape of the retrial what to
use or not use.  So the Federal court order would give
the Petitioner a new punishment hearing, but it would
not dictate to me what evidence I had to put on, what
arguments I had to make, nor could the State or the
trial court compel me to do or not do anything.  It
could only provide a remedy if I didn't do it correctly.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But if you fail to put
on the same evidence which the court of appeals had said
the failure to produce constituted ineffective
performance of counsel, if you do the same thing again,
why wouldn't be that ineffective assistance of counsel?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, it might or might not
depending on how the case was retried.  What if, for
example, on the mental -- let's just take an example:
The mental health history.  Okay.  The State went out
and got a doctor to controvert the opinions of our
doctors.  What if I decided at the retrial, you know, I
think that getting into this mental health history would
create more harm than good based on what the State's
doctor is going to say.  I'm not going to put that on,
I'm just going to go with the disadvantaged background
and argue that they haven't proven future dangerousness
because he's got no history of violence when he is
incarcerated.  I could make that strategic decision.  If
somebody wanted to come along later and grade my papers,
they could, and they could say it was thumbs up or
thumbs down as the case may be.
Let's examine the State's argument --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, you couldn't put -- if
all things otherwise were the same, you couldn't do what
the lawyer did here without being ineffective
assistance.  That's what -- isn't that their holding,
the holding of the district court?  The district court
says the lawyer in these circumstances did not give
effective assistance as to two things.  So of course
things could change in the new trial, and then you could
act differently, but if they didn't change, you would
have to do -- act -- what the district court said,
wouldn't you?
MR. SCHAFFER:  I would agree with regard to
the evidence of disadvantaged background, because that
is written in stone.  That doesn't change.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  Now, once that
is so, there is nothing in the order that would, things
being identical, stop the prosecutor from making
precisely the same remarks that you are challenging.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, but see, it wasn't the
prosecutor.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Is that --
MR. SCHAFFER:  It wasn't the prosecutor that
made the argument.  It was the defense --
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right, fine.  Whatever
the third error is --
MR. SCHAFFER:  Right.
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- there is nothing in the
order that would prevent the lawyer from doing precisely
the same thing.  There is something in the order that
would prevent you from doing the same first two things,
other things being precisely equal.
MR. SCHAFFER:  If I may, let's look at the
mental health history for a moment.  The mental health
history was not even known by the trial lawyer.  Okay?
So if he was ineffective, he was ineffective based on a
Wiggins failure to investigate type of situation.
That's a different question.  Let's assume
he had investigated and he found the same things that I
found during habeas, and he decided not to put it
on.  Then it would be a strategic decision which he
would have to defend.  And so that's where we come back,
because that evidence was never known --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But why are we talking
about the claim on which you lost on appeal?  You are
not going to get a chance to go back with disadvantaged,
with mental health, because you lost on those on appeal.
MR. SCHAFFER:  I don't think --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I thought the Wiggins
claims were rejected on appeal.
MR. SCHAFFER:  They were.  But let's play
this -- let's assume that we get merits review on the
closing argument.  And remember, it's not a claim, in my
view.  It's an argument in support of a claim.  And I
think that the key portion of the government's --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  May I just clarify it?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Sure.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Everything that you are
arguing rides on our treating ineffective assistance of
counsel as one claim rather than ineffective assistance
of counsel, confrontation clause, some other violation.
If we don't buy your argument that ineffective
assistance of counsel is one monolithic claim and we
think the division between what they -- what they're
calling Wiggins error and the -- those --
MR. SCHAFFER:  The two Spisak claims.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- you would lose.
MR. SCHAFFER:  I disagree.  I don't think
you even need to reach the issue of is IAC one claim or
not.  It's here because they've split my claim into
thirds by saying I made three claims instead of one.  I
can still win under a pure interpretation of American
Railway because I am not seeking greater relief than
what I got in the judgment, which is a new punishment
hearing.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Would -- would you agree
that to include all of the counsel's errors it's
important to show the substantiality of the error?
MR. SCHAFFER:  That's what I did in the
Fifth Circuit, was say, look --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  All right.  Would you
agree that that goes to show how substantial the
incompetence was?
MR. SCHAFFER:  The combined effect
relates --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Yes.
MR. SCHAFFER:  -- to the prejudice --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  All right.
MR. SCHAFFER:  -- inquiry, but of course one
alone can be sufficiently prejudicial.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  With that in mind, I want
to turn to the COA statute.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Sure.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Let's assume that we
accept your argument that you did not have to file a
separate notice of appeal.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Okay.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Does that mean that you
automatically comply with the COA?  Because the COA
statute says that a certificate of appeal --
appealability must show that the applicant has made a
substantial showing.  And you've conceded that all
aspects of the incompetence of counsel go to
substantiality, so why is it that you have complied with
the COA statute?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, I haven't complied --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And the under -- and the
overlying question is once you -- if you were to
convince us that no notice of appeal was required, does
it automatically follow that you are not required to
have a COA?
MR. SCHAFFER:  I think that's the key issue.
The rule I propose, that I think is based on the statute
and the -- and the text of the rules, is if you need to
cross-appeal, you need a COA.  If you do not need to
cross-appeal, you don't need a COA.  And let me give you
two -- let me hit the government's arguments head-on,
and I think this is key.
They say the COA requirement should be read
into the statute or adopted as a matter of Federal
common law.  That is a tacit acknowledgment that the
statute does not require a COA for the non-appealing
petitioner appellee.  In their brief, they do not rely
on the text of 2253(c) or the associated rules,
FRAP 22(b), or Habeas Rule 11(a).  They want you all
to -- the Court to read that into the statute.  And that
is not appropriate where the text is clear, where
Congress --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Are you saying that the
COA statute itself says you need a COA to appeal from
the final order and you don't want to appeal from the
final order because you like the final order?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, correct -- in part
correct.  2253(c) says a COA is required for an appeal
to be taken to the court of appeals.  Now, we know that
doesn't apply to the government for two reasons.  First,
under (c)(2) a governmental entity could never show the
denial of a Federal constitutional right.  Secondly,
under FRAP 22(b)(3) the government is expressly
excluded.  So if it doesn't apply to the government, who
does it apply to?  Who did Congress intend for 2253(c)
to apply to?
The answer is clear.  Petitioner-appellants
who take the appeal, or petitioner-appellees who take a
cross-appeal.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So why wouldn't you have to
take a cross-appeal?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Because, well, I -- that gets
us back to where we were --
JUSTICE BREYER:  It's the same problem,
isn't it?  I mean, do you help yourself by saying, okay,
we need to cross-appeal, it only applies there, because
then we get into exactly the same argument, whether you
need a cross-appeal.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, I'd say I don't need to
cross-appeal because I'm not seeking to enlarge my
rights in the judgment.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, yes, you are, because
then --
MR. SCHAFFER:  -- and IAC is a single claim.
JUSTICE BREYER:  -- we're back to the same
argument.  What?
MR. SCHAFFER:  IAC is a single claim, and
I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Let's assume that we
disagree with you that you needed a cross-appeal.  Could
you answer or didn't -- or agree with you, you didn't
need a cross-appeal.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Okay.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Answer Justice Kennedy's
question of why you don't need the COA.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Sure.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Because a cross-appeal
doesn't have to make a substantial showing of -- of a
denial of a constitutional right.
MR. SCHAFFER:  A cross-appeal is just a
piece of paper that you file.  It doesn't have to show
anything.  It just says I want to appeal.  It's the
COA --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Exactly.  So why are the
two tied together, in your mind?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well, because I think when
you read 2253(c) it's clear it applies only to the
petitioner appellant who lost, obviously, on everything
below or the petitioner appellee who lost on a separate
claim that he's now desiring to appeal.  And -- and this
is kind of, I think, obvious to me if you look at habeas
Rule 11(a), which says that, "The district court must
issue or deny a COA when it enters a final order adverse
to the applicant."  The applicant is the party taking
the appeal.
Here the district court did not enter a
final order adverse to me, and I didn't take the appeal.
So you don't reach that part of 11(a) that says if a COA
is required, it has to specify the issue or issues that
satisfy the showing of the denial of the Federal
constitutional right.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Do you agree that a
petitioner who has to take a cross-appeal, because the
petitioner wants to enlarge the judgment, does not have
to get a certificate of appealability?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Do I agree that he does or
does not?
JUSTICE ALITO:  Does not.
MR. SCHAFFER:  No.
JUSTICE ALITO:  He has to.
MR. SCHAFFER:  I think if you take a
cross-appeal, you need a COA.
And here's -- here's the other thing and I
do want to hit this.  The government -- the State says
the COA should be required as a matter of policy to
screen frivolous appeals, and indeed, that's the most
attractive argument they make because what court doesn't
want to screen frivolous appeals.
I want you to bear in mind, please, that
there's only a few cases each year in which the
petitioner prevails in the district court under the
daunting AEDPA standard of review and the State appeals,
the information we received off of the public databases
that we were able to check.  And so I put an asterisk
next to this, is that in 2013, there were 18 cases in
the Federal circuits that have our scenario where the
petitioner won and the State took the appeal.  So that's
less than 2 per -- per circuit.  That's a speck of sand
on the beach of cases.
Where a petitioner prevails in the district
court under the AEDPA standard of review, that appeal is
not a frivolous appeal.  The appellate court is going to
have to spend its time on it.  It's serious, especially
in a death penalty case.  And the briefing rules, the
page limits, the fact that the petitioner would have an
incentive to protect his judgment and focus his efforts
on the claim he won would certainly discourage people
from doing what the government says, which is to raise
100 frivolous arguments in response.
If that were to happen in this speck of sand
number of cases in the appellate courts, I'm totally
confident that the circuit courts can dispose of
frivolous arguments in a sentence, a footnote or a
paragraph like that.
Before I reserve the rest of my time for
rebuttal, I want you -- I don't know whether this Court
appreciates irony, but I suspect that you do, and I
consider it ironic that the State is basically trying to
scare this Court into reading a COA requirement into the
statute for a petitioner appellee under the guise of the
appellate courts being inundated with 100 frivolous
arguments by prevailing petitioners in a case where the
prevailing petitioner raised exactly one argument, and
it comprised 3 pages out of a 53-page brief in which the
first 50 pages sought to protect the judgment.
A final thought.  If this Court were to rule
in our favor, I don't see there being any seismic shift
in the Federal habeas landscape.  This case, in the
great scheme of things, is a blip on the Federal habeas
radar.  But if you accept the State's position and rule
in their favor, in my judgment, the Court would have to
find that ineffective assistance of counsel constitutes
separate claims based on the number of allegations of
deficient performance and that cannot be harmonized with
Strickland.
Under the State's theory, there would be no
circumstances, there would be no case in which the
petitioner appellee did not need to cross-appeal and
obtain the COA.  Viewing this in context and boiling it
down to the bottom line, I filed one IAC claim.  I had
one child, and I named him Strickland.  The State cannot
come back now and tell you that I had triplets and their
names are Wiggins I, Wiggins II and Spisak.
JUSTICE ALITO:  In other contexts, however,
IAC is not a unitary concept, is it?  I don't want to
take up your rebuttal time, but in other contexts like
repetitive litigation or exhaustion, IAC is not a
unitary concept.
MR. SCHAFFER:  Well --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Talk about it on rebuttal if
you --
MR. SCHAFFER:  I don't want to get too far
into that, but it's a totally different situation there,
because those cases, Trevino and so forth, they're based
on principles -- principles of federalism and comity.
It's not a lack of jurisdiction.  It's that the Court
can decide to excuse some procedural default based on
cause and prejudice.  In our case, it's a pure question
of appellate court jurisdiction.  Does the court of
appeals have jurisdiction to rule on an argument in
support of ineffective assistance where I've already won
on the claim?  All I'm asking them to do is consider the
argument as an alternate basis to affirm the judgment of
the district court.
And for that reason, this Court should
reverse the judgment of the Fifth Circuit and remand for
consideration of the closing argument on the merits.
Thank you.  I will save the rest of my time
for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you,
counselor.
Mr. Oldham.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANDREW S. OLDHAM
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. OLDHAM:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
It's now common ground that Petitioner would
need to cross-appeal to add some conditions to a
conditional release order issued by the district court.
The only question in this case now is whether the
particular condition requested by this particular
Petitioner was necessary or sufficient to add to the
conditional release order, and we think that it was.  We
think that this particular condition, the Spisak error,
was a meaningful condition and it necessitated a
cross-appeal for two reasons.
First, if Petitioner had cross-appealed and
prevailed on the Spisak claim, the State would have been
obligated to fix that error, to cure that error upon
pain of immediate release of the prisoner.  And that is
a dramatically form -- dramatically expanded form of
relief that would necessitate a cross-appeal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How would you do
that?  How would you cure the Spisak error?
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, there are many ways that
the State and the defense and -- I'm sorry, I should say
the prosecution and the defense and the State court
could cure the Spisak error.  It starts with the
enunciation of the standard from the Federal district
court as to exactly what the Sixth Amendment requires of
a closing argument, which then guides both the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, the Spisak
error is something that the lawyer said in closing
argument.
You're going to have a new trial, right?
Well, presumably, I mean, the lawyer may say the same
thing or the new lawyer may say the exact same thing or
he may not.  It seems to me that it's a fairly academic
dispute as to whether or not you have a separate claim
once you have the relief of a new trial.
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, we don't think it's an
academic claim with respect to adding the condition that
requires a certain level of constitutional performance
for the defense counsel --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  There's always --
you always have the same level of constitutional
performance.  This is only going to come up as a
particular problem if for some reason the lawyer says
exactly the same thing in closing as the prior lawyer
did.  And I don't anticipate that happening.
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, this actually happens in
ineffective assistance of counsel claims in other
contexts where the State court has the power, for
example, to conduct a colloquy with the defense lawyer
to probe what the judgment is that has informed the
defense lawyer's representation, what the defense lawyer
has done, what the defense lawyer plans to do.  And, of
course, the State has the ability to object and move for
curative instructions if the error recurs.
But the fundamental -- the really important
point is that if the error recurs or if the State fails
to fix it, the remedy is immediate release, which we
should all agree is a dramatically expanded form of --
of relief, which would necessitate a cross-appeal.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Mr. Oldham, some of my
questions to -- to your opposing counsel suggest that
ineffective assistance of counsel is mistake by mistake.
That there are here three claims of ineffective
assistance, not just one.  Maybe that's so.
What do you do with this case where the --
the trial court finds two instances of ineffective
assistance, the State agrees that those two are valid.
But appeals on the ground that it was harmless error,
that the cumulative effect of those two mistakes was not
enough to change the outcome of the trial.
The defendant, on the other hand, wants to
raise the issue that there was, indeed, a third instance
of ineffective assistance, and then if you combined all
three, there would have been sufficient harm to enable
setting aside the verdict.
What do you do with that case?  There --
there the three separate instances have sort of been
combined into one where -- where the issue is the
harmful effect.
MR. OLDHAM:  The answer, Justice Scalia,
would turn on the particularities of the third error of
the hypothetical.  That is, if the third error was
sufficient to push it across the line of the Sixth
Amendment in the deficient performance standard, then
that would be the contours of the ineffective assistance
of counsel claim.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Okay.  So you would allow
that one to be -- to be raised without a cross-appeal.
MR. OLDHAM:  But it would --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So long as it -- it
would -- or at least so long as it's argued that that
would produce the incremental effect of reversing the
judgment.
MR. OLDHAM:  Yes.  We agree with the
Clarence Darrow hypothetical from the top half of the
argument, which is that you measure the constitutional
error based on where the lawyer's performance
transgresses the balance of the Sixth Amendment.  And so
if in the hypothetical, if that happened to have
been on the third error, then that would be the contours
of the ineffectiveness claim.
To return to the Chief Justice's --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Before you leave that, I
thought that your opposing counsel said that did happen
here.  It was -- you did raise a question of -- of
whether there was enough prejudice and, therefore, they
were entitled to bring in the third as showing that even
if the first two weren't sufficient, the third made up
for it.
MR. OLDHAM:  Justice Breyer, we disagree
with that characterization of what happened in the court
below.  What happened in the court below and in the
District Court was that petitioner raised three
allegations of deficiency.  This is how he characterized
it in his own certiorari petition to this Court.  Three
allegations of deficiency, each of which standing alone
both transgressed the bounds of the Sixth Amendment and
was a prejudicial error.
We fought back on two because the District
Court had granted two, and those were reversed in the
Fifth Circuit.  He raised a third independent error and
if he wants to add that third independent error to the
conditional release order, that is he wants the State to
be held responsible and a constitutional error imputed
to the State sufficient to command his immediate release
upon failing to fix it at the second trial --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The first two were thrown
out on the grounds that there was no error; right?
MR. OLDHAM:  That's correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Not on the ground that the
effect was not harmful enough to warrant setting aside
the judgment.
MR. OLDHAM:  That's correct.  They were
under -- that's correct.  And although the State did
brief it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Counsel, what do you do
with the COA?  I mean, however we rule, we may be
creating headaches.  Okay.
So petitioner wins on two and he loses on
the third issue, the -- the closing summation.
Does he have to then go for the COA?  He
can't wait for you to appeal and then make that
decision, can he?
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, under our view and under
the hypothetical given on the top side of the argument
he could cross-appeal and that actually -- and of course
would have to get a COA.  But this is actually --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Cross-appeal when there's
no appeal?
MR. OLDHAM:  He could have -- he could have
taken the first appeal.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  He could not have taken
an appeal.  Only the State could take an appeal; right?
MR. OLDHAM:  Our view is that on this
particular judgment he could have taken the first
appeal.  And that's incredibly important because it
would give him an additional protection if there was a
second trial.  In particular, if he could get a Federal
court to say the Sixth Amendment demands this level of
competence --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Where does the statute or
the rule talk about somebody who loses on a particular
claim but wins the judgment, I thought -- I'm looking at
the order.  The order is on page 33 of the appendix and
it doesn't say anything about Spisak or about -- what
was the other one -- Wiggins.  It just says the order is
three choices, release him from custody or give him a
new sentencing hearing or sentence him to a term in
prison.  That's it.  That's the order that we’re
reviewing --
MR. OLDHAM:  That's correct,
Justice Ginsburg, but it must be read in the context of
the entire opinion.  As we pointed out in footnote 6 of
the red brief, this Court and other Federal courts often
write their conditional release orders differently.  To
say, for example, as Judge Pollack did in the Lamb case,
these particular errors have to be fixed.  And everyone
seems to agree that if the judgment said these
particular errors have to be fixed, he could have taken
the first appeal or he could take a cross-appeal.
JUSTICE BREYER:  If he could take his first
appeal, how does it work?  That is, it seems to me that
I've seen lots of petitions in habeas where an
incarcerated person will bring up 40 arguments.  Now,
suppose that he loses on 39 and he wins on one and he
gets his new trial, and the court -- the prosecution
says fine, we'll go ahead, we'll give you the new trial.
Is the lawyer then supposed to appeal his 39 losses?
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, as a practical matter,
the notice of appeal deadline would be far in advance of
the retrial decision.
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, no.  You said he could
take the first appeal.  So before the new trial goes on
he says, I think I'll take the first appeal on the other
39 that I lost on.  Can he do that?
MR. OLDHAM:  Absolutely.  And for --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, then a lot of people,
you know, I'm not saying they're badly motivated,
they're in prison, they might think this sort of
interesting, I might lose at trial, let's just see if I
can't find a few other grounds here.
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, it's obviously not a lot
of people.  It's --
JUSTICE BREYER:  I've never heard of that.
Have you found examples where that's happened?
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, as the petitioner points
out, there's only 18 of these cases in the Court of
Appeals from last year, but a great example --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Wait.  Have you found many,
one, cases where a petitioner won in the District Court,
there is no State appeal, but he did lose on other
grounds and he decided to take a first appeal on several
of those other grounds?
MR. OLDHAM:  I'm unaware of any but I --
only because the State often appeals --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, the reason
there might not be any, I mean, any decision by the
Federal court in that situation would be, I think, a
purely advisory opinion.  Let's say he loses on a
confrontation clause claim, he wins on inadequate
assistance of counsel.  He takes the appeal.  If I'm the
judge on appeal I say, well, in the new trial, they may
not call the witness that you said shouldn't have been
called and you want me to issue an advisory opinion just
in case they do.  I don't see how he can do that.
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, it wouldn't be an
advisory opinion in this sense.  It would say that what
happened in the previous trial transgressed the
confrontation clause or the Sixth Amendment, depending
on which case -- which claimant lost below and it would
give him a very valuable procedural protection at the
second trial.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No.  It's superfluous in
the sense that it is unnecessary to the judgment.  He
got the judgment, he won it.  The trial was set aside.
The conviction was set aside, he got a new trial.  And
he's saying, oh, there are additional reasons why I
should have gotten a new trial.  I'm not going to listen
to that.  That's absurd.  You got what you wanted.  Now
go away.
(Laughter.)
MR. OLDHAM:  That -- Justice Scalia, our
view of the conditional release order is significantly
weightier than that.  What we think a conditional
release order is and what we think that this Court's
habeas cases demand is that a conditional release order
is a Federal court's order on a constitutional claim
that says the State must release, that is the actual
quintessential habeas remedy, or fix these errors.
Never does the conditional release order say, you get a
new trial.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But let's -- you may
be -- this one did, said release -- give him a new
hearing or release him.
But—I’m taking-- I do want you to answer
my COA question, okay, because what you're saying is
exactly what Justice Scalia is worried about, which is,
is he going to go present the COA and are we going to
even entertain it since he won his release?  But if he
-- does he have to get a COA?
But more importantly, what happens when
there's a new hearing?  Those two mistakes are not
repeated but a new one is introduced and the old one is
repeated.
Are you saying he can't appeal again?
MR. OLDHAM:  No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  On the old one or the
new one?
MR. OLDHAM:  Our rule is actually much more
-- much more protective of the prisoner than that.
Because if the old error is recommitted he gets
immediate release.  And that's the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  No, that's -- you're
saying he only gets immediate release if it's the old
error that the judge found on the first habeas.
MR. OLDHAM:  That's right.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But let's assume that
the second error is -- the third error is committed and
even a new one is committed that wasn't a part of the
first function, can he appeal?
MR. OLDHAM:  Of course.  Of course.  And he
has -- yes, he has a new judgment.  He can challenge the
new judgment.  The only question is how much relief
affords to him.  Because he agrees with us, to go back
to Justice Scalia's example, he agrees with us that he
could --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Can we go back to basics.
Isn't it true that a judgment winner does not have to
appeal an issue on which he lost but he is -- if he's
content with the judgment, he can present arguments that
would entitle him to relief.  He can assert defensively.
A judgment winner doesn't have to appeal, doesn't have
to cross-appeal.  That is the general rule; right?
MR. OLDHAM:  Yes, we agree.  The only
question is whether he's a judgment winner and we
pointed out many examples where people can be prevailing
parties in the sense that the judgment imposes no
liability on them but they can nonetheless appeal and we
would submit that this is one of them, and it's
precisely because he wants the additional protection.
To go back to Justice Scalia's example,
everyone agrees that if the petitioner wins on one claim
but he wants to raise a coerced confession claim he can
file a first appeal or a cross-appeal.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Oldham, suppose it were he
just had two Wiggins claims.  One was the lawyer
didn't find the psychological report and the other was
the lawyer failed to put on my mother as a character
witness.  He loses one, he wins the other.  Does he have
to take a cross-appeal on that?
MR. OLDHAM:  He has to take a cross-appeal
if he wants the one he lost on added to the conditional
release order.  That is, he wants the protection that
the Federal court would provide against that error being
either recommitted or failing -- the State failing to
fix it.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But they -- you keep
talking about the conditional release order.  It doesn't
say anything about what the State must do, what errors
it must correct, it's on page 35, it just says give him
a new sentencing hearing or sentence him to a term of
imprisonment.  It doesn't say, because of this, because
of that, because of this.
MR. OLDHAM:  And that's absolutely correct.
But we -- it seems like both sides agree that it could
have said exactly what the opinion says.  That is, I
found two errors here, I have not found an error on the
third ground and therefore, it could have been
incorporated in the text, as they often do.
As I say, footnote 6 of the red brief
collects a series of the ways that Federal courts phrase
them, and it would be a bizarre cross-appeal that would
turn on the particular phraseology of the conditional
release order when everyone agrees that the meaning of
it is the same.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Let -- let me just ask you
this question about COAs.  Let's just take a case --
there's no cross-appeal or anything.  The prisoner
alleges in -- inadequate assistance of counsel, and he
loses.  He files a COA.  He says, my counsel was
inadequate because there were two Wiggins errors, he did
not -- two Wiggins errors.  That is what he says in the
COA.
The COA is granted.  Now he files his brief.
Can he allege a Spisak error as well?
MR. OLDHAM:  As far as I know, no court in
the United States -- no circuit court in the United
States would allow him to do that because of 2253(c)(3).
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So -- so can he -- so in
other words, in a COA, you have to list every error that
counsel made and at -- at -- on -- on pain of not being
able to argue that in your brief?
MR. OLDHAM:  Yes, Your Honor.  That is what
2253(c)(3) says, issue-by-issue specification.  And
every court of appeals in the United States agrees, even
the Seventh Circuit, that would seem to -- would say all
three of the errors that you hypothesize would be the
same.  Even in the Seventh Circuit, you would have to
get a certificate of appealability in that circumstance.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But that's -- (c)(3)
comes after (c)(1).  And (c)(1) says you need a COA to
appeal from the final order.  And so if you don't need a
COA to appeal from the final order, you go on and appeal
from the final order.  The final order is fine.  You
would never get to (c)(3).
(C)(3) says if you need a COA, then you will
indicate which specific issues.  But it doesn't --
(c)(3) doesn't tell you when you need a COA.  (C)(1)(A)
tells you that.
MR. OLDHAM:  That's correct, Justice
Ginsburg.  And (c)(1), as it's currently written,
predated even AEDPA.  And even before AEDPA, that is in
1986, the Second Circuit interpreted (c)(1) as it is
currently written to require prisoners, when they are
the appellees, to nonetheless get COAs.
And as we sit here today, 6 out the 8 --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Where does that -- where
does that come from in the statute?  I mean, the statute
says you need the COA to appeal from the final order in
a habeas proceeding.  Well -- in the final order.  I
don't want an appeal from the final order.  It's good.
MR. OLDHAM:  So the pre-AEDPA standard was
the certificate of probable cause standard, which courts
of appeal, starting with the Roman decision in 1986,
required prisoners to satisfy the issue -- the -- the
CPC requirement even as the appellee.  And as we sit
here today, 6 out of the 8 courts of appeals would
require the Petitioner in this case to get a certificate
of appealability.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  Suppose the --
isn't it --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  In fact, you get it from
the language of the statute, which says you need a
certificate to appeal from the final order.
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, Justice Ginsburg, as this
Court has said twice in both the Miller-El and in Slack,
the language of this statute, 2253(c), imposes a list of
necessary but not sufficient conditions.  And it is
entirely within the provenance of the courts of appeals,
to deal with these issues on a regular basis, to
interpret that language to also apply to a prisoner who
is the appellee, who wants to raise an issue for the
court of appeal's consideration, both because that's the
purpose of the statute and because it was the pre-AEDPA
standard upon which the statute was enacted.
And so if I might just return to the Chief
Justice's hypothetical about the potential for something
not happening again.  This is -- it's much more
significant than simply that.  If you think about the
quintessential error that could never recur, it would
be, for example, a Brady violation, that is, the
withholding of exculpatory evidence.  Once it's in the
possession of the defendant, how could it ever recur?
But it's in precisely that circumstance that
one of the most powerful exhibitions of a conditional
release order has worked out because in the -- in the
Wolf v. Clark case, the Fourth Circuit, the Commonwealth
of Virginia received a Brady remedy, that is, it -- it
had its conviction vacated because the -- the particular
evidence had not been turned over to the defense.
Now, that error, that particular error could
never be recommitted, but the Commonwealth violated the
spirit and the intention of that conditional release
order by interviewing the jailhouse informant that gave
the evidence, threatening him with perjury, and
convincing him not to testify at the second trial.
And in that circumstance, because the
conditional release order -- which was phrased
materially identically to ours, by the way -- the
phraseology did not mention Brady, but because he had
the power of a Federal conditional release order,
instead of having to sit through another trial, instead
of having to have the Brady evidence excluded, he was
able to go back to the Federal district court that
issued the original conditional order and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Oh, sure.  I mean,
there may be situations in which the State or the
ineffective counsel, they do repeat the error, or they
may not.
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, this one couldn't have
been repeated.  It was, by definition, not repeatable.
But it was because the State failed to fix it.  See,
it's actually a significantly greater obligation on the
State than not -- than simply not doing the same thing
over again.  Right?
JUSTICE BREYER:  Thinking here to the -- the
Criminal Justice Foundation filed a brief, and -- and as
I read it, I thought, well, the point -- the point of
this is don't make it too complicated.  So they say,
well, let's just consider what Estelle says, you
Can’t be deprived of-- you have to make a substantial
showing of the denial of a Federal right.
So they're saying the Federal right here
that we're deprived of is a Sixth Amendment right to --
to counsel, period.
There are a lot of different bases for it.
There are a lot of different things that happen, but
that's the single ground or right or, in this case,
issue doesn't change the word of -- that it used to
mean.  So call it this one thing.  It's so simple, and
at that point, let the court of appeals deal with it.
As soon as we try to separate different
bases for saying that this was a deprivation of the
right to counsel, we are going to produce a pretty good
nightmare because they shade into each other often.
They're related in a variety of ways.  They may be or
may not be related through the prejudice problem.  And
lawyers will start wondering when they have to file a
court cross-appeal, and we will create a -- a mess.
So that's the basic argument, I think, of
this brief, and it is one of the arguments that they're
trying to make.
Now, what is your simple, clear answer to
that?
MR. OLDHAM:  The current rule in 6 out of
the 8 Courts of Appeals is not a nightmare.  And the
current rule reads issue in 2253(c)(3) to mean issue,
not to mean a single claim.  And so the nightmare that's
predicted or the -- the pragmatic solution isn't in want
of a problem in the sense that this is the -- the rule
that we have advanced on the certificate of
appealability is the majority rule.  And as far as --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But isn't that a rule
that was set up, as Justice Ginsburg said, only when the
petitioner hasn't won.  But here, there's a judgment for
resentencing.  As the Chief Justice indicates, the error
may or may not -- the third error may or may not be
repeated.  So go back to that point, which is if you're
a successful litigant, do you even have a right to try
to go get a COA?
MR. OLDHAM:  So the rule that I'm providing,
the 6 out of 8, is in the circumstance where the
prisoner won and wants to, nonetheless, raise additional
issues.  So it's exactly this case.
And the simple fact of recurrence is both
a -- a difficult rule to predict ex-ante as the Wolf
case would illustrate, but it's also -- would give short
shrift to ineffective assistance of counsel claims
because --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Why doesn't this fit --
why doesn't this case just fit what is the standard rule
that a party who's content with the judgment doesn't
have to cross-appeal to preserve arguments that enabled
him to retain the benefits of the judgment?  That's the
standard rule.
MR. OLDHAM:  Justice Ginsburg, it fits
within that rule.  It just begs the question of what the
judgment is.  And in our -- in our view, the judgment
entitles him to -- to -- to either release or to a
resentencing under particular terms.  And if he wants to
change the terms of the resentencing, he's attacking the
judgment and expanding his relief.
We all agree that he would be attacking the
judgment and expanding his relief if he wanted to add
coerced confession.  Our view is that ineffective
assistance of counsel is not a second class right.  It
is not one that can be subordinated to a coerced
confession claim, and that for the exact same reasons
that the coerced confession claim may come up, may not
come up, may be difficult to understand ex-ante, the
practical significance of it may be difficult to discern
ex-ante, he still has to cross-appeal in both
circumstances.  Yes, he conceded in the top --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But if I understand the
implications -- this goes back to, I guess, the
hypothetical I asked before.  Now I have 5 Wiggins
claims.  You didn't put on my mother, and you didn't put
on my brother, and you didn't put on my sister, you
didn't put on my uncle, you didn't put on my aunt, and
the court says, you know, we think your brother and your
mother really did have something to say, we're not so
sure about the others.
Do you think I have to cross-appeal on my
aunt and my sister and my uncle, and not only did you
think I have to cross-appeal, but you think that if I
had won and the State had not taken an appeal, I would
have had to appeal myself?
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, two things, Justice
Kagan.  One is that on -- on that particular
hypothetical, I would suggest that there's just one
Wiggins claim, and that is failure to call family to
testify.  And so there is sort of a tension in how we
conceive of the claim in this case and it's --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, you know, I could do
another hypothetical --
MR. OLDHAM:  Sure.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- failure to call family,
failure to call the psychiatrist, failure to find the
psychiatric report --
MR. OLDHAM:  Sure.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- failure to go investigate
my mental background.
MR. OLDHAM:  Absolutely.  And our position
is, yes, it's not that you have to cross-appeal, it's
that you can cross-appeal, right, in the sense that you
could, if you wanted to go back and have a second trial
without having the ones that you lost protected by the
Federal Constitution, then you can.  But if you want to
have a conditional release order that commands the State
to fix those particular errors upon pain of immediately
releasing you, our rule allows you to cross-appeal,
whereas their rule does not.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So do you need a COA,
too?
MR. OLDHAM:  Yes.  Yes, Your Honor.  You
would always need a certificate of appealability.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  How do you do that?
If -- take Justice Kagan's example.  You've won, and you
want to -- you're -- you're willing to forego unless
there's an appeal by you.  Now I'm going to
cross-appeal.  Now I need a COA, too, before I know what
you're doing?
MR. OLDHAM:  Well, the prisoner -- it's
common ground that if the prisoner appeals on the top or
the bottom the prisoner needs a certificate of
appealability.  And our position is that the particular
rules that we're offering here offer protection to
prisoners in the sense that -- and it offers protections
to the State as well, right?  It lets everyone know before
we have to go back and have another trial about the mother
or the sister or the cousin or the psychiatric report
what the rules of the Sixth Amendment game are.  It
allows the prisoner to know that if the State doesn't
fix that error he gets to go free and it allows the
State to make a decision as to perhaps not even
conducting a trial again.
We've offered this example in the briefs,
it's been -- and it's unrebutted in the reply that
depending on what the particular conditions are, the
State may forego and commute to a term of years, which
is the ultimate benefit to the prisoner.  And so it's
incredibly important to give a prisoner the right to
cross-appeal in that circumstance.  And if he wants
the court of appeals to address that issue he has to
cross-appeal because it would be expanding that relief
by adding a condition on a conditional release order
that the State must obey or fix or otherwise let him go
immediately.
If there are no further questions.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Schaffer, two minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF RANDOLPH L. SCHAFFER, JR.
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. SCHAFFER:  I'm a -- as the Court can
probably tell, I'm a fairly simple-minded person, and
when I looked at this and said is there anything I need
to do to get this closing argument in front of the
circuit in response to the State's appeal, I said:
Well, no; I won on ineffective assistance of counsel.
I'm just making another argument in support of the
judgment as to why there was prejudice, end of story.
That's the extent of my thought.
The bulk of these Federal habeas cases, as
I'm sure the Court knows, 90 percent or more are pro se
State court prisoners trying to navigate the treacherous
AEDPA waters without any help at all.  And it's tough
enough to win on the merits.  To create the procedural
nightmare of even getting into the ballpark that the
State would have you create is like throwing out the
baby with the bath water.  The simple thing is we want
to make it easy for the courts to acquire jurisdiction.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The only way you can win
this, according to you, is if we rule IAC claims are one
claim?
MR. SCHAFFER:  No.  I can also win, Justice
Sotomayor, on the basis that, even if IAC is multiple
claims, I did not seek to enlarge my rights under the
judgment.  And it goes back to the State's position --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So when is it that you
have to cross-appeal?
MR. SCHAFFER:  If I want to enlarge my
rights.  For example, if I win on punishment phase IAC
and I lose on guilt phase whatever and I want more than
a new punishment hearing, I would have to cross-appeal
obviously in that situation.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you answered no, but
then your explanation produces yes.  You're saying you
don't have to cross-appeal because you won on an
ineffective assistance of counsel claim; right?  There
is one, you know, omnibus ineffective assistance of
counsel claim.  You won on that; right?
MR. SCHAFFER:  Correct.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So your answer to Justice
Sotomayor should have been the opposite of what it was.
If you said yes, you should have said no. If you said no,
you should of said yes.
MR. SCHAFFER:  I do that all the time.  But
my understanding was she was asking me when would you
need to cross-appeal, and I was saying the scenario in
which you would.  This is not one of them.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., the case in the
