IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
ALABAMA LEGISLATIVE  :
BLACK CAUCUS, ET AL.,  :
Appellants  :
v.  :  No. 13-895
ALABAMA, ET AL.;  :
:
and  :
:
ALABAMA DEMOCRATIC  :
CONFERENCE, ET AL.,  :
Appellants  :
v.  :  No. 13-1138
ALABAMA, ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, November 12, 2014
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:05 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
RICHARD PILDES, ESQ., New York, N.Y.; on behalf of
Appellants.
ERIC SCHNAPPER, ESQ., Seattle, Wash.; on behalf of
Appellants.
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
United States, as amicus curiae.
ANDREW L. BRASHER, ESQ., Solicitor General, Montgomery,
Ala.; on behalf of Appellees.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
RICHARD PILDES, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellants  4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ERIC SCHNAPPER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellants  17
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of United States,
as amicus curiae  29
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
ANDREW L. BRASHER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellees  39
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
RICHARD PILDES, ESQ.
On behalf of the Appellants  65
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:05 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
in Case Number 13-895, Alabama Legislative Black Caucus
in Alabama -- v. Alabama, and Case 13-1138, the Alabama
Democratic Conference v. Alabama.
Mr. Pildes.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD PILDES
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
MR. PILDES:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Alabama employed rigid racial quotas, rigid
racial targets to design all its black majority
districts based on mere racial statistics alone, and
then used only racial demographic data to meet those
targets with astonishing precision.  These targets were
not based on any consideration of what's required under
current conditions in Alabama as Section 5 actually
requires.
Racial quotas in the context of districting
are a dangerous business.  They can be a way of giving
minorities faced with racially polarized voting a fair
opportunity to elect, but they can also be a way of
unnecessarily packing voters by race in ways that
further polarize and isolate us by race.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So you want, on the
one hand -- they obviously had to move new voters into
the majority-minority districts because they were all
underpopulated, and they need to move enough so that the
minorities have an opportunity to elect candidates of
their choice, but they can't move too many because that
would be packing, correct?
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, we understand that
States are in a bind in this situation as has been true
under Title VII and under the Voting Rights Act under
Section 2.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So -- but they have
to do that.  They have to hit this sweet spot between
those two extremes without taking race predominantly
into consideration?
MR. PILDES:  They don't have to hit a sweet
pot -- spot.  This Court has marked out a legitimate
path that States can take and must take to comply both
with their Section 5 obligations and with their equal
protection obligations not to use the excessive and
unjustified use of racial categories.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, I thought the
Section 5 obligation, gee, it -- it used to require that
there -- that there be no regression in -- in -- in
majority black districts.  So if a district went from 69
percent black to 55 percent black, you would be in
trouble.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, Section 5 has
always required no retrogression based on the ability to
elect under current conditions.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.
MR. PILDES:  So if there's no racially
polarized voting --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And -- and they're saying
that's all we did.  You know, these -- these districts
were underpopulated with respect to other ones, so we
had to move new people in them, and we had to do it in
such a way that there was still the 69 percent black
population that they're used to be in order to avoid
retrogression.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, retrogression has
never meant merely reproducing racial statistics purely
for their own sake.  It's meant preserving the ability
to elect, preserving majority-minority districts.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Oh, you can say that, but
it meant you're -- the only way to be sure you're not
doing that is maintaining the same -- the same
percentage.  And that's certainly the way the Justice
Department, in the bad old days, used to interpret it.
MR. PILDES:  It may be in the first decade
or so of the application of Section 5, DOJ employed
various kinds of practices as you describe.  As our
brief documents in detail, the Department of Justice has
routinely precleared plans that reduce black populations
as long as they don't reduce the ability to elect.
And, indeed, in Alabama in the last round of
redistricting, if you look at the blue brief of the
Black Caucus at the chart at 8A, you will see that
Alabama dramatically reduced black populations in all of
its districts in the Senate and in virtually all of its
districts in the House.  And if you look at that chart,
you'll see numbers like a 12-point reduction, a 19-point
reduction, a 10-point reduction, 16-point reduction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why is that?  Why
is --
MR. PILDES:  They reduced districts down to
56 percent.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Why is that?  Why do
you no longer need as high a percentage of minority
voters to maintain a situation where minority voters can
still elect their candidates of choice?
MR. PILDES:  For the reasons that this Court
adverted to in Shelby County and the reasons that
Alabama rightly celebrates in its briefs.  Black turnout
and black registration rates in Alabama now routinely
equal or even exceed white registration and white
turnout rates.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You realize, I assume, that
you're -- you're making the argument that the opponents
of black plaintiffs used to make here.  They -- they --
they said, you know, by requiring packing of -- of
minorities into certain districts, you're reducing their
influence statewide so you -- the representatives in --
in other districts can ignore what -- what -- what the
minority wants because they're all packed into -- that's
the argument the other side used to be making.
MR. PILDES:  Yes, Your Honor.  And when the
Voting Rights Act legitimately requires the use of race
in the face of polarized voting, then there's a national
political judgment that reflects the tradeoffs, the cost
and the benefits, as there are, to designing these
districts.  You can --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Suppose -- suppose there
are Party A in 2001 takes minorities out of heavily
minority districts and puts them into opportunity
districts for political purposes.  It's for partisan
gerrymandering purposes.  Assume that.
MR. PILDES:  Uh-huh.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Party B then gets into
power ten years later.  It wants to undo what Party A
did, and it puts them back into heavily populated
districts.  Is there a violation when Party B does that?
MR. PILDES:  There's no --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And its -- and its -- and
will stipulate that its motive is simply to help its
partisan balance --
MR. PILDES:  If they --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- or partisan imbalance.
MR. PILDES:  If they do not use racial
classifications, if they do not use excessive racial
means to do it --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  No, no, they -- they do.
They put minorities back into heavily packed districts,
just as they took minorities out ten years before.
MR. PILDES:  Right.  But the line this
Court's precedents have drawn is precisely the line
between partisan motivations in districting and racial.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  In both of my
hypotheticals, it's partisan.  In either case, is there
a violation?
MR. PILDES:  If it's purely partisan in
motive and they don't use race, then there's no problem.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  No, but -- but they do use
race, but it's purely partisan.  Your -- the
hypothetical is, Case 1, they find minority voters and
put them into minority opportunity districts, unpacking
the very heavily minority populated districts.  Then the
next party comes in and simply undoes it, and it uses
the same calculus, race.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Are you going to tell
me -- is it your position, and I think it may be your
position, that in the first case it's permitted and the
second case it isn't?
MR. PILDES:  No, Your Honor.  Our position
is that race can't be used excessively and unjustifiably
in either case.  And the three-judge court found --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Was it unjust -- was it
unjustified in -- in -- in Case A when they were trying
to have more minority opportunity districts?
MR. PILDES:  If they exceeded their
obligations under Section 2 and Section 5, if they went
beyond the limited leeway this Court has said that
States have, if they have the strong basis in evidence
that's required, if they properly interpret the Act,
that's the legitimate path States have that this Court
has marked out.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Did they do this for
partisan purposes?
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And I'm asking if Party B
can then undo it for partisan purposes, because I sense
that there's a one-way ratchet here.
MR. PILDES:  I don't think that's correct,
Your Honor, and I understand the concern.
If, for partisan purposes, a legislature
passed a race-based barrier to voting, that would surely
be unconstitutional.  They can't use race in the way
this Court's cases -- in the Shaw line of cases indicate
are beyond the parameters the States have.  They have to
have a strong basis in evidence.
In this case, Alabama didn't even ask the
relevant legal question.  Alabama didn't ask what is
necessary to preserve the ability to elect, what might
be necessary to preserve the ability to elect.  They
just reproduced numbers, statistics, and the way they
did it is they just used racial data.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, you began by -- by
criticizing Alabama for supposedly imposing quotas.  But
listening to your argument, it sounds to me that you are
just as interested in quotas.  You're just interested in
lower quotas.
Justice Alito: Is that right?
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, --
JUSTICE ALITO:  So if you -- if they want to
keep it at 70 percent, that's -- that may be
illegitimate in your view.  But if they take it down to
the minimum that would be required in order to produce
the desired result, that's a -- that's a -- a
permissible quota.  So why are you using this term
"quota" at all?
MR. PILDES:  We don't have to use the word
"quota."
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, why did you use it?
MR. PILDES:  I actually meant to use the
word "racial targets."  Judge Thompson used the word --
JUSTICE ALITO:  You think there's a
difference between the two?
MR. PILDES:  Well, there's a lot of
rhetorical and inflammatory power in the word "quota."
But, Your Honor, the point here is that
there must be at least legitimate basis for racial
classification.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So that's to Justice
Kennedy's question, I thought your answer would be there
isn't a one-way ratchet.  That's Cromartie 2, isn't it?
MR. PILDES:  If you're using --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Doesn't Cromartie 2 say if
you're doing this for political reasons, because many,
many African-Americans vote Democrat, all right?  And so
what they're doing is they're trying to help the
Democrats.  So, yeah, we're trying to help the
Democrats.  Okay.
If that's what you can -- are doing and they
can't really prove the contrary, the burden is on the
one attacking the district, whether they are doing it by
removing some African-Americans from this one or by
putting more into it, it's the same issue.  Am I right?
MR. PILDES:  Yes, you're right.  And
that's --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Right.  Then it's not a
one-way ratchet.  It is a two-way ratchet, which --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And it's valid in both --
in both cases.  That's your problem.
MR. PILDES:  If --
JUSTICE BREYER:  That's not our case because
our case, they don't try to defend on that ground.
MR. PILDES:  Right.  And that's -- your
answer is exactly the answer I was trying to give to
Justice Kennedy, which is partisan manipulation, this
Court has said, may be fine and constitutional, but the
one thing you cannot do is use race as a proxy for
politics or political affiliation.  You cannot use
racial targets that don't have a legitimate
justification.  They're not tied to current conditions.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You don't -- I thought you
agreed with Justice Breyer.
MR. PILDES:  I do --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But now you're saying you
cannot use race as a proxy for political affiliation,
but that was his hypothetical --
MR. PILDES:  I thought --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- that these people were
moved because blacks overwhelmingly vote Democrat.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You're saying that's bad if
that's the reason they move them.  I don't think he
thinks that's bad.
MR. PILDES:  I understood Justice Breyer to
be describing a situation in which you're moving
people because they're Democrats.  You have voting
behavior data.  You look at the data.  You move people
based --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, you're moving them
because they're black, and you think blacks will
overwhelmingly vote Democrat.  That's why you're moving
them, because they're black.  Because we assume blacks
are overwhelmingly Democrats.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, in this area, the
Court has said that assumptions like that cannot be the
basis of the way district lines are drawn or the way
people are classified by race.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Mr. Pildes, because --
because your time is running out --
MR. PILDES:  Yes.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- there is -- in your
presentation, you're saying we are attacking the
statewide plan.  We are not picking one district or the
other.  And you have been attacked on that point.  The
attack is that Shaw claims have to be district by
district; they can't be statewide.  So I would like your
answer to that question.  There hasn't been a Shaw
claim, as far as I know, that was statewide.  They have
all been district by district.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, our claim is that
the exact same policy was applied in every black-
majority district, which is we will use racial data to
repopulate as close as we can possibly do it to the
exact same black percentage.  That's a policy applied in
every -- in all 36 districts.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And how -- how are your
clients hurt by that?  It seems to me you have to come
up with a client in one of the other districts that
would have been, as you put it, more competitive had
this packing not occurred.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I assume that's the harm
that -- that you're alleging.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, we -- the record
demonstrates that we have plaintiffs or we have members
of the ADC in many of the black majority districts at
issue, and that at least is sufficient for us to
challenge this policy, at least as applied in those
districts.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I thought the record just
showed that you -- you named your plaintiffs by county
rather than district.
MR. PILDES:  But many of the districts are
wholly contained within the county.  They occupy the
full county.  We demonstrate in our brief a number of
senate districts and many house districts that are whole
county districts.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Are you waiving
your district by district challenge?  Does your claim
rise and fall solely on this statewide point you make?
MR. PILDES:  By statewide, we simply mean a
common policy applied to every district in the State.
And Mr. Chief justice, if I may reserve the
balance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Schnapper.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ERIC SCHNAPPER
ON BEHALF OF APPELLANTS
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
This Court's Shaw jurisprudence channels the
conversation that we're having today.  This Court has
identified two constitutional claims that could be
raised with regard to the use of race in districting.
One is intentional dilution of minority votes for the
purpose of minimizing their effectiveness and the second
one is Shaw.  This is -- we're advancing a Shaw claim.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You lost on the dilution
claim.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  We did.  We did.  The facts
material to the Shaw claim are -- were not in dispute at
trial.  The question is whether they fall within the
concept of predominance in this Court's line of
decisions.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Did the district court
understand you to be asserting a district-specific --
district-specific claims?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  I think it understood us to
be challenging each of the districts.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Where -- where do you find
that in the -- in the opinion of the district court?  I
thought the district court interpreted you not to be
making that claim.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  I -- we -- we advanced
evidence as to the motive that was a motive common to
all the districts and then we advanced -- offered
evidence about particular districts to illustrate how
that was played out.  But this is not -- there's no
conceptual difference between challenging all 36
districts and challenging 36 districts.  It -- it's the
same claim.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But you mean had specific
-- in your proposed findings, you dealt specifically
with certain districts and not specifically with others.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  The specific information
dealt with many of the particular districts, but the
claim was that all of the districts were the result of a
common purpose, that that common -- and that common
purpose race was the predominant and overriding --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But some of the districts
were unchanged.  The percentage was exactly the same as
it was before.  Those are the only districts that your
clients were from.  How have they been harmed?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Our -- our clients -- we
have members in all the districts.  The theory of harm
in the Shaw line of cases --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Was that established in the
district court, that you have members in all the
districts?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  That was the finding of the
district court.  The Alabama legislature -- because this
concerned the black districts --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The finding of the district
court was that you have -- you have members --
MR. SCHNAPPER:  I think it said all or
virtually all.  But that wasn't -- our standing wasn't
in dispute.  But the -- the concept of injury in the
Shaw line of cases is -- is not injury to the
individuals who were in the districts that are -- become
whiter because blacks are moved out.  That is -- those
are the people who don't have standing.
In Hays, this Court made clear it's the --
it's the individuals in the districts into which blacks
are put for the predominant racial purpose of -- for
predominant racial purpose.  That's -- that's the
standing doctrine that this Court has announced in those
cases.
Predominance involves, under this Court's --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't understand what you
just said.  They have a claim because there are too many
blacks in their district?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  No.  It's not about the
number.  The theory of the Court in Shaw is that if race
is the predominant purpose in putting blacks into a
district, that that will likely result in
representational harm in terms of the way the elected
officials will act.  And that's been the theory of the
Shaw claims ever since Shaw.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And you think it's
possible for the State to navigate between not enough
minority members in the district and too many minority
members in the district without taking race into
account.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  No, we do -- we do not.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Race predominantly
into account.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  But Shaw -- Shaw doesn't say
that taking race into account raises a constitutional
question in all cases, particularly in -- in the wake of
this Court's decision in Easley, which made it clear,
finally resolving an issue that had been kicking around
for some time, that the fact that race was a factor in
drawing a district doesn't trigger strict scrutiny.  A
majority of the Court held there that for Shaw purposes
to trigger strict scrutiny the plaintiff would have to
show predominance, that race was the predominant,
overriding purpose, meaning it was the criteria to which
-- that couldn't be put aside for any other purpose.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So -- so they have
to navigate between too many and too few, but without
race being the predominant consideration.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  If race, if -- in terms of
the Constitution, if race isn't the predominant purpose
and dilution isn't involved, then there's no
constitutional claim.  With regard to Section 5, let
me -- I think it would be helpful to understand what the
government's interpretation is and has been for sometime
about what Section 5 requires.  This is reflected in the
government's brief at 22 and 23 and in the 2011
guidelines.
The government's view, and this is how --
this has long been understood, is that the black
proportion can be reduced to the point where blacks no
longer have the -- the ability to elect a candidate of
their choice.  Until you get to that point, changes are
not retrogressive, and that's not the way --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Do you think -- what
do you think -- well, it's speculative.  But I think
that if Alabama had reduced the number of minority
voters in majority-minority districts in any significant
way, the Attorney General would have come down on them
like a ton of bricks.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  That -- that is not correct,
Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  He did preclear the
plan that you're challenging today.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  He also precleared the 2001
plan which did precisely what you described.  The -- the
government's view of this is set out in some greater
detail in their brief in Georgia v. Ashcroft and in
the -- in the oral argument of Mr. Stewart at the time.
As they explained then, and this remains their view, and
consistent with the way the Department has operated,
until -- the numbers can fall until it gets to the point
where the ability to elect is in question.  The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I have a problem.
Can -- can I just go back to your Shaw-nonShaw?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Basically, you're saying
I don't have a Shaw challenge.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  I have a Shaw challenge.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  All right.  You're
claiming it's a Shaw challenge, but you don't have to
describe the injury.  It's a -- it's an ephemeral
injury; race played a part in the overall plan, without
an effect in a particular district.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  No, no.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  If a particular
district --
MR. SCHNAPPER:  No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I mean, if it stayed
essentially the same, they didn't move the boundaries
much, they obviously -- they don't -- it's an all-white
district.  If they moved the boundaries, it wasn't to
include more blacks or anything else.  It was just
because of -- of geographic divisions.  So explain to me
why you don't have to prove that you were harmed
specifically by the application of this policy.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Let me say two things in
response to that.  First, the -- the theory of Shaw is
that if black voters are, for a predominantly racial
reason, moved into a district, not just leave it alone,
moved into a district for predominantly racial reasons,
that would strict scrutiny.  Now --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But that wasn't true
any --
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Yes, it is.  Yes, it is,
Your Honor.  When one of the member of the court said
the districts hadn't changed, I think what he meant was
that the black percentage hadn't changed.  All of these
districts changed.  They were underpopulated by on
average about 15 percent.  There's an average of 6,000
voters, individuals, put in every house district, 20,000
in every senate district.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, explain -- now that
you're talking about districts, could I come back to the
question I asked at the beginning, so that I understand
what we have to decide.  On page 128 of the Joint
Appendix, there's a paragraph in the district court
opinion that explains what the district court understood
to be -- to be before it on the issue of intentional
discrimination.  I see nowhere any indication that the
district court construed your pleadings and your other
submissions to raise a claim about any specific
district.
The third point is we construe the filings
of the Democratic Conference plaintiffs as arguing that
certain senate districts constitute racial gerrymanders.
There's nothing with that with respect to your client.
Maybe I'm missing something.  So if that's how the
district court understood your position, then maybe it
was wrong, but that would be the threshold question we'd
have to decide, wouldn't it be, that if you have to be
district-specific, we would have to say the district
court misunderstood the claims that you were asserting?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  I think in the context of
the way the case was litigated and tried and the briefs
at the time, it was -- everybody understood the
plaintiffs were challenging all of the majority-black
districts.
JUSTICE ALITO:  The district court
understood that?  Then why did it include this paragraph
and why did it not go through any districts that it saw
you as challenging?  It went through some that it saw
the other plaintiffs as challenging, none with respect
to you.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  We think in the context in
which the case was litigated, there was no conceptual
difference between challenging all the 36 districts and
challenging 36 individual districts.  The reason the
opinion reads the way it does is that the State didn't
contend and we didn't contend that there was different
district-specific purposes afoot.  The State's account
of this, which everyone accepted, was that the State had
a common purpose in adding those thousands of
individuals to each district, which was to -- which was
to continue the black percentage as it had been all
along.  It was a purpose common to all of them.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And, Mr. Schnapper, isn't it
right that after trial, when you submitted proposed
findings of fact and conclusions of law, in fact, you
did reference particular districts?  You referenced
Senate Districts 18, 19 and 20.  In another place, you
talked about all the majority-black districts in the
State's black belt, and you explained how your theory of
the case related to each one of those districts.
MR. SCHNAPPER:  We did.  This -- this is
somewhat analogous to the Teamsters decision from back
in the 1970s.  Where the government to prove racial
discrimination in promotions, said it made out a pattern
and practice case by offering evidence that was class-wide,
that affected all the individual blacks and Hispanics,
and then offered some individual stories.  But the claim
was for all of the individuals who worked in those -- in
those facilities.
JUSTICE BREYER:  To get there, we'd have --
you're talking, about, second, we construe the filings
of the Black Caucus plaintiffs as arguing that the acts
as a whole constitute racial gerrymandering, so we'd
have to say that was wrong, they didn't get the
complaint right, send it back.
So if we're going to have to send it back, I
guess what you'd have to -- would there be anything
wrong with saying this:  Look, tell the plaintiffs
please to point district by district to the fact that
the primary motive here was racial.  I don't think that
would be too hard.  We have loads of evidence on that.
Now, if the primary is racial -- and this is
the crucial part -- they then to justify this have to
show that they are making a -- and I don't know what
word -- reasonable attempt, good faith reasonable
attempt, some other word, to comply with the section,
old Section 5 requirements, with the Section 5
requirements.  And now they have to do it over again
anyway and so they do it over again, and if in fact some
of the questions suggest that that is what they were
trying to do; and you'd have evidence there that said,
no, no, that isn't what they were trying to do.  They
didn't even read the guidelines of the attorney general.
They didn't even look at what happened in the past.
They made no such attempt.  All right.  So would there
be, from your point of view, anything wrong with that
holding?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Well, Your Honor, I think
with regard to the question of justification, we think
it doesn't make any sense, in light of this Court's
decision particularly in Shaw 2, to send it back.  The
Court's decision makes clear that there are three
parameters to the way you assess this:  First, what they
did is to be judged by the correct interpretation of the
statute, not what they might have thought in good faith
it meant.  Second -- and the word "correct" is in a
number of this Court's Shaw decisions.
Secondly, that the purpose to comply with
the correct interpretation has to have been their motive
at the time; and secondly, at the time, not at trial,
but back when they did this, they had to then, in 2012,
have had a strong basis in evidence for concluding that
not using all these different numbers would have
violated the statute.  They don't -- they can't satisfy
any of those things.  They can't go back -- you could
send the case back to the district court, but you can't
send the case back to 2012 and have them change the
purpose or change the evidence before them.
So, unless you're going to change the
standard of strict scrutiny this Court has applied in
Shaw and other affirmative action-related cases, you
could not do that.  It's just -- it's years too late for
them to solve those problems.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm still having a
psychological problem with your point.  There were three
reasons.  You're saying merely because it was one among
the three, it necessarily was predominant as to each
district created.  The example or hypothetical I posited
for you was the primary reason above all others that
they said is the 2 percent district, and there may be
districts among these 36 that, as I indicated, had
contiguous populations that didn't make a difference
about race.  So it didn't -- they are not affected by
this policy.  Why should we undo that?
MR. SCHNAPPER:  Okay.  Okay.  If I might just
answer the one last question.  In fact, as the
analysis of the precinct-splitting shows, with perhaps
two exceptions, there is race-based precinct-splitting
on the border of every one of the majority-black
districts in question here.  It wasn't a situation where
they just took the neighboring districts and they turned
out to replicate, to be just the ratio that they wanted.
It was very, very calculated and race-based.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
General Verrilli.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.,
FOR THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE
SUPPORTING NEITHER PARTY
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
The key point in this case is that Shaw
claims require district-specific analysis.  The district
court departed from that principle and in our judgment
the plaintiffs' main theory also departs from that
principle, and I'd like to address --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I don't understand why
that's so, General.  I mean, what the plaintiffs are
saying is yes, we have common evidence, not all together
usual in a Shaw claim, but here they have evidence.
It's a policy statement that retrogression was going to
be a very main priority.  I think it was number 2.  And
retrogression was defined in a certain way, as requiring
the maintenance of black voting population.  And that
was going to be taken into account in every single
majority minority district.
Now, the fact that there's evidence, the
principal evidence in the case, that relates to every
single district and so in a sense the evidence is
statewide, does not make it any less a district by
district case.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That may be right,
Justice Kagan, but it also doesn't prove that race
predominated in the Shaw sense with respect to each
specific district, and let me try to explain why.  The
test under Shaw is whether race predominates to the
derogation of traditional districting criteria.  And so
it may be that in some districts, the effort to maintain
the same African American population resulted in
judgments that -- to draw the districts in ways that
derogated from traditional districting criteria, such as
compactness and maintaining communities of interest, but
it may be in other districts that it didn't, and I can
provide specific examples of that.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, I guess I would
appreciate specific examples, because it seems to me as
sort of a going-in matter that when you say this is the
most important thing except for the Reynolds inquiry,
this is the most important thing, that necessarily it's
going to affect the way you redraw or who you put into
the districts.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  You might not reach the
target in every single district, but necessarily you're
saying we are prioritizing this race-based -- this
race-based thing, criterion, in a way that's going to
affect every judgment we make.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  But the question under
Shaw, Your Honor, as we read the Shaw line of cases, is
whether that is done in derogation of traditional
districting criteria.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, how can it not be?  If
you have three priorities or three criteria and you say
this is the absolute most important criteria, it's just
the natural effect of that is going to be to minimize
the other two criteria.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, that's not
necessarily true.  Sometimes they will conflict,
sometimes they won't.  And I think the example -- I can
give you examples I think that would illustrate that
from the record.
For example -- now, there weren't specific
findings about these districts in the district court's
opinion, so I'm not trying to say this is what the
district court found.  But with respect to some
districts, for example, House District 67, the State
argues that that was a district in which you are going
to have essentially an African American percentage at
the percentage that the district was drawn at no matter
how you drew it, and that was because the surrounding
populations around that district were all of comparable
African American percentages.  So whatever choice you
made in order to get to the 2 percent
one-person-one-vote threshold was going to involve
moving African Americans.  And we'd submit that's not a
situation in which race predominated over traditional
districting criteria.  It's a -- it's situation in which
traditional districting criteria drove the decision.
There may, however, be other districts --
and Senate District 26 is one that comes to mind, in
which, where you had this movement of 14,500 people into
a district, which was in the City of Montgomery and
surrounding areas, all but 35 of whom were African
American.  And if one looks at that map -- and actually,
it's very difficult to discern on the small maps that
are in your materials.  But if you can get a blow-up of
it, what you will see in that map is that the so-called
"crab claws" that the parties describe that extend out
from the district capture African American populations.
But what they do is carve out the white part of the City of
Montgomery and attach it by a very narrow land bridge to
the next --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:
based on economic data?
GENERAL VERRILLI:
be a problem, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:
thing.
GENERAL VERRILLI:
Suppose they did that
Then I think it would not
But it results in the same
Right.  But it wouldn't
-- it wouldn't be race predominating over traditional
districting criteria.  And I will go back and try to
answer the question that Your Honor posed earlier about
when partisanship can be a justification and when it
isn't.  I think it's a very technical answer, but I
think if a State were to move electoral precincts from
one district to another, the entire electoral precinct,
because there you would have the data on how people
voted in that precinct, that would -- that would not
raise a problem under the Shaw analysis because you
clearly would be making a decision for partisan reasons.
But when you split a precinct and you move
just based on census block information, there you don't
know how the people in the census block voted.  What you
know is their race.  And so at that point if you're
using race as a proxy -- and I think that's what
Mr. Pildes was trying to describe to Your Honor, when
you're using race as a proxy in that circumstance, that
would violate what this Court has said in all of its
Shaw cases is the constitutional norm at stake here
because you're making an assumption.  You're
stereotyping in that situation, so it's --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And that's true at the
outset if you move them by race in order to increase
their capacity to influence districts?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, that's a difficult
question, Your Honor, but I think if you're -- if you're
-- if you're moving people by race in order to ensure
that you're not violating the Voting Rights Act that
seems to be one thing.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But then it's a one-way
ratchet.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, I don't think it is a
one-way ratchet, Your Honor, because you can move in
both directions, just move precincts and not -- and not
census blocks.
JUSTICE ALITO:  General, you say that the
district court erred in addressing the claim of racial
gerrymandering on a statewide rather than a
district-specific basis.  I would assume that that was
an error on the part of the district court only if a
district-specific claim was asserted by the plaintiffs,
but you don't address that issue.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.  I'm happy to
address it now, Your Honor.  I actually think this is
quite a murky question.  I think, Your Honor -- we agree
Your Honor is quite right that the district court did
appear, and JSA 128 is the place where it seems clear
that they did to appear, to assume that this was a
statewide claim.  In some respects, one can understand
why, because the basic theory is that the motive
influenced every district and it did adjudicate the case
on that basis.
So it would seem to me that one outcome here
would be to say that Shaw -- the proper understanding of
Shaw is that claims have to be made on a
district-specific basis and that the plaintiffs here
didn't -- didn't propound cognizable claims under Shaw
and that would be one resolution here.  But I have to
say, the record is somewhat murky on this.  Judge
Thompson in dissent did say that he thought that the
claims were district-by-district specific.  Justice
Kagan has identified some information in the record.  So
another option might be to articulate the correct
district-specific standard and leave it to the district
court on remand to sort out whether the plaintiff has
his facts --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But you don't deny that a
statewide policy can refer to every district or every
majority minority district in the State?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No.  No, we don't deny
that, but that's not enough -- our point is that's not
enough to trigger strict scrutiny.  You have to look and
see whether it's implemented in a manner that is in
derogation of traditional districting criteria district
by district.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But again -- and I don't
want to press it if you've given me your best answer to
it -- if a policy says we're going to prioritize this
particular criterion, which here was the mistaken
understanding of retrogression, if a policy says, we're
going to prioritize this over everything else, it seems
to me that that's pretty good evidence of a violation.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Only if again -- I guess
I am just going to repeat myself, but if it's in
derogation of traditional districting criteria --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But if the policy says that
it's going to prioritize it over everything else, that
means it going to be in derogation of tradition
districting criteria.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  When they conflict --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Sometimes they might fail.
Sometimes you're not going to be able to prioritize it
over everything else, but the intent is still to
prioritize it over everything else.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  But the question is --
let me take a step back because I think it might help to
put it in this context.
A challenge, a Shaw challenge, is a
challenge to a facially neutral government action.  The
lines on the map are what are being challenged here.
That's the government action.  Those lines are facially
neutral.  They may, in fact, reflect a violation of the
Constitution under Shaw if race predominated in the
placement of those lines in derogation of traditional
districting criteria.  But that's what you've got to
prove, and the mere existence of this motive doesn't
prove it for each district, and that's our point.
If I could, I just would like to raise one
point in my remaining time going back to the question of
what Section 5 retrogression required.  Mr. Chief
Justice, you asked that question.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And when you do that,
will you also tell us what effect, if any, the
preclearance should have.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.  So -- and the two
are quite related.  I think Professor Pildes referred
you to this chart, but the key thing is to look at not
the difference between 2001 and the current plan, but
the difference between the 1993 plan and the 2001 plan.
The Justice Department cleared the 2001 plan
that Alabama submitted, and you will see for every
single district listed there, with maybe one exception,
there were significant reductions in the minority
percentages in those districts.  So Alabama knew
perfectly well that it was completely consistent with
its obligations under Section 5 to reduce the districts.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You asked for a
remand.  The result of the remand may well be Alabama
has to redistrict; is that right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And when they do so,
that would not be subject to Section 5, correct?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Certainly correct.
That's certainly correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And that's not a
concern for you?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, it's not a concern
for us.  It is what it is, Mr. Chief Justice.  If on
remand the district court concludes that some of these
districts violated the Constitution, then Alabama will
have to -- the legislature will get its first chance to
a legislate a fix and Section 5 won't be a basis for
them to take any action.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Brasher.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF ANDREW L. BRASHER
ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS
MR. BRASHER:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
I think the Court should begin with the
district court's fact-finding, because the district
court expressly found that race did not predominate and
the Court can affirm on that basis and avoid addressing
questions about Section 5 and redistricting that are
unlikely to arise again because of this Court's decision
in Shelby County.
On page 144 of the jurisdictional statement
appendix, the district court expressly found that we did
not impose a quota.  The court said that we imposed,
quote, "no bright-line rule," and what the court meant
is that we preserved the core of existing districts, we
followed preexisting district lines, we followed roads,
we followed county lines, municipal lines, we met the
needs of incumbents, and we preserved communities of
interest.
The plan that we proposed -- the plan that
we passed is a status quo plan.  The whole point of this
plan was to preserve the status quo because the
Republican Party had won a majority in the legislature
for first time in 130 years.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But the other side
says it was impermissible for you to preserve the status
quo because the opportunity for minority voters in the
majority minority districts to participate in the
electoral process had improved to the extent that
maintaining the status quo would be characterized as
packing.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, actually, if you look
at -- well, two responses to that, Your Honor.  The
first is that if you look at the amicus brief filed in
support of neither party by political scientists, they
show that black voter turnout and white voter turnout
and registration actually equalized in 1998.  So -- so
there actually isn't some difference between the
districts in 2010 and -- and the new ones that we
propose with respect to those criteria.
The second point, I guess, I would make to
that is that our -- our redistricting criteria -- our
nonracial redistricting criteria were coextensive with
the objective here to preserve these majority-black
districts as they have been.  And what I mean is that
the objective of these nonracial redistricting criteria
was to preserve the status quo.  And so I think that's
what the United States Solicitor General was getting at,
is that it's difficult to disentangle the notion that we
should preserve the status quo with the majority-black
districts.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Is -- is it fair to -- to
read the pleadings and -- and the submissions in this
case as saying that the State did not defend this plan
on the basis that it was for partisan purposes, but that
it was to comply with Section 5?
MR. BRASHER:  I don't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Is that -- is that a fair
reading of the -- A, of the red brief and, B, of what
the district court found?
MR. BRASHER:  I don't think it's a fair
reading of either, Your Honor, and this is the reason
why.  Certainly, with respect to specific districts
here, when they were actually challenged, we were able
to respond and say this was for partisan political
reasons.  One of those districts, for example, was
Senate District 11, which was specifically challenged by
the Alabama Democratic Conference, and the district
court held that the changes to that district were based
on politics.
Now, with respect to the plan as a whole,
our response has always been that there is a lot of
factors that went into drawing the plan as a whole and
when it's drawing any specific district.  And I think
it's important here that the Plaintiffs have never
proposed a redistricting plan that actually meets our
race-neutral redistricting criteria, especially the
2 percent deviation in population that the legislature
adopted.  And I think that's important for three
reasons.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Are you really saying that
that's a pleading requirement, that they have to come in
with a plan that meets all the rest of your criteria?
MR. BRASHER:  I do not believe that is a
pleading requirement.  I believe it's an evidentiary
issue and I think the Court held that much in Cromartie.
And I think it's important for three reasons.  First,
the legislature adopted that 2 percent deviation to end
the previous partisan gerrymander that the Democrats
adopted in 2001, where they systematically
underpopulated majority-black districts and
overpopulated majority-white districts in Republican
areas of the State, and that's why the Plaintiff's
brought a partisan gerrymandering claim in the district
court below.
And the second reason is what I was alluding
to earlier, and that's in Easley v. Cromartie, the Court
held that the first step of a racial gerrymandering
claim is to show that there's some conceivable way to do
this differently that creates greater racial balance.
And the facts that they -- they've never produced a plan
that actually does that is a serious problem.  And that
makes sense, because if you want to see if race was
predominant in redistricting, you take race out and then
you run it again and you see what happens.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Brasher, I mean, let me
just give you some numbers here from -- from some of
these districts.  Right?  HD 52, you needed to add 1145
African Americans in order to maintain the percentage of
African-American voters, which was your number 2
criterion.  You added 1143.  You missed by 2.  HD 55,
you needed to add 6981.  You added 6994.  SD 23, 15,069.
You hit at 15,185.
I mean, those numbers speak for themselves,
don't they?  That in each of these cases, you were
determined, come what may and disregarding other
criteria, to maintain the black voting age population.
MR. BRASHER:  I don't think that shows that
for two reasons.  First, I agree with the United States
Solicitor General that the question here is whether we
subordinated race-neutral redistricting criteria to hit
these targets.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  That was just a coincidence?
MR. BRASHER:  No.  But that goes to my
second point, is those House districts that you were
reading off are in the City of Birmingham.  The City of
Birmingham has over 200,000 people in it, 73 percent
black.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, it's 73 percent, and
you hit that 73 percent exactly.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, and that's my point.
There are at least going to be some of those House
districts in Birmingham that are 73 percent black and I
do not believe that in a place where there's more than
200,000 people and 73 percent of them are black you need
to subordinate race-neutral redistricting criteria to
draw a 73 percent black district.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, I think you kind of do
actually, because, I mean, you're trying to repopulate
these districts, and many of these districts, yes, there
are many, many, many African Americans.  But as you just
suggested, there are also white people.  And you did it
so that you, you know, completely replicated the exact
percentage figure.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I'll give you another
example of what I mean.  House District 67, which we
talk about in our briefs, is a single-county district.
It's always been a single-county district.  It's a
single-county district in our plan, and it's a
single-county district in every plan that the Plaintiffs
propose.  And it's always going to be 70 percent black
because that county is 70 percent black.
And I think the same thing could be said
about many of the neighborhoods in Birmingham, is that
these neighborhoods are 73 percent black and that's how
we hit the numbers.  And they certainly haven't proven
otherwise.
I also think that the 2 percent -- the
failure to propose a 2 percent plan is important because
a 10 percent plan, the plans that they actually have
proposed, are drastically different from a 2 percent
plan.  It's like comparing a plan with 100 districts to
one with only 80 districts.  Their Senate districts can
vary by 14,000 people, and ours can only vary by around
2,000 people.
And -- but even though these -- these plans
are drastically different with respect to the criteria
that the legislature adopted here, many of their
districts have exactly the same black population
percentage as our districts.  This is clearest if you
look at on page 36 of our brief where we lay out the
Senate districts and their own proposed plans next to
the Senate districts and our proposed plan.  And you'll
look and you'll see Senate District 18, 19, 20, some of
the Senate districts that Justice Kagan was talking
about earlier, are almost exactly the same in all three
plans.
If you look at Senate District 33, it's
exactly the same in our plan and in the Black Caucus's
proposed plan.  The evidence was that the only way you
could draw Senate District 33 with a different black
population percentage --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  What about District --
Senate District 26?
MR. BRASHER:  Senate District 26 was above
70 percent black in the previous plan and it's above
70 percent black in our plan and in the Black Caucus's
plan.  Now, it's not exactly on target, but the
Plaintiffs testified in this case that the area of
Montgomery City that we're talking about here is
99 percent black.
And because that was one of the Senate
districts that they actually challenged, we have
actually good-faith credibility determination from the
trial court because the drafters actually testified
about why they made the changes to Senate District 26
they made, and they said that because of the way
populations shifted, they had to change an adjoining
district, Senate District 30, which required changes
to -- to all of the rest of the districts.  And that
left a county, sort of an orphan county, Crenshaw
County, that is a rural county south of Montgomery.
They explained that what they did is they took part of
Senate -- former Senate District 26, took it out to make
a way to connect the rural Crenshaw County to the rest
of Senate District 25, which is already predominantly
rural.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, the Solicitor General
just said that if you look at that district, it has a
very bizarre shape and the effect of the bizarre shape
is to pull in predominantly African-American areas and
exclude predominantly white areas.  Is he correct on
that?
MR. BRASHER:  Actually, I respectfully
disagree with him about that.  I -- if you look at the
comparison map, it's in the Joint Appendix on 197, you
can see a comparison between the former district and the
current district.  And what you'll see is up at the
right -- I'm sorry, the -- let me try and orient
myself -- the left -- the left part of Montgomery
County, that's where the former district used to be.  It
was part of Senate District 25 that came into the middle
of that district, sort of a -- kind of came in the
middle of it.  And what the drafters did here is they
drew the lines closer to the City of Montgomery, and
they preserved that part of Senate District 25 that came
in the middle of it.  What they -- the only thing they
did is they took some precincts and some parts of
precincts, kind of along those lines, and they moved
them from Senate District 25 to Senate District 26.
And I want to also just correct something
that the -- my friend the Solicitor General said.  We
didn't just move black voters into that district.  We
also moved Hispanic voters into that district, we moved
white voters into that district.  We made changes to
that --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. -- Mr. Brasher, I mean,
usually in these cases you're looking at these
funny-shaped districts and you're trying to figure out
from the shape and from other matters whether race has
been used instead of traditional districting criteria.
But this is a very sort -- you know, sort of sui generis
Shaw claim, because here the principal evidence in the
case is not all the circumstantial stuff that we usually
do.  It's a policy statement from the State that says
race non-retrogression is going to be our principal
criterion except for Reynolds, and then a clear
testimony from the people who were applying that policy
statement that they thought that that meant maintaining
the black voting age population, something which is a
mistaken understanding of what retrogression entails.
But, you know, you don't have to look at all
the circumstantial evidence about the shape of districts
when you have a policy statement from the State saying
this is our number one criterion except for Reynolds and
this is how we understand it in such a way that it's
going to ensure that a 68 percent district stays a
68 percent district and a 52 percent district stays a
52 percent district and so on.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, just two quick responses
to that, Justice Kagan.  And the first is that the State
is always going to say that complying with Federal law
was a top priority because Federal law is supreme.  And
so if simply --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But this is much more than
that.  This is very specific saying where the -- the --
the two legislators principally in charge of this said
this is what we understand the requirements are, that
we're going to maintain the black voting age population
in each district.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, that brings me to my
second point, which is that imagine had we done the same
thing that the plaintiffs are suggesting, and we had
hired a political scientist to tell us that 55 percent
should be the target.  I don't think that we could say
race predominated in that circumstance, just because we
had a different target.  And so I think they are
bringing effectively a circumstantial case here.  They
have the fact that we said that this was our objective
under Section 5 --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, Justice Kagan's
question points up the fact that the defenders of this
plan did not rely on the fact that it was a political
gerrymander and, of course, they said it was the
2 percent call, but the basis was race in order to
comply with Section 5.
MR. BRASHER:  And my point about that is
certainly with respect to specific districts, they were
based on partisanship, and so had they challenged
specific districts, we would have responded in kind with
respect to those specific districts.  But they never
challenged specific districts below.
And I think to answer Justice Alito's
question, to my friends on the other side, I think you
should look at document 194 which is the Black Caucus'
posttrial brief.  And although they certainly mention an
occasional specific district, they didn't have any
evidence.  I guess this goes back to Justice Kagan's
question.  This is a circumstantial case because the
only evidence --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I thought that there was
considerable evidence on Senate District 26.
MR. BRASHER:  Senate District 26 was
challenged by the Alabama Democratic Conference, which
has now not brought a Shaw claim with respect to
district 26.  And because they specifically challenged
that district, you actually have, like I said, a
credibility determination by the district court about
the testimony with respect to that specific district.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Let me ask you about this
Section 5 mistake.  Isn't it so that both the district
court and Alabama were laboring under the impression
that retrogression meant you have to keep the same
numbers?
MR. BRASHER:  The district court made an
express fact-finding here that our goal was to prevent
substantial reductions in black population in the
preexisting majority black districts.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  And if that's a
misunderstanding of what Section 5 requires, then the
whole thing is infected by that mistake.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I disagree with you
respectfully about it being a misunderstanding, because
I think in 2006, Congress told us that we could not
diminish the ability to elect a black voters in a
preexisting majority black district.
My friend, Professor Pildes, testified
against the inclusion of that language in Congress, and
he told them that if they included that language, it
would "lock into place" the majority black districts in
the South.  If you cannot diminish the ability to elect,
that means if there's a safe majority black district
where there's a 100 percent chance that black voters can
elect their candidates of choice, you cannot drop that
to where they simply have a 50 percent chance, or a 60
percent chance.  And that was what we were setting out
to do.  And this Court said that States get leeway in
complying with Section 5 and the Equal Protection Clause,
that we do not have to hit things right on the dot.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Brasher, I guess I don't
understand your response to Justice Ginsburg.  I mean,
there are different interpretations of what those 2006
amendments mean, right?  Under one interpretation, it
was basically a codification of Justice Souter's
opinion, and so majority minority districts could be
transformed into influence districts.
On another stricter interpretation, perhaps,
no majority minority districts had to stay majority
minority districts.  But in no interpretation does a 76
percent district have to stay a 76 percent district when
circumstances change and when the ability to elect
candidates of one's choice does not require it.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, this is what Justice
Souter said in his dissent in Georgia v. Ashcroft.  He
said, "If racial elements consistently vote in separate
blocks," which it's conceded that they do in Alabama,
"decreasing the proportion of black voters will
generally reduce the chance that the minority group's
favored candidate would be elected."
The majority opinion in Georgia v. Ashcroft
agreed with that as well.  And the district court in
Georgia v. Ashcroft, which I think that Congress was
trying to go back to, said, "If existing opportunities
of minority voters to exercise their franchise are
robust, a proposed plan that leaves those voters with
merely a reasonable or fair chance of electing a
candidate of choice may constitute retrogression."
And the testimony from the plaintiffs' own
expert here was that majority black districts in Alabama
that are only 55 percent black would only give those
voters a reasonable opportunity to elect.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Suppose we, I don't know, I
want to know what you think about the practicalities of
sending this back.  Assume -- assume in the back of my
mind just relying on State policy is this.  A State
legislator gets up and says, in our State, there's a
history of discrimination against black people.  There
are very few black representatives in this body.  I
would like to find a way of drawing district lines so
that we have a few more.  Okay?
That's the normal way this case comes up.
This is an obverse and odd situation.  All right.  I
don't know that that statement should automatically
disqualify his plan.  Maybe we should look a little
further into it and see what they actually did.
Suppose I start there.  And then I say,
okay, you go proceed district by district.  I suspect
they will be able to prove that at least in some
districts, at least in some, the statement of the
legislator here did prevail and did make a difference.
Now, if that's so, they don't have Section 5
to rely on as a defense.  So I don't know what the
defense is possibly going to be.  And since we can't
even think what the defense is, why don't they just redo
this plan over in the legislature and save everybody a
lot of time and trouble.  What's your response to that?
MR. BRASHER:  There are a couple of
responses.  The first is, I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I thought it was a lot of
trouble to redo a plan.  Is it not a lot of trouble?
MR. BRASHER:  It is a lot of trouble.
JUSTICE BREYER:  So my point of my question
is you want to go to that lot of trouble before a lot of
extra trouble in court proceedings, or do you want to go
to that trouble right off the bat and get it over with?
I expect you'd have an answer to that, and
I'm not taking a point of view.  I just want to know
what your response is.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, to respond to that
pointed question, this plan was passed after 21 hearings
held throughout the State of Alabama.  It was passed
after extensive legislative negotiations.  It was passed
in a special session of the Alabama legislature that was
called for purposes of enacting a redistricting plan.
So we do not want to go back through that process --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Of course you don't, but my
question is, is there going to be a defense left that
could stop you from having to go back?
MR. BRASHER:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  What?
MR. BRASHER:  I think the United States
agrees with me that the question here is whether there
was a strong basis in evidence for us to believe at the
time that we passed this plan that we had to comply with
Section 5, and I think we have that defense, even if we
are litigating district by district.  But let me --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  What does it mean to
comply with Section 5?  And that's where you can say it
strongly -- it complies -- everybody agrees that that
counts, compliance with Section 5, strong interest in
doing that.  But if you think Section 5 means you got to
preserve the same numbers and that's not what Section 5
means, then the whole premise on which the district
court based its decision was wrong.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I don't think so,
because I think the district court's decision was
premised on the fact that race was not the predominant
factor in this plan.  But to go to that question about
Section 5, we adopted a very reasonable Section 5
preclearance strategy here.  It was the exact same thing
that Georgia did in 2005 and that Congress said in the
House report when it reauthorized Section 5 in 2006 --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  If that turns out to be
wrong, I guess you're still not guilty of using race.
You're still trying to comply with Section 5 as opposed
to being racist; right?
MR. BRASHER:  That's exactly right.  They
did make intentional discrimination claims in the
district court --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  If the district court said
that race was not the purpose of this plan, what in the
district court's view was the purpose of the plan?
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I don't think there's a
need for a district court to identify any one specific
purpose.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I'm asking in this case,
what did they say?
MR. BRASHER:  Yes.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Was it the presumption
that they wanted to assure preclearance under Section 5
and for that reason used race?  So when you say the
district court said, well, race was not the purpose, it
was close to the purpose because they were trying to use
Section 5 and use race for that reason.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, it was certainly --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  That's a very fine
distinction.
MR. BRASHER:  It was certainly a purpose
that went into the majority black districts, but it was
not the predominant motive in the way these laws were
drafted.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Don't you have to use race
to comply with Section 5?
MR. BRASHER:  That's right.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Is there any way to comply
with Section 5 without using race?
MR. BRASHER:  There is not.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But you don't have to use
race in this way, Mr. Brasher.  Nobody would say that
Section 5 required you to maintain a 78 percent district
and a 78 percent district was no longer needed with
respect to a group's ability to elect a candidate of
choice.
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I respectfully disagree
with that.  And once again, we followed the same
preclearance strategy that Georgia followed in 2005.
And that Congress -- remember, Congress made a record in
2006 to try to reauthorize Section 5 and part of that
record was them saying that Georgia's plan from 2005,
which kept all of their majority black districts exactly
the same was a good thing.  We did the same thing in
this redistricting cycle that other States did in this
redistricting cycle.  We actually did the same thing
that the plaintiffs did when they were in charge of the
legislature in 2001.  There's been some inconsistency on
that.  The only difference is they tried to hit targets
from the 1993 plan as they were in 1993, and we simply
tried to keep the districts the same from 2010 to 2012.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Could I follow up on
Justice Breyer's exploration of what would happen if
this was done over?  I assume that Section 5 would not
be a consideration so long as a new coverage formula is
not adopted by Congress.  Is that correct?
MR. BRASHER:  Correct.  If the legislature
were to pass new plans, I do not think that they would
have to comply.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And the legislature could do
whatever it wants if it's -- if it relies purely on
partisanship rather than on race.
MR. BRASHER:  That is correct.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And to what degree would or
could -- to what degree would the legislature be
justified in doing and to what degree would it be
required to take into account the degree, if any, to
which Section 2 imposes something like a retrogression
requirement?
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I think --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Do we know what that
might be?
MR. BRASHER:  I really honestly do not know
how Section 2 would necessarily apply in this
circumstance because by complying with Section 5 here,
we -- we necessarily complied with Section 2 because
it's a lesser standard.
But I do think that it's -- the fact that we
could have done, if we -- if the plans are vacated, they
are very likely to just be the same plans
reauthorized --
JUSTICE ALITO:  What would happen if you --
if you're -- if on a do-over, the objective was to
produce maximum Republican representation in both houses
of the legislature.  And the way in -- and in doing
that, there was a drastic reduction in the number of
African-American senators and representatives.  Would
that be a violation of Section 2?
MR. BRASHER:  Not necessarily.  There would,
obviously, be a lot more that would go into that
analysis whether that violated Section 2.  You'd have to
look at each individual district and see if they can
make a Section 2 claim.  I mean, one of the issues in
this case is that this plan actually gives proportional
representation to black voters in Alabama.  There are
about 25 percent black voting age population in Alabama,
and they have about 25 majority black districts in the
House and about 20 -- I'm sorry, about 25 percent
majority black districts in the House and about 25
percent majority black districts in the Senate.  And so
this is -- this plan meets Section 2 in that regard in
the sense that it gives proportional representation.
But I do not know what would happen, quite
frankly, if this -- if the Court were to vacate these
plans and the legislature were to just do a do-over.
And I would -- to go back to the 2 percent
deviation, these are very sophisticated parties on the
other side of this case with very sophisticated counsel.
The reason they've never proposed any way to do this
following our own race-neutral redistricting criteria is
because they know that the 2 percent deviation here
prevents them from gerrymandering districts to help
white Democrats get elected because it would be very
simple.  The 2 percent deviation was adopted at the very
beginning of this redistricting process, so the
plaintiffs had a year, while they were on the committee,
the reapportionment committee, to come up with their own
2 percent plan.  And instead, they just proposed these
10 percent deviation plans in the legislature.
And then we had a year of litigation for
them to come up with own 2 percent plan, and they --
they didn't do that.  And that's what the district court
was getting at when the district court said that -- you
know, the district court said race did not predominate
because we followed race-neutral redistricting criteria,
and then the district court suggested, you know what,
you know what this case is really about, it's about the
2 percent population deviation.  Because --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Brasher, you're
suggesting that there's some necessity for a 2 percent
plan, but there is no necessity for a 2 percent plan.
States have routinely gone up to 10 percent without
getting into trouble under Reynolds.  So that can't
insulate your plan from this kind of challenge, can it?
MR. BRASHER:  Well, I think it can, and for
this reason, is because we're in charge of adopting our
race-neutral redistricting criteria.  And under Easley,
if the plaintiffs want to prove that race predominated
in a plan, the first step of that, and certainly the
easiest way to do it, is to propose some other way of
meeting race-neutral redistricting criteria that
provides greater racial balance.
And they haven't proposed any way to do
that, and the plans that they did propose, even though
they are 10 percent plans, are very, very similar in
many of these majority black districts.  So not only
have they not proposed a 2 percent plan that's our
criteria, but they actually -- the plans they did
propose are not -- not that different.
I think at the very least, the fact that the
plaintiffs have never proposed any way to do this
redistricting that actually meets the State's
race-neutral redistricting criteria underscores that you
cannot find that the district courts fact-finding here
was clearly erroneous, that race did not predominate,
and I think the Court should affirm on that basis.
Let me address the question of remand for a
second here.  The United States has said that the Court
should remand this case.  But the United States'
position on that is internally inconsistent because the
United States agrees that the population percentages
alone in the districts are not sufficient for the
Plaintiffs to have met their burden of proof to show
that race predominated.
But that's the only evidence they introduced
about these districts, and that's why the district court
said, to the best that I can tell, these are statewide
challenges because the only evidence in the record,
whatever they may have said, the only evidence in the
record about these districts was just population
statistics.
JUSTICE BREYER:  You'd look at the -- you'd
look at the complaint, when I look at the complaint, I
suspect I'll find something about districts.  It's
certainly true that, sort of taking the US point of
view, the -- it's quite clear the -- to me anyway, that
the court decided on the basis of a statewide plan.  So
if it's wrong about that, then they ought to have a
chance to go back and make their claim district by
district and have a decision on that basis.
MR. BRASHER:  Well -- and once again, I
don't think -- they may have brought claims with respect
to each individual district.  I don't think they do.  I
think if you look at the complaint, you won't find that.
But even if they did, the only evidence that
they introduced about any of these districts are the
statistics alone, and the United States agrees with me
that that's insufficient for them to have met their
burden of proof.  So I don't see how you could reverse
the district's fact-finding as clearly erroneous that
race didn't predominant, given that all they introduced
was statistics.
I think The Court should affirm on the basis
of the fact-finding and not reach questions about
Section 5.
Unless the Court has any other questions,
that ends my -- thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Professor Pildes, you have two minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF RICHARD PILDES
ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
MR. PILDES:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chief
Justice.
If I can, I'd like to address --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Is he right on that last
point?  Earlier, one of the two of you said that if you
looked at the division of precincts, it was done on the
basis of this policy in almost every district.  Was that
shown below?
MR. PILDES:  We introduced all of that
precinct splitting information below and in our proposed
findings of fact, Document Number 196, some of which is
reproduced in one of the briefs.  We made exactly this
point, yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  What other -- besides
the statistics, what other evidence did you present?
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, we --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I can go back to the
Joint Appendix, but I just want a summary of it from
you.
MR. PILDES:  Your Honor, the key fact we
presented, I think, that hasn't been discussed here is
that the Alabama Constitution prohibits the splitting of
counties.  And they say they had a Supremacy Clause
obligation to meet these racial targets, and that meant
they could override the Alabama's -- the Alabama
Constitution's protection of county boundaries and all
other State traditional districting principles.
And the 2 percent rule works the same way.
If that's actually a Federal constitutional requirement,
they can also override the key protections against
partisan gerrymandering.  The very that few exist, the
only hard constraints, the county boundaries are
political subdivision boundaries, and it means they can
manipulate the all-important county delegations in the
Alabama legislature by breaking counties into multiple
districts and then deciding who runs the county by
putting their district in there.
Now, a second question we answered that I
think has been very important in this discussion -- and,
by the way, I don't want to lose track of the fact that
on remand, the Alabama legislature will have to comply
with the whole county provisions, or at least they can't
use this Federal excuse to split them.
The way most States do this is they either
start with traditional districting principles in the
core of existing districts and they look to see at the
end have we maintained the same number of
majority-minority districts, or if they start with a
number at the beginning, which they're not required to,
they ask what's necessary in current conditions to
preserve the ability to elect today.
That's what Alabama did in its 2001
submissions.  It actually said that the number for the
ability to elect was a 55 percent black voting age
population.  That's in its official submissions to the
United States.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the case in the
