IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
COMMIL USA, LLC,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 13-896
v.  :
CISCO SYSTEMS, INC.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, March 31, 2015
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:13 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
MARK S. WERBNER, ESQ., Dallas, Tex.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
GINGER D. ANDERS, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
United States, as amicus curiae, supporting
Petitioner.
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
MARK S. WERBNER, ESQ.
3On behalf of the Petitioner
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
GINGER D. ANDERS, ESQ.
For United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Petitioner  15
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
SETH P. WAXMAN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent  26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
MARK S. WERBNER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  49
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:13 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
first this morning in Case 13-896, Commil USA v. Cisco
Systems.
Mr. Werbner.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF MARK S. WERBNER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. WERBNER:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
This case concerns whether an infringer, who
bypasses myriad means of adjudicating patent validity
and who then actively induces infringement, can escape
responsibility simply by claiming that they believe the
patent was invalid.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, not claiming, but by
proving.
MR. WERBNER:  Well, they would have to prove
that, Your Honor.  But we submit that the presumption of
validity, especially because of that, it would be wrong
to allow the infringer to escape liability in those
instances.  If there's a mistake, it should be borne by
the infringer who made the mistake.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You mentioned the
presumption of validity.  What percentage of patents
that are challenged are found to be valid?
MR. WERBNER:  Well, Your Honor, from the
briefing, it appears a high number; 40 percent was an
estimate.  I don't know how --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, 40 -- 40
percent of the patents are -- are found to be valid?
Invalid.
MR. WERBNER:  Invalid.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Invalid.  So only
60 percent are upheld.  That's not much of a presumption
of validity.
MR. WERBNER:  Mr. Chief Justice, I would
submit that it would be for Congress to change the
presumption of validity, if -- if it's out of line.  The
presumption has been part of patent law for several
hundred years, even before the codification in 1952.
And it's more than just a procedural mechanism, it's a
message that patents are presumed valid.  They should
be respected not just by judges and juries, but by the
public who are told that until proven otherwise, patents
are presumed valid.  And someone who wishes to gamble on
their belief that it's invalid should bear the
consequences if they're wrong.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  This question would come
up only if the patent had been held valid, right?  And
the defense is although the patent is valid, we had a
good faith belief that it was invalid.
MR. WERBNER:  That's right, Justice
Ginsburg.  It would basically give the accused infringer
a second bite at the apple because they would have to
have the patent found valid.  And then, if that went
against them, then they would want a second chance to
say even though they were mistaken, they believed that
it was invalid.
And we think that giving them that second
bite at the apple will eviscerate the effectiveness of
Section 271(b), which is vital to protect the interest
of patent owners.  And the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The court below believed
that there was no good faith basis to distinguish a good
faith belief in lack of infringement from a good faith
belief in -- in validity.  How do you address that
difference?
MR. WERBNER:  Justice Sotomayor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Or is there one and why?
MR. WERBNER:  There is a substantial
difference, Your Honor, because we can see that -- that
validity and infringement are different.  I'd like to
start with the statutory basis that makes that clear.
271(b) says that whoever shall actively induce
infringement shall be liable as an infringer.  It speaks
not at all to validity.  Validity is in a completely
separate section of the Patent Act, section --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, but it's a -- it's a --
it's a type of aiding and abetting liability and both
at -- in tort law and in criminal law.  At the common
law, it was clear that you're not liable as an aider and
abetter unless you have a wrongful intent.  If indeed
your -- and you acknowledge that -- that part of this
depends upon -- upon wrongful intent, don't you?  You --
you say that it can't hinge upon the belief that the
patent is invalid, but do you not acknowledge that you
have to -- you -- you have to believe that you are
inducing infringement of -- of the invalid patent?
MR. WERBNER:  Well, indeed, Justice --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Where do you get that
requirement from?
MR. WERBNER:  Well, indeed, Justice Scalia,
those are two separate.  The -- and I acknowledge that,
as the Court said in the Global-Tech matter, that some
intent is required and that was found from the words
"actively induce" in Section 271(b).
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, why just some intent?
What -- what good does it do to say, well, you know,
you're really not a bad actor, but you're, you know --
you're half a bad actor, that's enough.  It -- it seems
to me that -- that if you don't know that you're
infringing or that you're encouraging somebody to
infringe is -- is no -- no worse than you're not knowing
that the patent is valid.
MR. WERBNER:  Well, under the court's Aro 2
case that the Court described in Global-Tech's as a
fixture of patent law, the Court specifically there
recognized that once an accused infringer received
actual notice of the patent and is put on notice of the
infringing conduct, that that -- that creates no defense
to that person.
And I think the policy reason for that is
that having actual knowledge of the patent goes a very
long way in -- in -- in putting the person who then goes
forward with knowledge of the patent different than in
Global-Tech, and they infringe and they were on notice,
they should be the ones, if I might say, who should have
stopped when they had that notice, Your Honor, and gone
to the myriad means of adjudicating patent validity.
Now under the America Invents Act, for
example, there are streamlined procedures available.  So
the wrongdoing arises when someone who has actual
knowledge of the patent and is on notice from the patent
owner of infringement, if they don't go to the
streamline procedures -- and they can do a declaratory
judgment, they can do the IPR, the inter-parties review
at the Patent Office -- then they are gambling on their
belief.  And as between the patent owner and the accused
who was on notice, it's wrong if the infringer with --
with that chooses not to pursue those methods.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you have a cause of
action against the person who infringes, right?  And it
doesn't matter whether he thinks the patent is invalid
or not.  You -- you got that person, don't you?  So this
is sort of a supplemental cause of action against --
against somebody who induces, who aids and abets.
MR. WERBNER:  Yes, Your Honor, that's --
that's true.  And the 271(a), the direct infringer, has
strict liability.  But I submit that when we look at
271(b) and (c), there shouldn't be this yawning gap
between the aider and abetter and the -- the direct
infringer.  There should be more required --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But there is a common
law -- I mean, there -- there was a common law, both
civil and criminal.  The aider and abetter was really
a -- way beyond what it took to -- to convict the person
who committed the tort or -- or committed the crime.
MR. WERBNER:  Justice Scalia, it's true.
But if we look at the restatement dealing with aiding
and abetting, we see that it depends.  There are several
provisions that -- that deal with aider and abetter, and
the one that has the word "induce" in it requires a much
lower scienter and intent, does the one who is
assisting.  And -- and that makes sense.
If I could point out one other statutory
aspect, and I'm referring to what was -- what is
Footnote 6 on page 22 of the government's brief, there's
an example there of three statutes that are very
powerful in telling us what was meant by Congress in
271(b), Footnote 6 on page 22.
The first, when we try to discern the
textual meaning of 271(b), we need go no further than
271(e)(5), that very same section.  And there, at the
very end of that section, it talks about "the courts of
the United States shall have subject matter jurisdiction
for declaratory judgment that such patent" -- this is
the brand name patent -- "is invalid or not infringed."
And I'll give two more examples where we see where
Congress knows the difference between invalidity and
infringement.  Where Congress is addressing both, it
says both.  And that was the first of three examples.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Werbner, suppose I have
a product and I'm trying to figure out whether, if I
sell this product, I'll have liability.  And there are
two ways to construe a statute -- construe a patent; one
is narrow and one is broad.  And if the patent is
construed narrowly, I won't be infringing it.  But if
the patent is construed broadly, it's not valid.  Right?
So I have two possible defenses, depending on whether
the patent is construed narrowly or the patent is
construed broadly.
Now, Global-Tech says that I have a good
faith defense as to non-infringement, but you're
suggesting I don't have that good faith defense as to
invalidity.  And I guess I don't understand quite why
that would make sense in the context that I'm talking
about, which I think is a pretty typical context.  But
it would seem that the two defenses are so intertwined
and so two sides of the same coin that they should be
treated in the same way.
MR. WERBNER:  Justice Kagan, I -- I
understand the question.  And -- and one of judges in
the court below said in dissent they're not two sides of
the same coin, they're actually two separate coins.  And
I -- I see the -- the -- where the issue arises in claim
construction, but every party to a patent litigation is
uncertain about claim construction, plaintiff and
defendant.  And until a Markman hearing is had, no party
knows for sure how the claim will be construed.  That's
just inherent in patent litigation.
If the person makes a judgment, as they have
to, about what the claim constructions are and they
think the patent doesn't infringe, then they are in a
different situation if they have a question about
validity.  And they have options.  Contrary to what my
opponent says, there are options at that point.  If the
person is not certain about claim construction as to
whether there will be validity or not, they can do an
IPR before the Patent Office, a new procedure that was
part of the American Invents Act which can be resolved in
18 months, and -- and often stay the litigation.  They
could go for declaratory judgment.
So my -- my answer would -- would be that,
regardless of what leads them to their confusion, if
they assumed the risk by -- by proceeding, then -- then
if it turns out they're wrong, they -- they should bear
the risk as between --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you -- you could say
the same thing about -- about whether they were
infringing or not.  They could bring a declaratory
judgment action as to whether they're fringing or not.
And therefore, they don't have to gamble that they're --
that they're not infringing.  They can get a declaratory
judgment.  So, you know, put the burden on them.
Why do you do it for the one and not for the
other?  That's -- that's what I don't understand.
MR. WERBNER:  Well, Your Honor, I would say
that with respect to beliefs and invalidity, it's deeply
ingrained in American law that there is a difference.
And -- for example, in the Cheek v. United States case,
that distinction was made very clear, that's in the
context of a criminal statute where the accused for tax
evasion, raising all sorts of mistakes of law and the
like, this Court held in that Cheek decision that one
accused of violating the prohibition will not be heard
to say they thought the prohibition was invalid or
unconstitutional.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But that really does get
back to the Chief Justice's opening question, because
you're quite right in your reply brief when you say that
this is a tradition in American law, that we assume that
statutes are constitutional, that we assume that
contracts are valid, that's right, but it's because they
really are.  You know, almost all statutes are
constitutional.  And here we're in a different universe
entirely, aren't we?  Where, you know, you could flip a
coin as to whether a patent is valid or invalid and be
pretty close, right?  It's about 50/50.
MR. WERBNER:  Well, the Congress has said
that there should be a presumption of validity and
that's been the law and in the Court's opinion in i4i
quoting Justice Cardozo about the force of the
presumption and Judge Rich who explained the basis
when -- when the government acts to presume that it did
so properly.  So maybe there is some step, but that's --
what I mean to say a -- a gap between the current
presumption and certain practices.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Is that a -- is that
an historical development?  Did more of them used to be
valid, however many decades ago and, it's sort of
changed recently?
MR. WERBNER:  I think more recently,
there -- there is more of an issue.  I'm not certain,
Mr. Chief Justice, how -- how the statistics were
further back.  But I do know that Congress has responded
very recently and the PTO is responding to the various
issues, and that should be the mechanism, congressional
action and -- and PTO action, and not prejudice patent
owners, who have not done anything wrong, who have
gained their patent.  And, of course, in this case, it
is a valid patent and Cisco not only was found to be
infringing a valid patent, they went to the PTO to
re-exam this patent and it was found --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But you -- you seem to be
arguing that notice is all that's needed.  But the whole
point of Global-Tech was inquiry was encouraged.  And it
seems to me that there's not a parallel or a symmetry
between what you're arguing and what Global-Tech said.
Global-Tech said, we want you to inquire.  You say, once
you get a notice -- and I'm sure these letters just come
all the time, they're form letters -- that that's it.
MR. WERBNER:  Justice Kennedy, I don't think
that it would be sufficient to be a form letter.  I know
that the Respondent has raised questions about that, but
I -- I don't submit that it -- it can just be a form
letter or inadequate.  But -- but I want to make my
point clear as a matter of Global-Tech and infringement,
because that's really different from the validity.
There, I think, it would be helpful if the Court could
clarify Global-Tech.  It was dealing with a situation
where there wasn't knowledge of the patent.  So I think
some of the statements there might -- might, in the
context of not knowing of the patent and willful
blindness, be different.
I think Aro II, where there was knowledge of
the patent, and this Court held very clearly that there
would be no defense available once this person received
the notice in the patent, I think that should guide the
Court in the cases where there is knowledge of the
patent.
If I may reserve the rest of my time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
MR. WERBNER:  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Ms. Anders.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF GINGER D. ANDERS
FOR UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE
SUPPORTING PETITIONER
MS. ANDERS:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
Neither a good faith belief in
non-infringement, nor a good faith belief in invalidity
should preclude liability for inducing enforcement.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Are you asking us to
overturn Global-Tech and --
MS. ANDERS:  No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- Aro?
MS. ANDERS:  No.  We don't think that the
Court should overturn Global-Tech.  We think that
Global-Tech clearly resolved the issue.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So if we read all the
texts to mean that you have to have knowledge of the
patent and knowledge that your activity infringes it,
then your argument doesn't hold up.
MS. ANDERS:  If that's how the Court
understands Global-Tech, then we would say, like
Petitioner, that -- that even if you think that -- that
knowledge of the infringing nature of the acts is
necessary, knowledge of invalidity is not also
necessary.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So break up your
argument if you would for me addressing both
presumptions.  Because I think those are different
arguments.
MS. ANDERS:  Well, so we think that if you
look at Global-Tech, it doesn't clearly resolve the
issue about whether knowledge of infringement --
knowledge of the infringing nature of the acts is
necessary.  There's language in the opinion that states
that knowledge of the patent would be sufficient to
satisfy knowledge of the infringement.  The court also
did not have to resolve the question about whether a
good faith belief in non-infringement would be necessary
because that was not presented in Global-Tech.  The
defendant there had no arguments that even if he knew
about the patent --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, there was an
argument there that he didn't know that someone
replacing a top infringed.
MS. ANDERS:  I -- if Your Honor --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The fabric --
MS. ANDERS:  -- is talking about Aro II in
that case, what the Court said was that you need
knowledge that the -- that the use is infringing and the
Court held that that knowledge was conclusively
satisfied by the defendant's knowledge of the patent and
knowledge of the link between the patent and the
conduct.  I think there was no plausible argument there
that the defendant had a good faith belief or -- I'm
sorry, that the defendant lacked a good faith belief
that his conduct was not infringing.  The question of
whether direct infringement was occurring was hotly
contested.  It was litigated all the way up to the
Supreme Court and back, and it closely divided the
Justices 5/4.  So I think anyone would say that in that
case, the defendant had a good faith belief in -- in
non-infringement.
Now, if I could just address why it makes
sense, I think, to read Global-Tech and Aro this way and
to not require knowledge of the --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Before you do that, Ms.
Anders, I mean, it just does seem whatever the factual
circumstances of that case were, we could not have been
more clear about the breadth of the holding.  I mean, we
just said, we now hold that induced infringement under
271(b) requires knowledge that the induced acts
constitute patent infringement.  And your brief
essentially puts a "not" in that sentence.
MS. ANDERS:  With respect, Justice Kagan, I
don't think that's so.  I think the -- the sentence that
immediately preceded the sentence that Your Honor just
read said that it would be strange to hold that
knowledge of the patent is needed under 271(c), but not
271(b).  Accordingly, we now hold that knowledge that
the induced acts constitute a patent infringement is
necessary.  So I think that the Court may have equated
the two things.
But -- but just to go back to why I think it
would make sense to read --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me, I don't
understand what you just said.  It equated what two
things?
MS. ANDERS:  It may have acknowledged the
patent --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Knowledge of the patent and
knowledge that the patent is -- is being infringed?
MS. ANDERS:  Yes.  Yes.  This is what the
Court did in Aro II.  I think the Court --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Are we that dumb, that --
that -- that we would say those two things in successive
sentences?
MS. ANDERS:  Well, no.  I think it comes
from Aro II, Your Honor.  What the Court said in Aro II
was the knowledge of infringement is necessary and the
Court said the defendant has no defense that he lacked
knowledge of infringement when he possessed knowledge of
the patent and knowledge of the accusation of
infringement.  So I think that's where this language
comes from.
But again, just to address both why this
makes sense and why I think it makes sense to say that a
good faith belief in invalidity is not a defense even --
even though 40 percent of patents may be invalid.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I hope you'll spend --
concentrate on that because that's the crux of this
case.  I mean, that's what the Federal circuit majority
said, that there's no principal difference between the
two.  And if you could make sure that you -- if you
think there is a principal difference, tell us what it
is.
MS. ANDERS:  Yes, Justice Ginsburg, I'll
address that.  But first I'd like to say that I think a
key point here is that if the inducer is right that the
patent is invalid, or that it's not infringed, he will
not be liable because the Court will find that the
patent was invalid or not infringed.  And so in that
case, you don't have to worry about liability.  So the
question is really what should happen when the defendant
is wrong?  Right.  Who should bear the risk of the
defendants being wrong that the patent is invalid or --
or not infringed?  And we think the inducer should bear
the burden.  This is -- this is someone who knows about
the patent, who has considered it, who has decided not
to challenge, not to use the statutory mechanisms that
Congress has provided to challenge the patent.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The patentee has a cause of
action against the person who -- who violates the
patent, right?  You're just talking about supplemental
liability for somebody who induced that -- that
violation.  And generally, for that kind of liability,
we have required mens rea.  We have required knowledge
that you're doing something wrong.
MS. ANDERS:  Well, two points with respect
to that.  The first point is that certainly in the
criminal law, you may need wrongful intent when you're an
aider and abetter, but you do not need knowledge that
the principal offense is illegal.  So, for instance, if
you're aiding and abetting a felon to possess a gun, you
need to know that you're selling them a gun and that
they're a felon.  You don't need to know that it's
illegal for the -- for a felon to possess a gun.  So we
think that's analogous here.
The second point I would make is that 271(b)
is not simply supplemental liability, it is an
important means of enforcing --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Have we held that, what you
just said?  Has this Court held that?  Do we have a case
in this Court that says that?
MS. ANDERS:  I think that's a --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You -- you can be liable
for aiding and abetting a felony when you don't know
that it's a felony?
MS. ANDERS:  You don't have to know that the
underlying conduct is illegal, yes, that's right.  I
think that's a principle of the common law.  I -- I
think you see that in the criminal law treatises for
certainly.
But -- but 271(b), I think, is -- Congress
intended that to be available to enforce patent rights
when it would be impracticable for patentholders to --
to file suit directly against a direct infringer.  So
situations like the Grokster scenario where you have
millions of direct infringers, you need to go after the
person who is inducing that conduct
But to go back to Justice Ginsburg's point
about why would it make sense to treat the two issues
differently, I think there are three reasons that --
that you would do so.  The first is that even though,
as -- as Justice Kagan said, claim construction can be a
common subsidiary issue in both non-infringement
questions and invalidity issues, I don't think it's
anomalous to still treat the two issues as separate.
For instance, in Chief v. United States, the
Court -- it -- it's clear that in -- in the statutory
context, you might have a question about statutory
construction that would be relevant to whether you're
violating the statute, and that same question might be
relevant to the validity of the statute, but the Court
still said that your belief that you -- that -- that the
statute was invalid did not negate your stand with
respect to whether you're violating the law.
And as to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You said on a -- a
couple of times about the idea of -- of difficulty of
going after all the little people.  But why is that?  It
would seem to me that once you have a few successful
suits against the users rather than inducers, both the
users and the inducer will get the message and not --
not continue on with the infringement.
MS. ANDERS:  Well, I'm not sure that that's
-- that's always going to be the case as a practical
matter.  I think there may be situations in -- in which,
you know, the -- the users may have -- the direct users
may have immunities.  For instance, the Patent Act
provides, in the context of surgical materials, that
doctors can't be directly liable for infringement, so
the only -- the only course there is to go after the
inducer.
So I think that Congress anticipated in the
Patent Act that inducement would be an independent means
of imposing liability.
But to go back to the -- the two reasons
that it may make sense as a policy matter to treat
invalidity and non-infringement differently, I think one
of them is that invalidity questions can be even harder
and more complex to determine.  I think it's important
to keep in mind here that -- that what we're saying is
that the defendant would have a -- he would be able to
immunize himself from liability based on his good faith
belief with respect to anticipation, whether there's
prior art that -- that may make it obvious to a person
skilled in the art --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of course, that -- that's
not your position, is it?  I mean, the United States
would treat the both the same, right?
MS. ANDERS:  That is our --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The United States says you
don't have to know either one.  You -- you -- it doesn't
matter.
MS. ANDERS:  That is our frontline position,
but we -- we --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes.
MS. SANDERS:  -- of course acknowledge that
the Court may understand Global-Tech differently than we
do, and in that case we think that there are -- there
are reasons --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The differences are not
enough to persuade you, but you think they should be
enough to persuade us.  Is that it?
MS. ANDERS:  No.  I think as a -- I think
our -- our primary point is that it's not usually the
case in the law that we require defendants to have
knowledge that they will ultimately be held liable, that
they have no good faith arguments about, you know,
complex legal questions, technical factual questions,
claim construction questions.  That is not usually the
way it works in the law.
But even when a defendant may need knowledge
that his conduct is illegal, it is not the case that --
that a belief that -- that the underlying legal duty is
invalid, would -- would negate that scienter.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What you just said
does sound like an argument that Global-Tech was -- was
wrong.
MS. ANDERS:  Again, I don't think it is,
Your Honor, because, again, even if you understand
Global-Tech to require knowledge of infringement, we
think there are reasons to treat infringement
differently.
And I go back to the statute here.  If you
assume that 271(b) requires knowledge with respect to
the fact that the acts constitute infringement,
infringement is defined in 271(a).  Infringement is
defined as practicing the elements of the patent without
authorization.  The validity of the patent is not an
element of the plaintiff's cause of action, so it is
possible to establish infringement without establishing
the validity of the patent.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You have infringed a
nonpatent, right?  I mean, it -- I guess you could say
that, but --
MS. ANDERS:  No.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- and we have many cases
that say you can't infringe an invalid patent.
MS. ANDERS:  I think --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  We say that often.
MS. ANDERS:  I think Congress made clear
that infringe -- that invalidity is something that
prevents liability from infringement.  It does not
prevent infringement from occurring.  Once the PTO has
granted a patent, that patent exists and it can be
infringed.  271(a) says --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  There are two different
burdens, aren't there, for infringement and for
invalidity?  Infringement, the patent owner bears the
burden of proving that the other is fringing; and for
invalidity, the -- the other side bears the burden.  So
they are treated differently --
MS. ANDERS:  That's correct.  I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- in the law.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Briefly.
MS. ANDERS:  I think 271(a) makes clear that
because of the presumption of validity, infringement and
invalidity are separate issues.  The patentee does not
have to prove validity in order to establish
infringement.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Waxman.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF SETH P. WAXMAN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. WAXMAN:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
As this Court explained in Grokster and in
Global-Tech, the linchpin of scienter for inducement
liability is knowledge that the induced acts, quote,
"violate the rights of the patentee."  Because
practicing an invalid patent violates no such right of a
patentee, an accused inducer who reasonably believes in
good faith that a patent is void lacks the scienter
required for liability under Section 271(b).
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So what does that do to
the presumption?
MR. WAXMAN:  The --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  If the presumption is
that a patent is invalid until you prove, you have the
burden -- that a patent is valid, you have the burden to
prove it's invalid, your position basically says, no, I
don't have to prove it, I just have to show I had a good
faith basis.
MR. WAXMAN:  Well, no, no, no.  I mean, in
order to invalidate a patent in court, the party urging
that the patent is invalid bears the burden of proving
invalidity by clear and convincing evidence.  That's
actually not the burden if you challenge it before the
PTO.
But it is a high burden, and it's
appropriately high because once a patent is declared
invalid, it is unenforceable against anybody for all
time and under principles of -- under the Blonder-Tongue
principles, a patentee who loses once is gone.  And
there -- this case, of course, and the issue in this
case only arises, as all specific intent cases arise,
only where there is otherwise established a cause of
action.
So, in other words, the good faith belief
either that the patent wasn't being infringed by the
direct infringers or was a void patent will arise only
when a court or the PTO has concluded that the patent is
indeed valid.  And when -- and the only issue in this
case is will it -- that it is the -- the plaintiff's
duty, the plaintiff's burden to prove scienter.  And
as -- as Aro suggests, and Global-Tech affirms, if the
plaintiff comes forward and says, I sent him a letter
identifying the patent and expressing my belief that the
patent is infringed, if the -- if the defendant doesn't
have anything else to say, that can be viewed as
permitting the jury to conclude that, in fact, the
defendant had scienter.
The only issue in this case is what the
defendant can say in response to the scienter element,
an element that does apply, as Justice Scalia was
pointing out, at common law for aiding and abetting
liability.  And the -- the jury will certainly be told
after the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But you're not aiding
and abetting.  You're --
MR. WAXMAN:  I'm sorry?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- induce -- you're not
aiding and abetting.  You're inducing.
MR. WAXMAN:  So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You're -- you're --
actually it's like I want -- you're -- you're appointing
a surrogate and you're saying, you do it for me, but you
do it.
MR. WAXMAN:  Well, I -- I want to get to my
last point about what the jury will be instructed, but
let me first, with all due respect, take on that
assertion.
When Congress enacted Section 271(b) and
Section 271(c) in 1952, both the House report and the
Senate report said two things about those provisions:
Number one, that they were enacted to reflect common law
principles of aiding and abetting liability, and that
they were thus, quote, "an expression of law and
morals."
And this Court in Global-Tech precisely
recognized that these provisions are, in fact, the
modern day statutory version of civil aiding and
abetting.  The Federal Circuit has always recognized it.
And aiding and abetting at common law absolutely require
knowledge of wrongdoing.
And just to get to your original question,
in a case in which the jury has found that the patent is
valid and the plaintiff goes on to say, you know, and
there was appropriate scienter because -- and it's quite
unlike this case because there was no letter -- a letter
was sent saying, I have this, the '395 patent, and
here's why you infringe it, you've heard the defendant
explain why he or she or it nonetheless had a reasonable
good faith belief that the patent was void.
In -- in evaluating the reasonableness and
good faith of that expressed belief, you need to take
into account that under the patent laws, patents --
issued patents are presumed valid and that in order
to -- in order to establish the invalidity of a patent
in court, as I have otherwise instructed you, the
defendant has to prove invalidity by clear and
convincing evidence, and that's what you should take
into account when you are evaluating the defendant's
profession of a good faith belief.  And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  If you -- go ahead.
MR. WAXMAN:  No -- I'm sorry.  I was just
going to -- just going to Justice Kagan's point, the --
about, you know, the two sides of the coin or two
different coins, whatever metaphor you want to use, what
the -- what happens in the paradigmatic case -- and it
actually happened in this case when the lawsuit was
filed is the defendant looks at the claim that it has a
method that is violating this patent and it may seek
legal counsel.  And what it found in this case and what
it would testify to if it were allowed is we looked at
these -- at this patent.  This patent seems to, by all
intents and purposes, claim Bluetooth technology, and if
the patent is construed narrowly as we think it should
be, our customers are not practicing the steps.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, that seems to
me to go to the application in your case.  But to step
back, if you regard the patent as law, it seems to me
that your position is really just ignorance of the law
as an excuse.
MR. WAXMAN:  No, no, no.  We are not -- not
at all, Mr. Chief Justice.  We are not arguing at all
for a freestanding defense of a mistake of law.  We're
not arguing here -- or there was a reference to Cheek.
We're not claiming that there is a reasonable good faith
defense in a belief that the patent laws are
unconstitutional or that they don't imply -- apply
secondary liability or even, we don't -- it wouldn't be
a reasonable good faith belief.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No.  But if the
patent -- you don't have to say the patent laws are
unconstitutional, but if you regard the patent more as
law rather than -- than contract, and it does apply
against the whole confer legal rights against the whole
world --
MR. WAXMAN:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- and you say,
well, even if we turn out to have been wrong about what
that law means, what that patent means, we still have a
valid defense.
MR. WAXMAN:  Well, what the law means and
what a patent means are two very different things.  And
I think that really is the crux of what I should have
started saying.  There's no dispute that practicing all
of the steps of a patented invention is unlawful and a
defense of a belief that it wasn't wouldn't be a
defense.  But invalidity defenses are not disputes about
the -- the parameters or the scope of the -- of Section
102 or 103 or 112.  Invalidity defenses are utterly
factual.  Several of them the Supreme Court -- the
Federal circuit has said are purely factual, and the
other ones that aren't are questions of law that
depend -- that are resolved completely by resolution of
facts.  And the government, in its brief at Page 30,
acknowledges and extolls this.  So a contention that
there is a reasonable good faith that a patent is void
is not arguing about the legality of anything.  It
argues about the force of the issued document.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I guess I'm not sure what
you're saying.  I mean, even take a typical contract
case.  Typical contract cases, somebody sues you for
breach of contract and you say, oh, I thought that the
contract was invalid.  It's true.  I would have breached
it if it were valid, but I thought the contract was
invalid.  That usually does not allow -- that's not a
good defense.  I mean, if it turns out that the contract
was invalid, you win.  But if the contract was valid,
you lose even though you thought the contract was
invalid.  And so, too, here it would seem to me.
MR. WAXMAN:  And that is exactly the rule
that -- I mean, contract breach is a -- it's not a tort,
but it's the analogy to a direct tort.  It's analogous
to the direct infringer.  On the contrary, at common
law, tortious interference required an act that was not
only intentional but, quote, "improper."  And that's
reflected in Section 766 of the first restatement of
torts under tortious interference.
And there are -- many, many courts have
understood and construed that word "improper" to require
a belief that the contract -- that you were tortiously
interfering with a contract that is, in fact, valid, and
many courts have allowed the third party, the
aider -- essentially, aider and abetter a defense
that they believe that, you know, this was a contract
for the supply of alcohol during prohibition.  And
juries have found a lack of scienter and a lack of
third-party liability at common law for the absence of
that belief.
I mean, at common law -- and this Court
in -- in the Court's Central Bank of Denver v. First
Interstate Bank of Denver, which was a private
securities action, has a long treatment of the history
of civil aiding and abetting liability and underscores
what the treatises reflect, which is that third-party
liability for a non-culpable wrongful act was
exceptionally rare.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But as Ms. Anders made
the point that in -- in the patent context, it's the
aider and abetter or the inducer is the mastermind and
then the aider and abetter is selling the allegedly
infringing device to a lot of customers.  And as between
those two, it's much more effective to go after the
person who is supplying the alleged -- the infringing
device.
MR. WAXMAN:  Well, Justice Ginsburg, in some
contexts it is; in some contexts it isn't.  When, you
know, Walmart or McDonald's get a letter from Commil
saying that you are infringing our patent because you're
using the -- you know, Cisco provided wide area network,
a couple things happen.  We're talking about the
practicalities of things.
In the first place, companies like Cisco
all -- it is a commonplace to have an indemnification
for customers saying if you're sued for patent
infringement, we will take over the defense and we are
liable.  And even if they don't have that, it obviously
is going to do a company like Cisco or, heaven forbid, a
smaller, you know, innovative company to say, well, you
know, they can't really reach us.  They're just suing
our customers.  And in practice, what sometimes happens,
even in the absence of an indemnification agreement, is
the manufacturer, whether it's Cisco or Apple or
whoever, will intervene in the action or file an
individual dec action to take on the very question.  And
so in the real world of litigation, this issue is
resolved.
Now, on the Chief Justice's question about
how valid are patents, I mean, the -- the answer is the
statistics have changed over time.
At -- at page 49 of our brief, we cite a
1998 study that showed that patents were invalidated 46
percent of the time.  In 2002, a study was done of
Federal circuit decisions between 2003 and 2009 and
found that patents -- challenged patents were
invalidated 60 percent of the time.  And I do think that
in light of this Court's explication of the bounds of
certain validity principles in Alice Corp. as to
business method patents, Nautilus as to indefiniteness,
Mayo as to patentable subject matter, KSR as to
obviousness, there's no question that that number is
going to go up.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, but that might be a
very good reason for Congress to take a new look at this
presumption of validity.  But your problem is that this
presumption of validity exists and that this question of
validity functions in a patent suit only as an
affirmative defense.
MR. WAXMAN:  So I don't -- I -- maybe I'm
seeing this wrong, but I don't actually see the
presumption of validity as a problem.  The presumption
of the validity raises the bar of proving to a jury that
you had a reasonable good faith belief that this patent
would be invalidated; that you have to -- it wouldn't be
reasonable to assume, oh, I think I can prove by 51
percent that it's invalid, or I think it's 51 percent
likely.
The -- the reasonableness in good faith of
your profession has to be evaluated against the high bar
that you will face in court.  And the -- the flip side
of the coin is so one of these letters comes in and --
and Cisco -- I mean, we've seen the government's
statistics are 60 to -- 60 to 100,000 of these letters a
year.  Cisco gets way more than one letter every day.  I
mean, they're sued twice a year.  Every time they get a
letter, according to the government and according to
Commil, what they are supposed to do is shut down the
production line, tell all of the customers who've bought
their technology, oh, no, no, the patent is presumed
valid, you should stop; otherwise, you'll be infringing
while they do what they did, which is to file an action
in the PTO to seek a declaration of invalidity.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  That's only a
problem if you turn out to be wrong.
MR. WAXMAN:  Exactly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Right?  I mean, so
why shouldn't you bear that risk?  Why do you require
the patent holder to lose the value of his patent until
you get around to deciding the validity or the -- the
infringement suit is solved?
MR. WAXMAN:  So I think a couple of answers.
First of all, it is not the -- I mean, you could
establish an a priori rule that says, since all we're
talking about here is retrospective damages looking back
from the adjudication of invalidity, and then that
the -- that the direct infringers are practicing all of
the steps.
And the question just is, whose -- who bears
the burden of that -- of those retrospective damages.
Where the common law put it under aiding and abetting
liability, and where 271(b) and 271(c) put it, as this
Court has explained in Grokster and in Global-Tech, is
to leave it for the jury.  The jury is told, this entity
is accused of inducing infringement or contributory
infringement, and you therefore need to find, in the
first instance, that some entity was, in fact -- could
be, quote, immersed as a direct infringer, to quote this
Court's opinion in Aro.  If you do that, aiding and
abetting liability will follow if the plaintiff
establishes three separate tests, one of which is
scienter.
And the jury will -- and you need to
evaluate whether, in fact, the plaintiff has established
scienter.  If the plaintiff establishes scienter, then
the alleged -- the alleged inducer is an adjudicated
inducer and is, in fact, responsible for all of those
damages.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I -- I still don't
understand.  I mean, you posit that you know that your
steps, if the patent is valid, infringe.
MR. WAXMAN:  I'm sorry, I didn't hear you.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You know, an -- for
inducement, you have to prove that the person knows that
they're infringing.  The next question is, are they
liable for it, and that issue has to do with validity; a
second question.
So I don't know why the patent owner has to
suffer the loss of royalties to your gamble that the
patent is void, because presumably they've proven that
you knew your steps infringed.
MR. WAXMAN:  So I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So you knew that, at
least on the terms of the patent as it exists, you
violated.
MR. WAXMAN:  I have a doctrinal -- my answer
has a doctrinal portion and a practical, real-world
portion.  The doctrinal portion is simply the statement
that was made by somebody on the bench, and -- and I'll
just quote Justice Black in his dissenting opinion in
Exhibit Supply, which began with a statement that was
agreed -- was -- was started as common ground, where
he -- he said, there can be no infringement of a void
patent.  And if you -- and -- and there are --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  May I -- may I stop you
at that point and ask how does that compare with what
Charles Rich said, which is -- and I think this is in
the government's brief and I'm sure that you know it --
assertion that invalid claims can't be infringed is a
nonsense statement.
What do you suppose he meant by that?
MR. WAXMAN:  Okay.  First of all, Charles
Rich, Judge Rich, Chief Judge Rich, held for the court
in Richdel, which was, which was decided in 1983 at the
very outset of the Federal Circuit's creation, this was
the holding of Richdel, that if a claim is invalid,
there is nothing to be infringed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, that --
MR. WAXMAN:  What he meant -- what he meant
when he made the statement that you've quoted was
accurate in the very peculiar context of that case.
Because in that case, there was, in fact, a claim of
invalidity under best mode, and there was a claim that
the steps of the method or the combination were not
being practiced.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Well, then what's --
what's --
MR. WAXMAN:  But because of -- may I just --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You're making this
case-specific.  But he also said, courts constantly hold
claims infringed, but invalid.
MR. WAXMAN:  So what that means is, if I can
just finish my point on the case that he was deciding,
and what it made -- why it made sense for -- because of
a reason of the quirk of the case, the best mode defense
of invalidity was not presented to the jury.  And he was
simply saying that it was wrong to say that by having
found the -- the question of whether all the steps were
practiced or in that case, not, he necessarily -- the
jury necessarily made a finding on invalidity.
What -- what the more general statement,
Justice Ginsburg, reflects is the fact that infringement
can be referred to -- I mean, it -- there are, as was
pointed out, separate defenses.  One is the first -- in
271(a) or 282(a) -- (a)(1), is you're not practicing all
of the steps of the claimed invention, and that is
vernacularly referred to as noninfringement.
The claim that a patent is valid depends on
a -- or invalid depends on a showing that it doesn't
satisfy Sections 102, 103, or 112 of the Patent Act, and
is a -- is a showing that, if made, will invalidate the
patent against everybody, not just the defendant in the
case.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I thought -- and maybe
correct me if I'm wrong -- that what this meant was
thinking of how it comes up in litigation.  So you're in
the district court, and you have -- let's say you're the
alleged infringer or contributory infringer or inducer,
so you say, number one, the patent is invalid; and,
number two, if it's valid, it was not infringed.
So in the court of first instance, both of
those issues are discrete in the sense that I am arguing
it's not valid, so no patent is out of it; but if I'm
wrong about that, it wasn't infringed.  So though --
those are discrete inquiries.
MR. WAXMAN:  There's -- there's -- we're not
disputing that they're discrete inquiries.  The validity
of the -- a -- a finding of infringement, the ability
to, as this Court put it in Aro 1, immerse a defendant
as an infringer presupposes that there is, in fact --
someone is practicing all the steps of a valid patent.
That is -- that's indisputable.
It's simply -- it is a nonsense statement to
say that you can be immersed as an infringer of a void
patent.  The patent provides rights.  The rights to
exclude; the right to withhold authorization within the
meaning of 271(a), defining infringement.  If you have
no ability, no legal right to withhold authorization,
you don't have a legal right that's being violated if
somebody practices the claimed steps.
Now, I do want to make a couple of points --
well, first, I should go back to the -- let me try to
remember my practical side of Justice -- the answer to
Justice Sotomayor's question.  I wish I could remember
it, because it was really good.  Maybe I'll -- maybe
I'll --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Your answer -- your
answer was really good or my question?
MR. WAXMAN:  No, no, your question was good,
but my answer was also good, and it will probably come
to me on the walk back to my office.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I have forgotten the
question.  What was -- what was the question?
MR. WAXMAN:  So I think the question was --
well, what was the question?
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Waxman, as a -- as a
company that's in this position, the company has other
alternatives.  It can go to court and seek a declaratory
judgment, it can go to the PTAB, it can go to the PTO,
it can do all of these things essentially to figure out
whether the patent is valid.  And those things also have
the side benefit of getting invalid patents struck so
that nobody else will have to deal with them either.
So why isn't that the right way to
understand this system, is that, no, rather than come --
rather than allow a company to come in and do what we
don't allow in any other context, as far as I can see,
which is to plead a good faith belief in the invalidity
of the patent, that, no, we -- we say to them, yes, we
understand you have a question, Congress has set up many
mechanisms for you to get an answer to that question,
use one of those mechanisms.
MR. WAXMAN:  Okay.  So, I mean, look, I'm --
our argument isn't principally a policy argument, but
I'll give you the policy answer to your question.  The
legal answer is that 271(b) and (c) liability is a
validly and recognized as a statutory instantiation of
civil aiding and abetting liability.  And third-party
liability at common law was a rarity and a particular
rarity in the absence of culpability.
But as to your question, so Cisco is a big
company and it has a lot of resources.  It's true that
it gets hundreds or thousands of these letters every
year.  And if the notion that it should run into court
and institute an action every time somebody with a
business method patent that seems now pretty clearly
invalid under this Court's decision in Alice has to
begin patent litigation and stop -- stop the production
line and tell all of its customers not to do it, I
think, would be an odd practical remedy.
The question here is:  What about a company
that's perhaps a less -- that's Cisco 20 years ago.  You
know, an innovative company that is making products that
people can use.  It gets a letter and it looks at this
letter and says, gee, you know, if the patent is
construed the way we think it should be construed, we
don't think our customers are violating it, and if it's
construed broadly, it's probably void because of X, Y,
or Z.
If we go to court -- first of all, we will
have to shut down our only means of -- you know, we have
to shut down our production line, we have to tell our
customer to stop using it and we get to go to court and
litigate what probably will be a $1 million to
$10 million case, which if we don't shut our production
line, we will be retrospectively liable for all the
damages that occurred.  And the paradigm of what happens
here is -- again, this is getting back to a point that I
do remember that you made, which is the two sides of the
coin -- what the lower court held -- what the trial
court held was that under Global-Tech, it had to allow
Cisco in -- on the issue of scienter to explain why it
had a good faith belief that the patent was not
infringed.  But it was not allowed to explain why, if
the -- all the steps -- if the claim -- if the patent
were construed so as to encompass what Cisco does, it
would be invalid for lack of enablement or written
description.  And -- which is exactly what happened.
And so the defense that Cisco was allowed to
make at trial was the sound of one hand clapping
whereas what Cisco did, once it received notice of this
suit, was to -- to do an analysis and say, this appears
to claim only Bluetooth, we don't do Bluetooth, so our
customers are not practicing the steps.  But if this
were construed broadly enough to include the protocols
that we are involved in, it would be anticipated and in
any event, there's no enablement or a written
description of how to do it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That goes to -- that
goes to rolling the dice.
MR. WAXMAN:  Well, yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Meaning if you --
MR. WAXMAN:  But --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Infringement is one
thing.  If you have a good faith belief, you've done the
inquiry, the one that Justice Kennedy talked about, that
was the premise of Global-Tech, which is there's a valid
patent out there, you have to give a reason why your
steps don't infringe their steps.
MR. WAXMAN:  You have to give --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  If you can do that,
that's fine.  If you can't, if -- once you've done,
you've lost on that, then you've rolled the dice.  Why
should the patent owner now be deprived of the value of--
MR. WAXMAN:  Justice Sotomayor, you are
rolling the dice no matter what.  Because if you can't
convince -- you need to be able to convince a jury that
notwithstanding the -- whatever proof the plaintiff has
that you were on notice of the patent and a claim of
infringement, that your scienter, which after all is
measured by what you believe, not why what the other
side tells you to believe, you are -- if the jury can
only evaluate half of the thought process of the
defendant, the defendant says, if it's narrowly
construed, the -- the steps aren't practiced; if it's
broadly construed, it's invalid.  But when you get to
the jury, the only thing you're allowed to tell the jury
is, well, I believed that if it was narrowly construed,
we wouldn't be practicing this.  That's not a real --
that's not giving the jury the benefit of what you
believed.
And again, all this case is about, it's not
about immunizing anything.  It's about what the jury
will hear if the defendant has anything to say about its
scienter in response to a prima facia showing by the
plaintiff that the defendant knew of the patent and that
it -- the patent was being infringed.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Is there -- this is -- we
have no question, right, that validity or invalidity is
an affirmative defense?
MR. WAXMAN:  Correct.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Is that correct?  I mean, is
there any other area of law where the defendant gets to
say, I thought an affirmative defense would be
available?  It turned out I was wrong, but I thought an
affirmative defense would be available.
MR. WAXMAN:  Oh, I think, if you -- may I --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Sure.
MR. WAXMAN:  Quickly.  Any of the common
law, any of the -- if you go back to the common law and
look at instances where aiding and abetting liability,
which as this Court pointed out is referenced in 876(b)
of the first restatement, that defense was available.
Because someone who didn't have that belief was not
culpable and, quote, "morally wrong."
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Werbner, you have four minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF MARK S. WERBNER
ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
MR. WERBNER:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
Justice Kagan, to your question just now, I
know of no other area of the law where a defendant, if
it turns out they're right, they win, and if it turns
out they're wrong, they win.  That's the position that
Cisco is seeking.
And the parade of horribles of having to
shut down the factory --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You're argument goes too
far, because that's the same for infringement.  If you
don't think you're infringing and you have a good faith
basis, you're right.
MR. WERBNER:  Well, there -- there is the --
in my mind, the fact is, is that Cisco in their amici
pressed Congress to create through the PTO the IPR
procedures.  It's not a million dollar lawsuit, and it's
not one that goes on forever.  They have many lawyers
that can evaluate the risk and go to the PTO.  That's
where they should go if they're seeking validity.
Infringement you can't go to the PTO, but the IPR allows
that.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of course your response to
the -- the assertion that your -- your argument goes too
far is well, we don't -- we don't agree that -- that it
applies to whether you've infringed, right?  I mean,
your argument is even -- even the question of
infringement, despite what we said in Global-Tech, that
is not a defense either, right?  So at least you're
consistent.
MR. WERBNER:  Well, Justice Scalia, I do
want to point out that Cisco cannot point to a single
statutory provision that suggests that Congress thought
that the validity of the patent was an element of
271(b).
So, no matter how the Court comes out on the
non-infringement scienter and the Global-Tech,
regardless, our position doesn't depend on it and -- and
there's no statutory support for validity being a
component of a 271(b).  And the reference was to
Blonder-Tongue?  That -- that case that this Court
decided back in, I think, the early '70s said that a
jury finding or a judge that a patent is invalid doesn't
wipe it out.  It's not -- it doesn't become void or
canceled.  It's a matter of collateral estoppel that has
to be pled under Rule 8(c).  And if a defendant later
does not, then that patent was infringing an invalid
patent because it's an affirmative defense.
So I think the Blonder-Tongue case really
completely undermines the position that -- that
infringement presupposes validity.  It's quite separate,
it's quite distinct and for the reasons we stated, we
would ask that the case be reversed and remanded to the
Federal circuit unless there are questions.
Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:14 a.m., the case in the
