IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
LARRY WHITFIELD,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 13-9026
v.  :
UNITED STATES.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, December 2, 2014
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:06 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
JOSHUA B. CARPENTER, ESQ., Asheville, N.C.; on behalf of
Petitioner.
BRIAN H. FLETCHER, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice; Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Respondent.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
JOSHUA B. CARPENTER, ESQ.
3On behalf of the Petitioner
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
BRIAN H. FLETCHER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondent  27
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
JOSHUA B. CARPENTER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioner  53
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:06 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We will now hear
argument next this morning in Case No. 13-9026,
Whitfield v. United States.
Mr. Carpenter.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOSHUA B. CARPENTER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. CARPENTER: Thank you Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The basic bank robbery offense under
Section 2113(a) requires the robber to use force,
intimidation or violence against another person.
Section (e)'s forced accompaniment provision is designed
for much more extreme conduct that Congress viewed as
roughly on par with murder.  And yet the government
would have that provision and its ten-year mandatory
minimum apply any time that a robber forces someone to
take a single step with him in the course of a robbery.
That single step rule isn't justified by the
text of the statute, and it isn't necessary to ensure
just punishment for bank robbers.  In this case --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why isn't it justified by
the text?
MR. CARPENTER:  Your Honor, it's not
justified by the text, first --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I can -- I can accompany
my -- my wife to her table when we go to a dinner party,
and we're -- we're seated at different tables.  Isn't --
isn't it proper to say I accompany her to the table?
MR. CARPENTER:  Your Honor, our view is not
that it is technically improper, but that it is -- it
would not be an ordinary and natural usage of the word
"accompany," for example, to say --
JUSTICE SCALIA: There is, I just gave you an
ordinary and natural use.  I accompanied my wife to her
table.
MR. CARPENTER:  Our view is that it is not
an ordinary usage to say were you accompanied, for
example, from this side of the lectern to this side,
which is the amount of movement the government believes
is -- is covered.  Or, for example, to say, will you
accompany me, Justice Scalia, from your chair down to
yours.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You -- you think there's a
spatial component to -- I mean, what -- I don't
understand why you say it's -- it's not normal usage,
unless you say there is a spatial requirement that
you -- to accompany somebody, you have to walk a longer
distance, and I -- the example I just gave you suggests
otherwise.
MR. CARPENTER:  Your Honor, our view of
the -- in the ordinary usage it is used in the sense of
going to a destination, to the theater, to the ballpark.
But even if there is some question --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  To my wife's table.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, even if there is some
question about whether the usage of just a movement of a
few feet is an ordinary usage, where there are multiple,
possible meanings of a term, we look to the statutory
context and the statutory structure --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I'm asking you whether
there are multiple possible -- listen, I'm very big on
the rule of lenity, but the condition for it is that
there be ambiguity.  And accompany means accompany.  I
don't see any spatial component to it.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And the rule here is, you
know, garbage in, garbage out.  It may be a very foolish
statute.  But -- but we apply what -- what Congress
thought was not foolish.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, Justice Scalia, first,
whether there's ambiguity is determined not by looking
at the word "accompany" in isolation.  But as the Court
said last year in the Utility Air context -- or in the
Utility Air case, the words of the statute are
interpreted in their context and with a view towards
their place in the statutory scheme.  Here the place
that the word "accompany" serves in the statutory scheme
is to set off a set of extreme conduct that Congress
viewed as roughly on par with murder.  Its association
in Section (e) with the killing offense tells us under
the Noscitur principle that Congress viewed a forced
accompaniment as akin to murder.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  20 steps -- 20 steps is
horrible enough for Congress to have believed it's
enough of an accompaniment?  What?  Half a mile?  What?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well,  we don't
believe there's going to be a bright-line rule based on
the number of steps or the number of feet.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't insist on a
bright-line rule.  I insist on some rule.  What --
what is your -- what is your rule?  Does it have to be
outside the building?  Does -- does the bank robber have
to take the person as a hostage outside the building?
MR. CARPENTER:  We think the best way to
effectuate the structure of the scheme is to have a
finding of substantiality.  And we would instruct a jury
or a fact-finder in our Rule 29 motion, first and
foremost, to say that a substantial movement is
something more than a de minimus or a trivial movement.
If the district court or this Court wants to go further
than that, we believe that the court -- the jury --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That's a -- that's a
very different rule than in your brief.  I could buy a
de minimis rule, but I don't know where you get the word
"substantial."
MR. CARPENTER:  Your Honor, we believe that
"substantial" is -- is implied in the structure.  Again,
looking at first the Noscitur --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Let's say we disagree.
Where would you find "de minimis"?
MR. CARPENTER:  If you disagree with that,
then I think you would look -- you could just apply a de
minimis principle and say that movement of just a few
feet within a person's own home is --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  How much is a few feet?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, in this case, it's
about 4 to 9 feet, which is approximately from where
you're sitting, Justice Sotomayor, to where you're
sitting, Justice Scalia.  That is approximately --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I thought the record was
different.  I thought the record was 14 to 20?
MR. CARPENTER:  It's not.  The government in
its brief asserts that it is 20 feet from the front door
of the house --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  8 -- no.  I
was right.  Go ahead.
MR. CARPENTER:  If you look at the -- the
government asserts that it was 20 feet from the front
door all the way back to the room.  But, first, the
record also suggests that she was -- met Mr. --
Mr. Whitfield while she was coming out of the hallway.
So the movement wasn't the 20 feet from the front door.
It was from the threshold of the hallway into the
computer room.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Is it contextual?
In other words, is 20 feet in her home different from
20 feet in the bank?
MR. CARPENTER:  Yes.  Well, I think 20 feet
all within a single building is almost never going to
qualify because that cannot be so significantly
different from the conduct that is covered by an
ordinary (a) offense that Congress would have viewed it
as extreme enough to justify a ten-year mandatory
minimum penalty.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But it seems -- the
reason I ask is that it -- it strikes me that it makes a
difference if it's in part of the robbery itself.  I
mean, it seems to me to tell the teller to go to the
vault or something.  That's what happens in a bank
robbery.  If on the other hand, the -- the defendant
takes the teller from the bank to the car and then, you
know, they -- they block the car, that strikes me as
something different even though the distance might be
the same.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, you're right and we
agree with you on the -- that it is a contextual
inquiry.  So taking the -- the person out of the bank
and into the car is very likely going to qualify.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Except that the statute
says "both in the course of or in fleeing from."  So it
obviously envisions an accompaniment in the course of
the bank robbery, doesn't it?
MR. CARPENTER:  I -- I believe --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The answer is yes, right?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, that language in our
view would be satisfied by the hypothetical -- or by
the -- not a hypothetical -- by an actual case that we
see in Wilson, for example, which is cited in the
government's brief where the bank robber goes to a bank
employee's home, forces them to come with him from their
home to the bank to facilitate the robbery.  That's
absolutely an accompaniment in the commission of the
offense.  I don't think anything in the statute suggests
that there must be some category of accompaniment within
the walls of the bank only.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If the test is -- if the
test is that there must be something that's substantial,
how would you instruct the jury?
MR. CARPENTER:  We would instruct the jury
first to say it must be more than de minimus or trivial
movement.  You could go further than that and ask the
jury to consider factors such as the amount of distance
that was covered, whether the person was moved into or
out of a bank or another building and whether they were
ultimately transported to a different place or location
than where they were found.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But your first -- when you
just said it's not de minimis, is that your primary
argument?  You just want a non-de minimis rule?
MR. CARPENTER:  We believe that resolves
this case.  Yes.  We think that -- as we use
"substantial" in the briefs, it is the flip side of de
minimis.  So we think that de minimis is what happened
here.  Movement with -- inside a person's own home only
for a few feet is de minimis.  We think the way to
effectuate that --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  The woman died from a heart
attack, didn't she?  That wasn't de minimis.
MR. CARPENTER:  No.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And -- and part of what
frightened her may have been the -- the fact that your
client forced her to go from one room to another.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, Justice Scalia, there
is no doubt this is a tragic and sad case, but
Section 2113(e) provides a mechanism for the government
to hold Mr. Whitfield directly responsible --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But why wouldn't it be --
MR. CARPENTER:  -- for the fact that she
passed away.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Why wouldn't it be
substantial when you go from one room to another?  Why
doesn't that satisfy the definition of substantial?
MR. CARPENTER:  The reason for that, I
think, is if you look at the structure --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I mean, we're -- we're
looking for -- for guidelines here.  So if you go from
one room to another, that's arguably substantial.
MR. CARPENTER:  I think the problem with
that interpretation, Justice Kennedy, is that it sweeps
in so many (a) offenses because the movement of just a few
feet inside the bank, as Justice -- as Mr. Chief Justice
referred to, happens frequently.  Congress, in setting
up Section (e) as an aggravated offense that requires a
ten-year mandatory minimum, and that at the time it was
passed, required --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I don't think that a few
feet from a cash register to a vault -- I've actually
never seen the vault.  It's usually locked away behind
the main area, so that's going to be another room, and
it's going to be not necessarily a short distance.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, the -- the typical
bank robbery happens in branch offices which are
probably half the size of this courtroom, so I don't
believe it's going to be --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I can see -- I think the
statistics that we were shown is that the vast majority
of bank robberies are at the counter, that people are
not moved at all.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, we don't know the
latter aspect of that in that no one -- including the
government under the current iteration of the U.S.
Attorneys' Manual before this case -- has been looking
at the question of whether a person was moved a single
step -- again, from this side of the lectern to that,
from this side of the counter to that -- in the course
of the bank robbery.  But we know if the -- if this
Court --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  This case -- this case
didn't involve a single step.  But you say whatever it
was, nine feet, it's de minimis.  If you are right about
that, then this charge never should have gone to the
jury because is -- is the jury supposed to say what is
de minimis or is the judge supposed to say that?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, the judge will always
address that in the first instance under a Rule 29
motion.  But, Justice Ginsburg, you are absolutely
correct.  Our view is that this should not have went to
the jury on the forced accompaniment count.
But I would return to Justice Scalia's
question --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Now, you -- you say there
is -- there is no proper instruction to a jury that
would allow this case to go to the jury?
MR. CARPENTER:  That is correct.  We do
not --
JUSTICE BREYER:  That isn't de minimis.
That's -- I mean, don't you accompany a person as well
when you stay with them in the room, and did he?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, the -- the government
even agrees with us here that this isn't a confinement
statute, and that goes back to the --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Wait.  So -- so a person --
does it make no difference that they -- they take the
teller or they take the woman, you walk ten feet down to
a room, he says, sit there, and he stays with her to
make certain that she won't pop her head up so someone
can see?  I think that's probably what happened here.
All right.  If that's what happened here, the
accompaniment was not just walking, it was also staying
and walking back perhaps.
MR. CARPENTER:  The problem, Justice Breyer,
is that that converts this into a confinement provision,
and Congress pointedly did not write a confinement
provision.  We know first that accompany, by its
dictionary definition that the government agrees with,
means to go with, not to stay with.
JUSTICE BREYER:  That’s  a very peculiar
statute.  You kidnap a victim as a hostage.  You walk
them two feet into the car.  You quickly disguise the
car and have them lie on the floor, and -- and that
isn't covered by the statute.  Or you have outside, I
don't know, there is a closet, you go, you walk them in,
and push them in the closet, that is not covered.  It is
covered if you -- if you go 30 feet down the corridor
with somebody else.  I can't -- I don't understand,
then, how this statute --
MR. CARPENTER:  I will agree with you that
Congress could have written a much more precise statute
here, but we think that it -- given the penalty
structure and the increased ten-year mandatory minimum
that would apply here in so many bank robbery cases --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, I'm not so sure
what -- if you were going to draft the statute to reach
some of this conduct where people are forced to
accompany the robber, how would you have done it?
MR. CARPENTER:  I think if Congress wanted
to adopt the government's interpretation of this
statute, it should have said forces someone to accompany
him for any distance whatsoever.  Because that modifies
the word accompany which, in our view, in its ordinary
usage implies something more than the movement of a single
step.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  In an ordinary use it
doesn't.  Justice Scalia gave one example.  Suppose I
were to say, the nurse accompanied a patient as she
walked around the Intensive Care Unit.  That's an
ordinary use of the -- of "accompanied."
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, again, we don't
disagree that it's a permissible usage.  We -- for the
reasons set out in the brief -- don't think that it is
ordinary usage, and we certainly don't think it is
ordinary in the way that Congress used it.
Again, if you look at the usages of the word
"accompany" in the code in 1934, Congress never used it
to cover this type of short distance movement.  It's
also consistent with this Court's usages in the 1930s
which they -- virtually all of them in the 1930s
referred to long distance movements.  And we think that
is consistent with the structure of the statute --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Because that was evident
from the rest of the statute, right?
MR. CARPENTER:  And I think it's --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I mean, all the statutes
you cite, they make it clear that -- that you are
talking about accompanying over a long distance,
kidnapping or whatever else.  But here there's no such
indication, and presumably where -- where you have an
indication in some statutes, you do not have it here, it
presumably does not apply here.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, Justice Scalia, I
disagree with you that we don't have the other
indications in this statute, and I would start with the
noscitur principle under Section (e).  Congress put
forced accompaniment in Section (e) because it viewed it
as akin in terms of the defendant's culpability to
murder.  It made it more serious than Section (d).  We
know from Section (d) that Congress viewed -- endangering
a person's life with a gun or knife as only a minor
aggravating factor that didn't warrant any mandatory
minimum at all.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It -- it didn't -- it
didn't make it comparable to murder because the
provision itself says that the -- the accompaniment
shall be -- a person accompanied shall be in prison not
less than 10 years or if death results, shall be
punished by death or life in prison.  So it's -- you are
talking 10 years.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, the death results
language was added in 1994 as a conforming amendment to
bring the statute in line with this Court's
jurisprudence.  If you look at our brief at pages 25 and
26, we have the original text of the statute.  Under the
original version passed in 1994 -- or 1934, forced
accompaniment and killing carried the exact same
statutory penalty.  Both required a mandatory minimum of
10 years.  Both required or made it ineligible for the
death penalty.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Which -- which statute was
your client prosecuted under, the old one or the current
one?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, certainly under the
current one.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yeah, well --
MR. CARPENTER:  But the -- the context is
still the same in -- in the relationship with the
killing offense.
And I would go back to your earlier
question, Justice Scalia.  This statute, through the
killing offense, gives the government the tools it needs
to hold Mr. Whitfield directly responsible for the fact
that Mrs. Parnell died.  Mr. Whitfield was indicted for
a killing offense.  Over our objection, the District
Court interpreted that provision as a felony murder
provision that did not require any intent -- intent
above and beyond the intent necessary for the bank
robbery itself.  And based on the evidence, the jury
rejected that count and held him not responsible for her
death.
It makes little sense to stretch the meaning
of a forced accompaniment so broadly that it allows the
government to hold him indirectly responsible for her
death when the jury, who we rely on to make these kinds
of determinations in our system --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  I'm sorry, I would like
to stop you for a minute.  Because I thought that the --
the killing was one thing.  But it -- it wasn't --
there -- didn't the judge say you didn't ask for -- what
was it --
MR. CARPENTER:  Death results.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- death results, right.
MR. CARPENTER:  Justice Ginsburg, you are
correct that the Fourth Circuit threw out the death
results finding because it had not been charged in the
initial indictment.
But you're also correct that killing is a
separate offense.  As interpreted by the Fourth Circuit
at least, fourth -- a forced --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So this -- this jury -- I
mean the issue of causing the death, that wasn't charged
and the defendant was not acquitted of that?
MR. CARPENTER:  But that is a separate
offense.  As interpreted by the Fourth Circuit, there
are three offenses under Section (e), killing, forced
accompaniment, and the third is forced accompaniment
resulting in death.  The third is the one that wasn't
charged and was thrown out.  Even under it, we still
have the antecedent question of whether there was a
forced accompaniment in the first place.
But he was properly indicted on the killing
offense.  It was interpreted by the District Court as a
felony murder provision.  And based on the evidence, the
jury held that Mr. Whitfield was not responsible for
killing Mrs. Parnell.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If the test is more than de
minimis, what does the judge tell the jury if the jury
says we don't understand what de minimis means?
MR. CARPENTER:  I think de minimis is often,
in other jury instructions, defined as trivial or
insignificant, and we would --
JUSTICE ALITO:  What does that mean?
They -- what does that mean in relationship to the
distance that must be involved?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, in our view, this is
the easy case in that it's only a few feet and it's
entirely within a person's own home.  The -- we think
the way to effectuate that is through a substantiality
finding which juries make all the time in other -- under
other criminal statutes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  You want to know what, I
mean, that's exactly the same question.  Look,
substantially -- you tell the jury substantial, they
have no idea in this context.  I mean, I wouldn't.  I
would have thought yeah, moving a person -- I don't see
what it has to do with her home or somebody else's home.
I don't see what that has to do with it.  And a few feet
sounds, yeah, it sounds substantial to me.  I know
nothing about it, you see.
So is there anything else you want to say in
response to what Justice Alito said?  Because that --
think of my problem.  It's not your client that is the
problem, but it's not the main problem.  The main
problem is to write a standard so people can understand
it.  And what do you want the words of that standard to
say?
MR. CARPENTER:  Justice Breyer, I would go
back to the jury instruction that I set out earlier.  We
believe the jury could be charged in determining whether
the movement is substantial or whether the movement is
more than de minimis.  You could consider the amount of
distance that was traveled, whether the person was taken
into or out of the home or another building and whether
they were ultimately transported to a different place or
different location --
JUSTICE ALITO:  The problem is we don't --
the jury would not know and the court would not know
what you are looking at, what ultimately you're
concerned about.  You have a number of factors.  But I
assume the point of this statute is to impose a severe
penalty in cases in which Congress thought there would
be great emotional distress for the person who is forced
to accompany that person.
Now, that could depend on lots of things,
not just the distance traveled.  So to -- applying a
purely spatial test to that just doesn't make any sense.
You can't say is it substantial in relation to the thing
that this statute is getting at.  That is what I have a
problem with.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well I think in part you are
over reading what Congress was trying to do here by
suggesting that if the person was put in particular fear
or danger or trauma that that would justify any charge.
That’s – That’s not what he was looking at.  Because we
know --
JUSTICE ALITO:  What is the reason for this?
Why a heavier penalty for a case where there is
accompaniment it it's not that there is greater --
across the whole category, greater likelihood of trauma
to the person who is involved?
MR. CARPENTER:  We know that Congress viewed
the forced accompaniment provision as similar to
kidnapping, which under the Federal law at the time
required transportation entirely out of State and under
common law required transportation out of the country.
Under even the common definition of kidnapping at page
30 of our brief required more than a confinement or a
false imprisonment.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  How do I know – How do I
know - Congress considered it equivalent to kidnapping?
How do I know that?
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, for those of you who
do consider the legislative history, there are --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, I don't know it at all.
MR. CARPENTER:  So you may not know this but
-- I think, Justice Scalia, you do know it from the
context, and particularly from the association that
Congress made in Section (e) between forced
accompaniment and killing.  It made both of those crimes
eligible for the death penalty at the discretion of the
jury.  And if you look at the broader code at that time,
there were only a handful of offenses that carried the
potential for the death penalty.  Among them were murder
and kidnapping.
So I think that is one very good reason why
we know that Congress would have been thinking of
accompaniment as something akin to kidnapping, which it
had in other provisions of the code --
JUSTICE BREYER:  To do that you had to cross
State lines.  The kidnapping statute, you had to cross
State lines, and you don't even argue you have to cross
State lines.
MR. CARPENTER:  No, absolutely not, Justice
Breyer.  We're not suggesting that Congress intended to
incorporate the elements of Federal kidnapping here.
But what we are saying -- to go back to the question
about what we're trying to distinguish here, we believe
that forced accompaniment and the instruction that we've
suggested for the jury allows the jury to distinguish
cases of confinement on the one hand -- where the
movement is incidental to a confinement, you are keeping
a person in their home, you are keeping the person in
the bank -- it distinguishes those from cases that we
would in a nontechnical sense think of as a kidnapping
or an abduction where you are taking someone from the
bank with you on the getaway, which was the John
Dillinger scenario we discussed in the briefs, or the
opposite scenario that I talked about from the Wilson case
a few minutes ago, where you take the bank employee from
their home to the bank.  That kind of situation is, we
believe, the heart of what Congress was trying to get
to.
JUSTICE KAGAN: I mean, you might be right that
it's the heart of what Congress was trying to get at, but
this happens all the time when Congress writes statutes,
right?  It thinks about a particular case, it has an
idea in its mind of the sort of conduct that they mean,
which is this John Dillinger example, but then when it
gets down to drafting the words it writes words that are
broader than that, that include things that are not in
the front of their minds, like this one.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, I think when you put
the words they use in the context in which they use
them, it limits it to that kind of scenario.  And even
the government has never thought that these kinds of --
a few steps of movement inside the bank qualify as a
forced accompaniment.  I would point to the cases cited
in our reply brief at pages 12 and 13, all of which were
charged under (a) or (d) and all of which clearly
involve movement that would easily satisfy the
government's single-step rule here.  Yet in each of
those cases, based on the guidelines, based on the 3553A
factors, the district courts imposed sentences well
below the 10-year mandatory minimum that would apply
under a Section (e) charge.
We know that if the Court here blesses the
single-step rule that the government is now advocating,
which has never been present in the United States
Attorneys' Manual before, the default principle under
the Justice Department's charging guidelines will be to
include a Section (e) count in every bank robbery where
the prosecutor can allege and prove a single step of
movement that occurred in the course of the robbery.
That surely cannot be what Congress intended in the
structure of this statute where it designated Section
(e) as an offense that was so much more serious and so
much more extreme --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But here it wasn't a
single step.  And it seems from what happened that this
case presents the  very danger that (e) wants to guard
against.  That is, the woman was  terrified and she had a
heart attack.
MR. CARPENTER:  Well, Justice Ginsburg, I
disagree that -- and the government actually agrees with
us at page 40 of their brief -- with the notion that
dangerousness by itself can convert something into an
accompaniment that’s not.  We believe first that in
Section (a) Congress required as an element of a basic
offense force, intimidation, or violence.  What that
tells us is that in every bank robbery, there is going
to be danger presented to everyone present.  And under
Section (d), Congress used danger as the jumping off
point for an aggravated offense under Section (d).  It
escalated the statutory maximum in cases where the
robber used a gun or a knife to put someone's life in
danger.  So I think the dangerousness by itself doesn't
get us to an (e) offense.
And also -- so  one more thing before I
reserve my time, which is that reversing this conviction
and rejecting the government's single-step rule is in no
way going to allow Mr. Whitfield to walk away from this
unpunished.  Even under our view, his sentence would be
12 to 13 years, which is approximately four times the
amount that a bank robber receives -- that a first-time
offender like Mr. Whitfield receives for a bank robbery
offense.  That factors in his post-robbery conduct
during his flight and gives him adequate punishment for
that.  So the (e) charge is unnecessary to ensure that
he receives the punishment he needs.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you,
Mr. Carpenter.
Mr. Fletcher.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF BRIAN H. FLETCHER
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
MR. FLETCHER:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
Section 2113(e) prescribes greater
punishment for a bank robber who forces another
person to accompany him in committing the robbery or in
attempting to avoid arrest.
When Petitioner invaded the Parnell home and
forced Mrs. Parnell to go with him to a different room
where they could not be seen by the police, he violated
that statute because the forced movement fell squarely
within the ordinary meaning of the word "accompany."  In
everyday speech it is both proper and common to say that
one person accompanied someone else from one room
of the house to another, and Congress chose to use that
broad non-technical term in framing Section 2113(e).  It
didn't include any qualifying language requiring that
the forced accompaniment traverse a particular number of
feet, cross the threshold of a building or otherwise
cover a substantial distance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Yes, but all the
definitions begin by saying accompanying is go with
somebody as an associate or companion.  Yes, it is
certainly a permissible use and a common use in context
to say I accompanied someone –you know - across the hall.
But when you are in the context that this present one is
of bank robbery, the point of associate or companion, I
think, takes on greater weight.  Obviously, an unwilling
one.
MR. FLETCHER:  I think you are right,
Mr. Chief Justice.  I think the connotation of
"accompany" focuses very much not only on movement but
also on movement together.  But as you say, it doesn't
have to be a friendly association or a voluntary
association.
I think this Court's opinion in Oregon v.
Elstad, which involved essentially the reverse of the
movement in this case -- the police encountered a
suspect in the bedroom in his house and directed him to
get dressed and accompany them, this Court wrote, to the
living room to answer questions.  I assume they hadn't
met before.  I assume that the association wasn't a sort
of long-standing one or a voluntary one.  But it's still
natural in those circumstances to describe two people
moving from one room to another with the term
"accompany."
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  All right, you take
two bank robberies.  One, the robber comes in, waves a
gun, pistol whips five people, grabs the money and
leaves.  Okay?  In another the bank robber comes in,
just gets the bag of money, says, you walk over here 2
feet with me, so he can get the bag of money and leaves.
The first one you could get probation.  I mean, you're
not going to, but there's no minimum sentence.  And
the second one you get at least 10 years.  That doesn't
make any sense.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, I think it does make
sense because I think Congress understood, and I think
in practice we would see that the first bank robber in
your first hypothetical is not going to get probation.
He is going to get a very, very substantial sentence.
And we know that Congress contemplated --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But they didn't care
exactly what the minimum was, right, even before the
sentencing guidelines, which would obviously have a
higher sentence, they didn't care if it was one year
because of extenuating circumstances, whatever.  But,
they said, forcing someone to accompany you is so much
more serious that you get at least 10 years.
MR. FLETCHER:  And I think that they had
good reason to do that, but I also just want to
highlight that the 10-year mandatory minimum that they
set for the forced accompaniment offense is right in the
middle of the range for a completely unaggravated,
unarmed bank robbery in violation of Section 2113.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Range where?
MR. FLETCHER:  Of the statutory range of
zero -- probation to 20 years.  The statutory maximum is
20 years and Congress set the limit for a nonaggravated
bank robbery.  For an armed bank robbery under 2113(d),
the statutory maximum is 25 years.
And so when Congress established a mandatory
minimum penalty for Section 2113(e) at 10 years,
absolutely it did that because it regarded 2113(e)
violations as culpable conduct that merited enhanced
punishment a deterrence.  But it also made clear that it
understood that there were going to be unaggravated bank
robberies and armed bank robberies that warranted
greater punishment than forced accompaniments and it
left room for sentencing judges and now, with the
guidelines, for sentences to be framed in a way that
took account of the type of aggravating circumstances
like pistol whipping the victim and threats and things
of the nature that you described that don't trigger a
statutory enhancement but that obviously sentencing
judges would consider.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Do you think there's --
JUSTICE BREYER:  The problem -- the problem
is there is a set of cases where you can think it's
serious and a set of cases where you just think it
isn't.  The bank robbery -- there are more in the bank
are the ones that concern me that it isn't.  The bank
robbers are in the bank, there are a couple of other
customers walk in and one of them says will you please
walk over here with me for a second.  Okay?  They walk
two feet to get him out of the way.  That doesn't sound
as if that is a lot worse than pistol whipping somebody.
And you can multiply those cases.
And what is worrying me about it is, since
it's a mandatory minimum, the prosecutors have a choice
about whether to -- to indict or not on that ground, and
a person who is coming in and who is represented and --
what is his choice?  You know, you either plead guilty
or I put this in, too, because you moved one of the
customers 10 feet.
Now, that's -- that's the -- it's the --
that's the nature of the mandatory minimum which is
disturbing and calls, I think, for some kind of lenity
when there is openness of interpretation.  But on the
other hand it's very hard for me to distinguish how to
separate the cases that seem comparatively trivial
taking place within the bank from the ones where you
really are injecting fear, special fear, into the mind
of the person who is told to accompany you, and that
could take place even if it's like one foot, because
he's been singled out.
Okay.  Is there any way to do it?  Is there
any way that you could reassure me that in these lesser
cases this will not be used as an instrument towards a
guilty plea or an instrument where these minor things
that he's been talking about nonstop, your brother over
here, that they'll certainly turn out to be charged
routinely?
MR. FLETCHER:  Yes, absolutely.  I think --
I would like to say a number of things.  I think the
first one goes to the charging question that you asked
and that my friend referred to.  He pointed to the
cases, the four cases that he cites at pages 12 and 13
of his reply brief as examples that would fall under our
definition of forced accompaniment but that weren't
charged as such in this case.  But I think -- or in
those particular cases.
I think what is important to highlight about
that is that three of the four cases arose in circuits
that have already adopted our rule.  One was in the
Seventh Circuit and one was in the Eleventh Circuit and
one was in the Ninth Circuit, and the Seventh and
Eleventh Circuits have specifically said that movement
within a bank, our rule here, you don't have to move
anyone a particular distance, you don't have to move
them out of the building.  And so the fact that they
weren't charged in that case reflects an exercise of the
government's charging discretion, not the fact that the
rule that we're asking you to adopt today had been
blessed by those circuits.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But that's what you are
going to lead it to, Mr. Fletcher, it's just going to be
prosecutorial good judgment that's going to separate the
case that's, like, could you come with me a couple of
feet.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, I think that is part of
it and I do think it's important to highlight that
the -- the charging guidance that my friend points to
does permit the exercise of prosecutorial discretion to
determine individual cases.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Right.  I guess I'm asking
you is there anything else.  Would you -- you think that
there should not be a de minimis exception at all.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, I guess I don't
understand my friend to be really asking for a de
minimis exception, but let me --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I'm asking about a de
minimis exception.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, the reason why I don't
think de minimis, although we could talk about very
short movements and my friend likes to -- and we can
talk about, I don't think that de minimis movements
should be excluded.  I don't think it's reasonable to --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Even the one step?
MR. FLETCHER:  Yes, Your Honor, even the one
step.  And the -- the reason why I don't think it's
reasonable to exclude those is that this statute only
applies to forced movements, and it's that element of
force that I think my friend likes to ignore and focus
just on the step or two steps.  But every time a robber
violates the statute, he does it because he's forced
someone --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You know, I thought that
was the case, which is why I didn't understand Justice
Breyer's question where he said the amiable bank robber
says, would you please step – what do you say?
Would you
please step over here?
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yeah, I'm  walking
into a bank robbery where they have about --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Step over there or I'll
blow your head off is what he says.
MR. FLETCHER:  Yes, and I imagine a
request --
JUSTICE BREYER:  My -- my example was meant
to encompass a polite, but armed, bank robber.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But the point is the
idea of someone whose bank is being robbed not being
forcibly compelled to accompany someone is fanciful, and
all you have to do, again -- I guess it's repeating the
question -- is you got two feet and the prosecutor is
armed with another 10 years automatically in his pocket,
and then you use that to extort a plea bargain of, you
know, six years, somebody who might otherwise wanted to
go to trial.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, we know that Congress
drafted the statute as a mandatory minimum provision.
We know that it used broad language that encompasses
even very, very short movements.  And I think the
discussion that --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, that begs the
question, I think.
MR. FLETCHER:  But, well, I was going to try
to get to the answer, which is that the reason why
Congress did that and I think the discussion today
highlights is because, number one, it's very, very hard
to separate out the cases that drive at the heartland of
what Congress was concerned about, the human shield and
the hostages situations, with any sort of rule based on
distance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, your U.S.
attorney's manual does just that.  It says you prosecute
these when anyone forcibly abducts another during the
commission of any offense.  That seems to me to be
trying to take out those walked two feet.  That's not a
forcible abduction.
MR. FLETCHER:  I -- I'm not sure that is
correct, Mr. Chief Justice.  The U.S. attorney's manual
does refer to the Section 2113(e) offense in a
one-sentence description as covering forcible abduction.
But I don't think -- it's perfectly sensible and courts
have used the word abduction to describe moving someone
from one place in a bank to another one.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So -- so you think
when the manual says forcibly abducts, it means the
two-foot situation.
MR. FLETCHER:  Potentially, yes.  The
guidelines -- the sentencing guidelines use the word
abduction, for instance, Mr. Chief Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER:  What about  that -- why don't
we say that?  Say that what this statute covers is
forcible abduction, and there we are.  That's not
perfect.  But it's – it at least my polite -- armed bank
robber who asks the person to move over hasn't abducted
him and in many of these de minimis cases there won't be
an abduction.  Why not just pick up those words and say
indeed, the government uses that when it explains it.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, Congress used very,
very different language.  Congress didn't incorporate
the common law of kidnapping.  It didn't refer to an
abduction.  It used the word "accompanying" which has an
everyday meaning that encompasses short movements.
But also, I think -- I understand the
impetus that some of your questions suggest that
abduction carries up or connotes long movements, but
that's not the way that it's used in the U.S. attorney's
manual and it's not the way that it's used in the
provision of the guidelines which provides an
enhancement for a bank robbery or for any robbery that
involves the abduction of a victim.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So the manual is
read -- forcibly abducts, they read as for somebody to
move two feet.  That's an abduction?
MR. FLETCHER:  Yes.  They don't view it as
limiting the charges under Section 2113(e) to require
movement of any particular distance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And so the manual
which -- the other provision in the manual which is that
you should charge as large an offense as possible means
that in the case where somebody is forced to move two
feet, you charge the -- that as a forcible abduction.
MR. FLETCHER:  No, that is not correct and
in part that is because the manual doesn't say you
always charge the most serious offense.  It says you
charge the most serious offense that's consistent with
the nature of the conduct at issue and that that
permits, and in fact requires, an individualized
assessment of the defendant's conduct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So is two feet
consistent with the conduct at issue?
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, I think -- I think
there is a reason and I -- I do think there's a reason
why Congress covered even very short movements, and
that's in part because every time a robber forces
someone to go with him he exposes that person to a great
degree of trauma, to physical danger, and I think also
Congress reasonably decided not to try to write in a
limitation to use a term that includes movements as
short as a few feet because it's so difficult to draw a
line.  It's difficult to draw an administrable line at
all.  And any of the lines that have been offered to you
by my friend, by the amicus briefs, by the lower courts
that have tried to cabin this statute by departing from
its text, all of them would exclude cases that would
give rise to exactly the sorts of dangers that Congress
was concerned about, which are robbers using victims as
human shields, or robbers holding the gun to the head of
the victim and dragging them around the bank during the
offense.  I think all of those are at the heartland of
what Congress was concerned about.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  When Congress first drafted
this accompanying language, this was a capital offense,
yes?
MR. FLETCHER:  Potentially, yes.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  So, I mean, would you say
the same thing if it were still a capital offense?
MR. FLETCHER:  We would.  We think the --
the offense had the same meaning then and now.  And I
think part of the reason why we'd say that is, first and
foremost, that the statutory language we think
"accompanying" has a plain meaning that includes those
sorts of movements.
But also I think it -- it's true, my friend
likes to point out that it was potentially death
eligible, but the sentencing range in the 1934 statute
was a minimum of 10 years to a death sentence if the
verdict of the jury shall so recommend.
The murderer statute at -- in 1934 in
contrast said that if you murder someone it's a
mandatory death penalty or life imprisonment.  I
think --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Of course that was
unconstitutional, right?  The -- imposing the death
penalty for this.
MR. FLETCHER:  That's correct.  The Court
later held --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  For even -- even
kidnapping, you know, taking the person away when you're
fleeing.  It was unconstitutional to apply the death
penalty, so we really don't -- don't have to take that
into account, I suppose.
MR. FLETCHER:  That's correct.  In the
current statute --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  I guess I was just
suggesting that maybe we should take that into account
in thinking about what Congress could have meant for
this statute to mean, but it seems -- it -- it seems
very unlikely that Congress meant to give the death
penalty to somebody who forced another person to move
two feet.
MR. FLETCHER:  And I think Congress probably
understood that a jury would be very unlikely, in fact,
almost certain not to recommend the death penalty in a
case like that.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Well, no, no.  But we're
talking about what the proper instructions to a jury,
not jury nullification.  Don't -- don't play -- don't
play that card.
MR. FLETCHER:  But, Justice Kennedy, I'm not
suggesting that they nullify on the guilt offense, but
the penalty provision in the 1934 statute said it's
punishable by death if the verdict of the jury shall so
recommend --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Are the --
MR. FLETCHER:  -- which permitted a jury to
decide the severity of the offense.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  What's wrong with de
minimis?  Meaning why don't we leave it to the jury to
decide when a movement is inconsequential,  it’s
trivial?  We're worried about telling them what that --
what that is, but we use the word de minimis all the
time, and all we tell juries is you don't have to find
this if the movement was really trivial and
inconsequential.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, I -- I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And they can then use
their judgment instead of the prosecutor about when
something is causing the kind of fear that Congress
worried about.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, I think that's a long
ways from the statutory text, first and foremost.  I
also don't think that it's consistent --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, we -- we've
basically said, albeit only a civil area, that we always
assume that trivial and inconsequential matters will not
be covered by a law.
MR. FLETCHER:  You're right.  De minimis --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I don't know why that
can't be true in the criminal area either.
MR. FLETCHER:  De minimis is a general
principle of law.  I, like you, have not found a case
where this Court has applied it in the criminal context.
I think in part that's because it's ultimately about
deciding what Congress intended to prescribe.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, if we were going to
apply it I guess what we would apply is was there
significant fear or trauma induced?  I mean, that's --
that's what the statute's about.  Threatening people,
causing them such excitement that they may have a heart
attack, as happened here.  I don't know that the
distance is what is de minimis.  It's how much you put
the person in fear, I suppose.
MR. FLETCHER:  I do think that that's right
and I think that points up that crafting any sort of a
de minimis or substantiality requirement that tried to
get at the concerns that Congress had in passing the
statute would be extremely hard to do.  And I think the
jury that asks, as Justice Alito suggested, what do you
mean by de minimis?  How are we supposed to determine
whether or not a movement is de minimis?  It would be
very, very difficult to give that jury a reasonable --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, but you could say de
minimis did because of the language that you point to,
accompaniment.  That's what I criticized you earlier as
just being too vague.  But where movements are small,
this is -- where movements are small -- in considering
de minimis you can consider that where movements are
small, the absence or presence of the kind of fear that
is connoted by the word abduction, which -- that's a
little tough.  But I see your point there.
But the alternative is just this sort of
vast discretion in bank robbery cases where -- where
there has been nothing more like an inch or it really
had nothing to do with the abduction concern and the
distances were miniscule.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's a very bad statute.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Would you admit that?
MR. FLETCHER:  I would disagree with that.
I would say though that even if you agree with that,
that's not a reason to read it other than according to
its terms.
And I think, Justice Breyer, my friend likes
to suggest that if you go our way on this you really are
going to open up this discretion for prosecutors to
charge the 2113(e) offense in a vast number of cases.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes, that's true.
MR. FLETCHER:  Respectfully, though, I don't
think he's been able to substantiate that with any kind
of evidence.  As we pointed out --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, 95 or -- over
90 percent of all the criminal charges in the country
are pleaded guilty.  Isn't that the right number,
something like that?
MR. FLETCHER:  I --
JUSTICE BREYER:  And certainly you do read
lots of criticisms of people pleading guilty because
they are afraid that in the absence of the guilty plea
the sentence will go way up.  I don't know how true that
is, I haven't seen the studies, but I'm certainly
familiar with literature that says that.
MR. FLETCHER:  I understand the concern but
it arises only to the extent that forced accompaniments
of short distances are common in bank robberies.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No, no.  That is
exactly where the prosecutor needs another ace in his
hand.  In other words, if he's waving a gun, if he's
assaulting the people, if he's shooting them, fine, he's
got enough leverage.  But when he hasn't done any of
that and all he's done is asked the teller or whoever to
accompany him for -- of forced, I'm sorry, the teller to
accompany him for a few feet, that's where the
prosecutor says I, you know, it's a good thing I've got
these 10 years or otherwise he might go to trial.
MR. FLETCHER:  I don't think that's correct,
Mr. Chief Justice.  I think in a number -- our rule has
been the law in a number of circuits, at least four of
them, in the Eleventh Circuit since the Bauer decision
in 1992, and yet you don't see and Petitioner certainly
hasn't pointed to you a pattern of prosecutorial abuse
in those circuits.  Instead what you see is the case,
the Section 2113(e) offense being charged in unusual
bank --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  How would you -- how
would you see the evidence of prosecutorial abuse?  When
you have these cases, he says I'm going to charge you
with a 10-year minimum, and the guy says, my gosh, I
can't risk that, I'm going to plead guilty to 6 years or
7 years.  I don't see how that pattern could show up in
any kind of statistics.
MR. FLETCHER:  Well, for one thing, I mean,
both sides here are looking at the fact patterns in
reported cases.  There could be --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  It would not be a
reported case because he would have pled guilty.
MR. FLETCHER:  But even guilty pleas can
give rise to reported cases that describe the facts of
the offense if there's an appeal relating to sentencing,
as there often is.  And we just don't see the government
bringing this charge in part because most bank robberies
do not involve forced movement.  The classic bank
robbery --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  When they plead
guilty don't they have to -- I don't remember if this is
just limited to the State systems or not -- don't they
have to waive their rights to appeal?
MR. FLETCHER:  In some cases guilty pleas do
include waivers of appeal rights.  So I'm -- I
understand the point that many guilty pleas wouldn't
show up in reported cases, but I think we also provide
statistics about the number of -- guilty pleas that
would still be sentenced according to the sentencing
guidelines and we provide statistics that say that --
and -- and would show up in the FBI's bank crime
statistics.
We provide statistics suggesting that
most -- the overwhelming majority of bank robberies are
limited to the teller area.  They don't involve moving
someone to the vault.  The classic bank robbery -- we
cite to the secondary literature as well -- involves
someone walking up to a teller and presenting a demand
note or making an oral demand.  And I think once a
robber goes beyond that and begins forcibly
orchestrating the movement of people around the bank,
that's stuff that -- conduct that's typically
accomplished with a weapon or with physical -- direct
application of physical force to compel people to move
around the bank.  And I think Congress correctly made a
judgment that that's significantly aggravated conduct
that separates those offenses from the mine-run bank
robberies.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But the problem is that
there is some fortuity in this.  Some bank robbers will
tell people, tellers, move to that corner and lay down
on the floor and they'll just point the gun.  There is
no accompaniment.  Some of them may say move, and move
with them.  There is --
MR. FLETCHER:  There's -- there's no doubt
that there's some fortuity.  That's going to happen any
time Congress frames a broad rule.  But I do think that
being forced to move around the bank with the robber is
materially worse and materially more dangerous to the
victims than being ordered to move to the other side of
the bank by the robber.
If the robber comes into the bank and pulls
a gun, everyone in the gun is going to be -- everyone in
the bank is going to be frightened.  And if he directs
everyone to go over to one side of the room, that's
going to be frightening, too.  But if he picks out a
teller and says, You're coming with me and we're going
to the vault, that teller is going to be the most afraid
in the bank, the most traumatized.  That person's going
to be in the greatest danger, at the greatest risk of
further violence from the robber, and that person is
going to be in the worst possible place if the police
respond, if an armed guard responds, or if some sort of
confrontation breaks out.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, I just don't
see that as a common sense proposition.  If you're a
teller, when are you more scared, when the guy has a gun
pointed at you and says get the money or when the guy
does not have a gun so far as you can see and says you
better come with me over to the vault?
MR. FLETCHER:  So I think potentially in --
in the case with a gun, but a couple of points on that.
One is the vast majority, as far as I can tell, 2113(e),
forced accompaniment offenses, almost always involve
weapons.  I think the parties cite, you know, 6 or 8
lower court cases that have involved the -- the question
at issue here.  How far do you have to move in order to
be a forced accompaniment.  In all of them except this
one, the person had either a gun or knife.  And I think
that makes sense because if you're going to be trying to
direct the people -- the movement of people within the
bank, you're going to do that by means of a gun or a
knife.
The second thing that I'd say is that I do
think that the teller who is forced to move with the
robber, even if we hypothesize the unusual case of a
robber who doesn't have a weapon, that teller is still
sort of at risk of further physical force unarmed by the
robber himself; that person is still in danger in the
event that an armed confrontation breaks out with
someone else.  That person is still in a very, very bad
position.
I think Congress reasonably decided that it
wanted to deter bank robbers from involving innocent
people in their offense.  And I think it sensibly made
the decision to deter that sort of conduct at the very
first step by writing the statute in a way that
prohibits forced accompaniment, a term that as our briefs
demonstrate, readily encompasses the type of movement at
issue here from one room to another.  And I think also
readily encompasses even movements as short as a few
steps.
The example that my friend gave earlier was
moving from one side of the lectern to another, and he
suggested that movements of that order aren't -- aren't
sensibly described as accompaniments.  I think to the
contrary, if Mr. Dreeben had joined me when I came to
the lectern to present my argument a few minutes ago, we
would very easily say that he accompanied me to the
lectern to present the argument.
This Court used the word "accompany" to
describe a movement of just a few steps in Washington v.
Chrisman where the issue was a police officer
accompanying a college student from the public corridor
of the student's dorm into the student's dorm room.  And
I think by choosing to use that term, Congress made the
judgment that forced movements with a robber present
enhanced dangers, present greater trauma to the victims,
and that it was appropriate to deter and punish that
conduct with a broad rule, because in every instance
where it arises, it presents some dangers.  But also
because to try to draft any line that excludes some of
the types of hypotheticals that the Court has proposed
today would be very difficult to do, would produce an
arbitrary and hard to administer standard and would
inevitably rule out some of the cases that Congress
meant to include when it drafted the statute.
If the Court has --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Suppose we had substantial
evidence that prosecutors were using the threat of this
extra charge in order to obtain guilty pleas, very
substantial evidence, would that be a basis for us to
rule that the statute is either inoperable altogether or
that it should be interpreted in a way consistent with
what the Petitioner argues?
MR. FLETCHER:  I don't think so.  I don't
think this Court has ever suggested that the charging
decisions with respect to a particular statute should
inform the way the statute is interpreted.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  So you think that concern
is simply irrelevant to the interpretative task that we
face.
MR. FLETCHER:  I think the Court has said
that the interpretative task in interpreting a statute
is to give the words of the statute their ordinary
meaning in the context in which they're enacted.  I
don't think that is considered -- a charge of questions
is -- of charging discretion would play into that
inquiry.
I understand why such a hypothetical pattern
of prosecutorial abuse would give the Court pause and
would be of concern, and I think that's why it's
significant that to the extent that those concerns do
arise, we don't have evidence of that here in the
circuits that have adopted our rule or something very
much like it.  And I don't think there's any indication
that prosecutors are departing from the instruction to
consider the circumstances of individual cases in
bringing charges.
If the Court has no further questions, we'd
ask that the judgment below be affirmed.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Carpenter, you have four minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF JOSHUA B. CARPENTER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
MR. CARPENTER:  Thank you.  I would offer
the Court first a twist on the old adage from
Justice Holmes, which is to say that sad facts sometimes
make very bad law.  The facts of this case are
undoubtedly sad, but the broad rule that the government
seeks to apply here would cover cases where the facts
aren't as sad and aren't -- aren't tragic at all.
I would go to your point, Justice Scalia,
about whether we should somehow interpret the statute to
cover cases where there's particularly heightened
trauma.  On that issue, there was trauma here, but it
had nothing to do with the movement from one room to
another and it had everything to do with the fact that
he invaded her home.  So it can't -- this case can't
turn -- the application of this provision can't turn on
the happenstance of whether she was sitting in her room
when he walked in or whether she happened to be standing
at the hallway and he asked her to move into the room.
Also, the government repeatedly points out
all the bad conduct that can happen even where there is
movement of only a few feet, and it's inside the bank,
but it can be accompanied with physical assault, et
cetera.  I would point the Court to the government's own
brief at page 23 where my friend cites a series of cases
that he described as the most egregious examples of
forced movements over a short distance.
In each of those -- in three of those cases
they were decided under the guidelines, Davis, Lewis and
Reid.  In each one, based on the guidelines and based on
the 3553(a) factors, the district courts imposed a
sentence well below the statutory maximum that was
available for an (a) offense.  What that tells us is
that the enhanced statutory maximums under (e) aren't
necessary, even in these egregious cases where the
movement is accompanied by physical assault and where
it's of a short distance in the bank.
On the flip side, though, the government's
broad, single-step rule is going to be tremendously
harmful in the mine run of bank robberies where you have
only a few feet of movement and which present the
problems that many of you have touched upon about the
exercise of prosecutorial discretion.
It's important to point out that in his
presentation today, my friend mentioned that well, the
guidelines -- the guidelines charging manual doesn't
actually provide a limit here because abduction means
even movement of a single step.  So we know that the
government isn't disavowing the single-step rule.  It
continues to advance it before this Court.
And the government has also pointed to
problems with line drawing.  There's no doubt that it is
not easy to draw a line in a case like this.  But that
doesn't justify the Court or the government in throwing
up its hands and saying there's no line at all.  I would
say that the rule of lenity should have special force in
the context of mandatory minimum provisions like this
one, both because of the notice that a criminal
defendant should receive that his conduct is so severe,
that he's going to face the mandatory minimum penalty as
severe as this one, and because of the harm to the
system that flows from a broadly applicable mandatory
minimum that gives the prosecution the ability to
threaten these charges in otherwise ordinary bank
robbery cases.
If there are no further questions, we'd ask
the Court to reverse the (e) conviction and send this
case back for resentencing.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, Counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:00 p.m., the case in the
