IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MONTANA, :
Plaintiff : No. 137, Orig.
v. :
WYOMING AND NORTH DAKOTA :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Monday, January 10, 2011
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:02 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
STEVE BULLOCK, ESQ., Attorney General, Helena, Montana;
on behalf of Plaintiff.
PETER KENNETH MICHAEL, ESQ., Senior Assistant Attorney
General, Cheyenne, Wyoming; on behalf of Defendant
Wyoming.
WILLIAM M. JAY, ESQ., Assistant to the Solicitor
General, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of the United States, as amicus curiae,
supporting Defendants.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAGE
STEVE BULLOCK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Plaintiff 3
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PETER KENNETH MICHAEL, ESQ.
On behalf of Defendant Wyoming 25
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
WILLIAM M. JAY, ESQ.
On behalf of the United States, as
amicus curiae, supporting Defendants 42
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
STEVE BULLOCK, ESQ.
On behalf of the Plaintiff 52
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:02 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: We'll hear argument
next this morning in Case 137 on our original docket,
Montana v. Wyoming and North Dakota.
General Bullock.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF STEVE BULLOCK
ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF
MR. BULLOCK: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Tongue and Powder Rivers are the only
significant water supply in a 10,000-square-mile area in
Montana and Wyoming, and this Court is being asked to
decide whether the compact allows Wyoming to take the
return flows that Montana farmers in that area have
always relied on or, instead, affords protection to both
States. Our exception should be sustained for three
reasons.
First, the plain language of the compact
preserves the water supply each State was receiving as
of 1950. Second, contrary to the compact's purposes,
the Master's interpretation would allow individual water
users to alter those amounts. And, third, the Master's
policy determinations about efficiency add ambiguity to
the principles underlying a century of western water
law. On that --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General Bullock, would
you please point to the precise language of the compact
that freezes consumption, as distinguished from the
amount of water diverted -- which freezes consumption as
of January 1st, 1950?
MR. BULLOCK: Yes, Your Honor. In the
compact, it's at the appendix of the Master's first
interim report. Two areas: first, the preamble
provides for an equitable division/apportionment of the
water; and then the operative provision, article V(A),
states that the uses existing as of January 1st, 1950,
in each signatory State shall continue to be enjoyed.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Well, the uses existing
is irrigation.
I don't see where it says -- and so I can
understand, the amount of water diverted can't be
increased.
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, the whole of
article V(A) and V(B) -- I mean, no one contests that
it's the full allocation of the water. So V(B) is water
after 1950; V(A) is prior. And in order for the status
quo to be -- remain -- for the appropriative right to
beneficial uses existing in Montana as of 1950, there
needs to be a water supply. And also operative to that,
it's within the definitions at article II(H), is
beneficial use. And that's a derivation or departure
from the general prior appropriation law, because it's
that use by which a water supply is depleted
when usefully used.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But why doesn't the
language in article V(A) -- and this is not too helpful
-- simply restate the issue before us, what is a
beneficial use by the upstream owner?
MR. BULLOCK: Well, Your Honor, it need not
because in article II(H) it defines what a beneficial
use is, and that's that use by which the water supply of
a basin is depleted. And it's that depletion that -- as
of 1950, so it wasn't a full consumption of water in
Wyoming, and that depletion is the return flow upon
which Montanans rely.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, that's the essence
-- that's the essence of the argument before us. The
depletion was the amount of water that was taken from
this water source to irrigate the crops. The -- the
issue now before us is whether beneficial use means
consumption or it means use, isn't it?
I -- you're begging the question in my mind,
because I don't -- what source do you have for the fact
that a return flow is beneficial use?
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, the return flow is
the basis of Montana's water right, so that the return
flow under the compact isn't actually beneficial use.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: That's not actually
true. Their water right was the beneficial use that
your pre-1950 consumers used, meaning you had consumers
who were irrigating their own crops, who were doing
other things with the water. The rights protected are
their pre-1950 uses. You're putting -- you're -- you're
still equating consumption as -- as being their use, but
I don't know where you get that equation from.
MR. BULLOCK: The equation, Your Honor, that
consumption is the same thing as --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: As use.
MR. BULLOCK: -- as use?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Uh-huh.
MR. BULLOCK: Well, we could go actually to
the Special Master, who himself had stated that when
exploring -- I mean, the beneficial use reflects the
historic consumptive use. It's from his own textbook.
It's on page 82. The Master says that a senior's right
is limited to the amount he originally beneficially
applied and consumptively used; that is, the amount
received at the point of use minus the runoff.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could someone pre-1950
who irrigated crops change the crops?
MR. BULLOCK: It's -- it's an open question,
Your Honor. Yes, they certainly could, but not if it
impacted a downstream appropriator, as per this compact.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How in the world do any
States monitor that? The change in crops, the change in
irrigation methods, the change in anything that would
cause a difference in return flow? Let's assume global
warming in some form or another evaporated more water,
and so some crop area did some solar heating that caused
a greater evaporation. Is that a breach of the compact?
So two questions embedded in there. How
does any State monitor that, the change in crops or
change in irrigation methods? And, second, how far does
it go in terms of the pre-1950s right to use their
water?
MR. BULLOCK: To the first question, Your
Honor, even as of 1950, the drafters recognized that
this was a fully appropriated river; it had reached its
maximum practical limit. So each individual downstream
knows how much water they should be getting. I mean, we
have 80 years of measurements on one of these rivers
alone, and you could go online right now and find out
what the flow is at the State line occurring as of this
morning.
So a piece of it that this is something
we've been doing for a long time in the west as far as
knowing what water is in the river, where it is, and
throughout, you know, downstream appropriation.
To the second question --
JUSTICE GINSBURG: But would --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But all that shows is --
or might show in a particular case, is that the amount
of water is reduced. Now the -- then the question is
have the senior appropriators or the upstream
appropriators reduced it in a way that's inconsistent or
that's an overuse of their beneficial rights, and you're
right -- again right where we started from. And then
you have to regulate exactly how each irrigator is using
the appropriative right.
MR. BULLOCK: And, Your Honor, you don't --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: So the -- so the flows
don't necessarily answer the question.
MR. BULLOCK: Well, Your Honor, it's
ultimately up to each State to administer their rights
and their water intrastate. But this is a compact among
sovereigns. So what we need, what Montana needs, is to
get that supply of water that it was receiving as of
50.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: But you -- this is
where it's been talking about beneficial uses. What the
compact said -- says is appropriative rights to
beneficial uses. And to me that suggests, which I
always understood to be the way water law worked in the
west, is you have a right to pull out, you know, water,
and the appropriative right is you have the right to
take out however much you were taking out. And the fact
that less comes back, that's something different. That
doesn't affect your appropriation.
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, even at the time
of the compact, that Wyoming recognized their paper
rights, that appropriative right was much more than the
actual use occurring. So you can't read beneficial use
out of -- especially under this compact, but in any.
Even under the general common law, you only have an
appropriative right for the beneficial use, and all
along --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, isn't that
what's going on here? The beneficial use is irrigation
of crops. They have an appropriative right to take out
so much flow for that. That's all they're doing.
They're doing it now, just as they were back then. They
just use up more of it once they've taken it out.
MR. BULLOCK: Mr. Chief Justice, two things,
the first of which, the beneficial use is -- I mean, we
can't read this definition of beneficial use out of the
contract -- or out of the compact. And it is a
contract, actually, among States. And, also, though --
second of which, though, that it's also a fundamental
tenet of prior appropriation law -- is the downstream
irrigator takes, given the same conditions as when he
first got his or her right.
JUSTICE BREYER: Given the same conditions.
But is there any evidence, or can you say anything from
the record or any other place, going back to 1950 -- I
assume in 1950 people knew how much the different
landowners were taking out of the stream of the river in
Wyoming to use for irrigation and other such purposes.
They knew that.
Is there any indication they knew at that
time how much each individual landowner was putting
back? I think the answer is "no." But I'd be very
interested if it's "yes." And I think it would help you
a lot if it's "yes," because I'm --
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: To tell you the truth, I'm
pretty skeptical of the fact that they're writing an
appropriation right into this about regulating something
they don't even know about.
MR. BULLOCK: Effectively, Your Honor, it
could be yes.
JUSTICE BREYER: Well, I didn't say it could
be yes. I would like you to tell me if the answer is
yes, and then, of course, I'm going to ask you --
MR. BULLOCK: Sure.
JUSTICE BREYER: -- where in the record I
find something that says that they knew how much each
individual landowner is putting back into this river in
Wyoming. And I think you can't answer that question,
can you?
MR. BULLOCK: I certainly cannot answer
that, and they didn't need to know, from the
perspective --
JUSTICE BREYER: Oh, they didn't? In other
words, they didn't know how much is coming back, but
you're coming in and saying what they were -- what they
were regulating here is they're saying, not only you
get -- you maintain a right to take out 100,000 units to
do your irrigation, but you have to put back 80,000, but
they didn't even know what the number was, whether it
was 80, 70, or 60, and the appropriation law is
ambiguous? I think -- I think I can go that far with
you to say it's ambiguous, but I don't see how I can go
further.
I mean, that's my basic question. It's --
did you see what it was? Was I clear? Not too?
MR. BULLOCK: I --
JUSTICE BREYER: I'm saying, how can you
read this treaty to require landowners to put back
amounts into the river that they didn't even know what
they were?
MR. BULLOCK: First, Your Honor, the
individual landowner does not have to put water back in
that they didn't even know what they were. What they do
need to do is make sure that the beneficial -- the
appropriative right to beneficial use is existing in
both States. The Solicitor General pointed out that we
don't break up V(A) and V(B) and put one group priority
over the other, but existing as of 1950 in both States
shall continue to be enjoyed. So the only way that we
can continue to enjoy the rights in Montana downstream
is to ensure that we have the water supplies that we
had --
JUSTICE SCALIA: You -- you say you get the
same amount of water and it's up to -- it's up to
Wyoming to figure out who they have to cut down for not
putting back enough to meet that amount? You don't care
what private owner it comes from? It's up to Wyoming to
figure out who has to be cut back?
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, I don't say we --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm trying to help you.
(Laughter.)
MR. BULLOCK: Sorry?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, I think that is
what -- the answer is yes, isn't it?
MR. BULLOCK: Yes, but -- but, Your Honor,
we don't say the exact same quantity of water. We say
under like water supplies.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Under like water supplies,
yes.
MR. BULLOCK: Yes. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Could you tell me the -- I
didn't get the page of the Special Master's report which
you asserted adopts your -- your definition of
beneficial use. What page was it?
JUSTICE KENNEDY: I thought you referred us,
just while you're going through your notes, to page 82,
and there's an intriguing footnote where the Special
Master talks about his own -- his own book. But that
doesn't seem to me to be conclusive on your point,
because he's saying the area is confused. And his point
-- it seems to me it brings up what the special -- I'm
taking over your answer to Justice Scalia's question.
It is page 82, footnote --
MR. BULLOCK: Footnote 15, yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: There's a footnote on that
page, yes.
MR. BULLOCK: And there he's talking
about --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It seems to say what you
say it says.
JUSTICE ALITO: If your understanding is
correct, would the result be that landowners in Wyoming
would only be allowed to consume as much as they
consumed in 1950, but landowners in Montana could take
advantage of improved irrigation techniques and use much
more of the -- they could divert the same amount of
water, but they could use much more of it?
MR. BULLOCK: No, Your Honor, that would not
be the case.
JUSTICE ALITO: Why wouldn't it?
MR. BULLOCK: First, for the irrigators in
Montana -- I mean, one of the things -- Montana sought
to have a system of interstate administration. Montana
-- or Wyoming, through storage, through curtailing
consumption by post-'50 users, or otherwise can
administer its water rights in however it so deems. So,
ultimately, that's a decision of the State of how it
administers the water rights and the consumption of that
amount that it has.
For Montana, we can't increase consumption
any more than the water that we would have received at
that point. So to the extent that Montana allows an
individual irrigator to go to 100 percent of consumption
of its water right, then in our system in Montana, we
have to deal with what's going to happen to the
subsequent appropriator right downstream.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: And what happens under
Montana law?
MR. BULLOCK: Under Montana law, if there's
an injury, and that's -- that's actually -- and the
Special Master pointed this out in another one of his
footnotes, that that still would be actionable. Like a
change from flood irrigation to sprinkler irrigation, to
the extent that it deprives a downstream user of waters
that they're relying on, that they could bring an
action.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Yes, but your people can do
that. Your people can get more use out of the same
amount of water diverted by going to sprinkler
irrigation, whereas the people in Wyoming can't. That's
a little unfair, it seems to me. Right?
MR. BULLOCK: Both can, Your Honor. I mean,
that -- that is -- I guess the presumption is that we
would have the water to use it, and Wyoming is actually
getting a lot more production by consuming a lot more of
the water within its right.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Your people are entitled to
take out the same amount they took out before, right?
Pre-1950?
MR. BULLOCK: Under like water supply
conditions --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Whereas the people in
Wyoming, you say, are not entitled to take out the same
amount; they are entitled only net the same amount that
they had before. Whereas downstream your people can
take out the same amount and whereas before 20 percent
of it used to go back into the stream, they can now make
use of that whole 20 percent through sprinkler
irrigation, right? It gives you a great advantage.
I mean, maybe that's the way it was written,
but -- but don't tell me that this is even-handed,
because it --
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, I don't think that
it does give us a great advantage, because we still have
to deal with the same amount of water supply that we
would have had. So, at that point, if we switch to
sprinkler irrigation, the first irrigator does that,
there's going to be a shortage down river unless we make
it up through additional storage or other causes. So --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Do you have ultimate
liability to Montana -- pardon me -- to North Dakota for
-- for overuse?
MR. BULLOCK: We do a little bit, Your
Honor. There's the picture of the basin in the first
appendix.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I won't -- I won't
get into that, but it does seem to me that the Chief
Justice asked the question, if you're entitled to take
the water, you can use it for any purpose. I -- I take
it the answer to that is it has to be a beneficial use,
it has to be for approximately the same crop, but that
brings us to this -- to this gray area that the Special
Master refers to on page 82 as confusing. And I
think -- was it page 65 -- he talks about this is a
confusing area of the law.
What is your best authority for your
position? What is the best authority? Do you have a
case or a -- a paragraph in a treatise that's --
MR. BULLOCK: Sure. Yes, Your Honor. In
92, the Utah Supreme Court framed the question: This
court's called upon to determine the applicable law when
the use of new technology impacts --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The Utah case is your best
case?
MR. BULLOCK: That's -- that's the only case
that any of the parties cited that actually deals with
the change from sprinkler -- or flood to sprinkler
irrigation. And what that said is if the return flow
goes to the same river which it came from, that
subsequent irrigators or downstream appropriators have
the right to rely on that.
And I guess I'd say that my second best case
is the Special Master's own footnote. It's 69/12, where
he says that, you know, even though State change
procedures don't typically apply to crop or -- changes
in crop irrigation techniques, this does not mean
there's no way to challenge increases in efficiency.
Downstream water users, for example, could sue to enjoin
an upstream appropriator from increasing consumption or
to force the upstream appropriator to replace lost
runoff.
JUSTICE SCALIA: I would think your best
point is not all of that stuff, but simply the
definition section, which very clearly makes a
distinction between beneficial use and diversion. And
your point is that what is guaranteed is not the
diversion right that existed pre-1950, but the
beneficial use right, which is the net use of the water,
not -- not the total amount diverted.
If -- if there were not both of those
definitions, it seems to me it would be a little -- your
case would be a little harder. But with the two of
those definitions there and with V(A) using beneficial
use rather than -- it could have said diversion,
appropriative right to diversion, but it didn't say
that. It said to beneficial use.
Well, why -- why define beneficial use that
way if you don't mean it? That's your best point, isn't
MR. BULLOCK: I -- I agree, Your Honor.
(Laughter.)
MR. BULLOCK: I was trying to -- I believe
Justice Kennedy asked for a case or a treatise, so
that's --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, all right.
MR. BULLOCK: But I agree that the plain
language -- and especially in an area where there's so
much ambiguities the Special Master acknowledges, why
change the status quo of what was occurring? And
that's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I don't understand
why that's a good -- good answer. I mean, the
beneficial use is that use by which the water supply is
depleted. Well, the use here is irrigation. It doesn't
say irrigation up to the technological development in
50. They're still taking out the same amount of water
for that beneficial use. They're using it to irrigate.
And if they get better at it so they use more, well,
that's just too bad for you.
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, but they're
depleting more from the basin, and that's -- I mean, you
can have beneficial use for non-consumptive purposes.
JUSTICE BREYER: That's back where -- that's
where I was here, too. See, I can't get too far -- I
mean, you have the word "depletion" in that definition.
I -- I -- that might help you. But I'm thinking in
accordance with the doctrine of appropriation, what does
that doctrine, that legal doctrine, say about use and
return? And that's why we're -- we're -- why I was
thinking it seems totally unclear.
It talks about seepage, the cases, which I
gather is different from return. Okay. So could they
have really meant net? And what struck me is that they
couldn't, which -- which you were beginning to address,
too, is that they couldn't have meant net because the
water law at that time is unlikely to have meant net for
the reason that they didn't -- you don't know what's
coming back.
Do you see? It's not just -- I see your
point. Your point is, well, Wyoming knew how much was
going into Wyoming. But that's not my point. My point
is what -- what's the water law? What's the law of
appropriation at that time in respect to return flows?
And if people didn't measure return flows in general, I
suspect in an ambiguous area they would have analogized
it to seepage, which is what the -- what the Special
Master thought.
MR. BULLOCK: Your Honor, the seepage cases,
though, deal with adjoining landowners --
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, they --
MR. BULLOCK: -- not the same river flow,
and the Special Master acknowledged that.
JUSTICE BREYER: Uh-huh.
MR. BULLOCK: That -- and I guess what I was
earlier trying to explain is certainly each appropriator
knows how much water it would -- would be receiving,
what the flows typically are, and they all basically
judge on that. But I guess if there's any ambiguity --
and the law wasn't necessarily clear as of 1950 on
conversions from flood to sprinkler irrigation, but what
we were trying to do is preserve those uses in both
States existing as of January 1st, 1950, and we can't do
that without a water supply.
Other than the text, I think that the next
place that one would look in interpreting the compact
would be the legislative history. And I think that the
report to the Senate was real good in saying that --
and this is part of -- it's appended to motion --
Montana's brief in response to the motion to dismiss the
bill of complaint. At 3a it says, "It's clear then that
the demand of one State upon another for a supply
different from that now obtaining under present
conditions of supply and diversion is not contemplated,
nor would such a demand have a legal standing."
So what they were trying to do in 1950 is
protect what each State was doing.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where is that again --
where at?
MR. BULLOCK: That's at 3a of the appendix,
Montana's motion -- or the response to Wyoming's motion
to dismiss the bill of complaint.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: General Bullock, assume
that you're right, that what was guaranteed was the same
amount of water flowing into Montana as in 1950, and
I -- I take it you don't care how Wyoming deals with
this, but what -- if you're right, what could Wyoming
do? It can't tell the -- the farmers go back to the old
way of irrigating or go back to a different crop?
MR. BULLOCK: No -- I mean, no, Justice
Ginsburg. Wyoming could choose to reduce groundwater
pumping. They could choose to curtail irrigation on
post-1950. They could choose to release storage. I
mean, they've -- they've built, I think, 15 new
reservoirs in Wyoming since the date of the compact.
They could choose to release water from that to fulfill
those rights.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: So, you say it doesn't --
they don't -- Wyoming doesn't have to know whether
farmer A or farmer B is taking more than they took in
50 -- I mean, is using more than they used in 1950;
they just have to know what the total amount is, and
Wyoming can make that up?
MR. BULLOCK: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So really -- I'm sorry.
The issue is, are both of you -- both of you have pre-
and post-1950 users?
MR. BULLOCK: Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right. And I -- I
guess this goes to the second question, which was sort
of not really addressed. The Special Master said, well,
you could cut back your post-1950 users and satisfy all
of the needs of your pre-1950 users. Why isn't that the
answer? Why isn't that an answer that should be
respected, because you can satisfy all of the pre-1950
needs that you have potentially?
MR. BULLOCK: No, Your Honor, we can't
necessarily satisfy all the needs. The drafters did say
even as of 1950 that this basin reached its maximum
practicable limit for irrigation, and that's from the
October -- the last of the drafters meetings. So -- so,
the water supply as of then, without additional storage,
had already hit that limit. And, ultimately, what we
need, though, is -- each State will administer
intrastate, but we still should be able to rely on the
ability to get a supply of water to meet those needs as
of 1950 under like water supply conditions.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Before any 1950 use?
Post-1950 users are permitted?
MR. BULLOCK: We're still at the stage of
discovery, but, yes, likely that's how it would occur,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So why isn't this a
premature lawsuit? Because I think really the essence
of your claim is we need the pre-1950 water flow. We
don't care who it comes from. And what -- all the
Special Master said, in my mind, was the difference --
you can't look to what the pre-1950s were doing in this
situation, but I haven't addressed what the posts are
going to do or have been doing and whether that's right,
and that's depriving you of the water flow.
I don't know if he answered that question.
Are you, in fact, entitled to a minimum amount of water
flow? That's really what should be the point of the
issue, isn't it?
MR. BULLOCK: It is, or that quantity under
like water supply conditions. I don't think it's
premature. We've tried to administer this compact,
actually made calls in 2004 and 2006; and as a result of
not getting the water, knowing -- believing we're in a
water-short time, that's when we filed this action.
I'd like to reserve my time if I may.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Michael.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PETER KENNETH MICHAEL
ON BEHALF OF DEFENDANT WYOMING
MR. MICHAEL: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Court has identified in previous
questioning this case at this point in this issue
involves whether a Wyoming or a Montana diverter may
change cropping patterns, may change various
technologies in irrigated agriculture, and change up and
down, depending on the year and the fallowing of land
and that sort of thing, the amount of water that is
actually consumed by crops. And I think the Court has
identified the critical fact that a water right, a
classic western water right, appropriative right as in
article V(A), is made up of the right to divert an
amount of water at a head gate in an irrigation
situation, put it on a defined quantity of land, and use
it for a purpose, irrigation, that's defined by the
State. Wyoming has had such a -- a system in place for
many years and controls those issues but does not and
has not attempted to measure consumptive.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But what is the
controlling principle in answering the question that I
think you properly put? Could these irrigators switch
to something like rice, which absorbs a tremendous
amount of water, or are they -- when they switch crops
it must be reasonably close to the earlier beneficial
use? What is -- what is the standard that we look to,
to answer that question?
MR. MICHAEL: The standard is the standard
of waste, practical irrigation.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: The standard of?
MR. MICHAEL: Waste, of not wasting water,
practical irrigation. The irrigation right is a general
right, and if rice were to double the amount of
consumptive use by the crop, that would be permissible
if the previous use had not been affected by an
abandonment action, because the amount of water was
being reasonably used for the former crop and the crop
has changed. So it's not a question of -- of percentage
change.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I thought --
MR. MICHAEL: It's a question --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Suppose the first --
suppose the first crop absorbs 50 percent of the water
and returns 50 percent by seepage. The second crop that
they switch to still absorbs just 50 percent of the
water but because of the -- of the pattern, the other 50
percent just evaporates?
MR. MICHAEL: The -- the way that the water
is -- there's -- there's a basket, Your Honor. There's
a basket that starts with a quantity that's taken at the
head gate, 4 cubic feet per second put on the -- on the
field. And within that quantity there -- there's
multiple -- two components, basically: the amount
consumed by the crop -- I should say the amount consumed
by the crop or depleted by other elements, ditches,
seepage, other types of things, deep percolation into
the ground -- and -- and the other component which is
water that's not lost but can return or go somewhere.
It's not evaporated; there's no transpiration. So
there's those two components.
And if that -- if that quantity, that
division changes, that's perfectly permissible within
the use of the water right. And the reason for that was
set out in Wiel's -- Samuel Wiel's text in 1911, carried
forward in texts and cases ever since, that -- and in
the Binning case, a 1940 case in Wyoming; which is the
water while it's in the stream in the public common is
-- is not under the possession and control -- the
personal property control of the irrigator.
JUSTICE SCALIA: But we're dealing here with
a compact which has a text, and -- and what the water
law of Wyoming or of Montana happened to be cannot
overrule the text, and I am -- I'm hung up on the fact
that article V(A) says appropriative rights to the
beneficial uses of the water of the Yellowstone River
System existing as of January 1, 1950. Appropriative
rights not to diversion, not to diversion for beneficial
uses, but appropriative rights to the beneficial uses,
which is defined -- which is defined in the compact to
say "that use by which the water supply of a drainage
basin is depleted when usefully employed."
And it could have said diversion, but it
didn't say that, and I notice that the Government's
brief uses -- seems to use the words interchangeably,
"depletion" and "diversion." They're not
interchangeable. They're defined quite separately in
this thing. And besides which I find it implausible
that Montana signed on to, well, we don't know how much
water we're going to get; it depends, you know, upon how
much stuff was -- was flowing back before, but we're not
guaranteed that that will be flowing back again.
You combine those two things, and I -- I --
what do you do about that definition?
MR. MICHAEL: Your Honor, the definition has
two components, the classic beneficial -- the component
that would come from a classic beneficial use
definition, which is useful employment for the
activities of man, a beneficial purpose, which -- a non-
wasteful purpose. That's the start.
JUSTICE SCALIA: That's not how it's
defined.
MR. MICHAEL: That's -- that's the last
portion. That's the second part.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, that's fine.
MR. MICHAEL: The first part is use by which
the water supply of a drainage basin is depleted. In
the western United States, a drainage basin --
appropriable water is not all the water in the air and
on the land and dropping from the sky; appropriable
water is water confined in a water course. The Binning
case made that clear. Until the water returned from the
field into a water course, it was not appropriable by
the downstream user. So this definition -- by using
the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But are you addressing the
word "depleted"?
MR. MICHAEL: I'm addressing the word
"supply" of the drainage basin; and then it is depleted.
Use by which the supply, the water supply of a drainage
basin, is depleted.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: But are you saying that
"depleted" means only what's withdrawn, and it's not
calculated by -- with reference to what is returned?
MR. MICHAEL: That's correct.
JUSTICE BREYER: But you -- obviously,
you're saying --
MR. MICHAEL: That is different from
"diverted."
JUSTICE BREYER: You read it with a
different emphasis. Justice Scalia read it with --
beneficial use is that use by which the water supply of
a drainage basin "is depleted" when usefully employed by
the activities of man.
And you read it: By which the water supply
of a drainage basin is depleted "when usefully employed
by the activities of man." So that it is a definition
in respect to how you use it, not amounts.
But if you emphasize the word "depleted," it
could be read as referring to amounts, and not quality
of use, not nature. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why don't you emphasize
both of them?
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, well --
JUSTICE SCALIA: I'm willing to emphasize
both, but you can't write out the "depleted" out of the
-- how does your definition of "depleted" differ from --
from "diversion"?
MR. MICHAEL: If you had a broader --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Is the diversion for a
beneficial use the same thing as a depletion?
MR. MICHAEL: May I give an example?
In a -- in a river, the Tongue River, if
there is a -- if there is a waterwheel, Montana allows
water rights. A 1912 case, Hennessy v. Featherman,
allows a water right to push a waterwheel. That water
flowing down the river does not -- does not -- is not
diverted. And nevertheless it -- it would allow a water
right.
This definition differentiates that. In
this definition under the compact, water that is
diverted for agriculture, that is diverted is a
beneficial use, but there's a small segment of -- of
what could be a legitimate water right that is excluded
under this definition.
JUSTICE SCALIA: No, but, I mean, to -- to
do that, the definition would have read: The term
"beneficial use" is defined to be that use by which the
water -- that use "for which" the water supply of a
drainage basin is diverted for useful employment by the
activities of man, and that's not what it says. To the
contrary, it makes a clear distinction between
"depletion" and the previous definition of "diversion."
I just -- I was trying to give that stark
difference some effect in the later section V(A).
MR. MICHAEL: Let me say this, Your Honor,
if I might: The -- you will find in -- in the compact,
in article V(B), the use of both "diversion" and
"beneficial use."
JUSTICE SCALIA: Okay.
MR. MICHAEL: And so we have two -- those
terms are both used. And in V(B) the drafters made a
distinction; they said direct diversions or storage
would be covered by V(B), and then they said how
diversions are counted.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Where -- where --
MR. MICHAEL: In (C) they talk about the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: What part of V(B) are you
talking about?
MR. MICHAEL: I'm talking about at the
bottom of V(B), where you're talking about the three --
the third-tier rights.
JUSTICE SCALIA: The point of measurement
shall be below the last diversion?
MR. MICHAEL: No, V(B). In the first text,
the first paragraph of V(B), towards the bottom, the
text says: "And the remainder of the unused and
unappropriated water is allocated to each State for
storage and direct diversions for beneficial use on new
lands."
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Excuse me --
JUSTICE SCALIA: For -- exactly. I mean,
there it talks about diversions for beneficial use and
not depletion for beneficial use. I mean, I think
that's something different.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, could I --
MR. MICHAEL: Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you answer -- do
you see a difference? Finish that, and then could I
just clarify something from what you were just reading?
MR. MICHAEL: I think there's a difference
in that the -- in practical terms, the depletion -- in
the depletion and the beneficial use definition, a
diversion would be the only way to deplete that. And
that's -- that's the point. The only way to make it
through a depletion --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And so, once again, you're
saying that depletion is a calculation of what is taken
without reference to what returns?
MR. MICHAEL: Yes, Your Honor. And --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Oh, so when --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: And your best authority
for that is?
MR. MICHAEL: The best authority, I think,
is what the -- the Special Master's discussion of this,
that the only practical way a water supply of the
drainage basin would -- being the quantities of water in
the rivers themselves, would be depleted would be
through a diversion. So there's really no reason to
make a distinction.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Just to follow up on
Justice Kennedy's point, because I think it's important:
So you were reading -- when it says "is depleted," you
think all you have to show is that it's less than when
you started, and once that is shown, it is depleted.
Then you're saying, but we can deplete as much as we
want?
MR. MICHAEL: Yes, depletion would be moving
it from this glass of water, if that was the river --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Yes.
MR. MICHAEL: -- and it reduces the quantity
of water in the river. That would be a depletion.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: And you don't care
how much? You're saying, well, this is a beneficial use
because it depletes some of the water, it takes some
away, and once we have gotten over that hurdle, all bets
are off and we can deplete as much as we want.
MR. MICHAEL: Yes. And, of course, the
water right --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I guess to get
back to the point, wouldn't the normal word be "divert"?
MR. MICHAEL: It may well be, Your Honor.
There's -- there's some problems with this definition.
It self-defines itself using "usefully" twice, so we
have some drafting issues with -- with this -- in some
of these.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Counsel, could I go back
to my question, which is twofold? The first is the
Solicitor General recommends that we defer the decision
on remedies in this case, and Montana seems to agree.
Do you agree as well? The second question presented.
MR. MICHAEL: That has been deferred, is my
understanding.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: It has? My problem with
this is -- and I think I need to understand what the
fight is about here, or what the dispute is about -- it
really does seem to me that it is a question of
remedies, not about whether you're taking more water
rights through irrigation or not.
If I understand this compact right, both of
you are protected in your pre-1950 beneficial uses.
Each of you appear, under the terms of article V, to be
entitled to get enough water to fill those uses. The
next section, the one that you read earlier, lets you
use things in the future for post-1950 uses, but only if
the water supply's protected pre-1950 beneficial uses
have received all they're entitled to. Neither of you
are entitled or -- to take anything post-1950 until
pre-1950 is protected.
That's how I read article V. Am I reading
it wrong? Because it seems to me that the only time
that we get into a dispute -- and this is the part that
I think your adversary may be right about, ultimately --
is it's not a consumptive compact, but it's a use
compact, and both of you are entitled to get a full --
that's what I'm reading article V to say, to get enough
water to satisfy the beneficial uses before anybody's
entitled to post-1950 water.
Tell me what in the language of article V
suggests something different than that understanding.
MR. MICHAEL: I disagree -- the language in
article V that disagrees with that is the very first few
words, "appropriative rights." Appropriative rights do
not guarantee that any water user or any group of water
users will be satisfied. 1934 was a horrendously dry
year in the basin, 50 percent -- flows were 50 percent
less than normal. In those kinds of years, the river --
the river dried up that year in parts of the river,
so -- well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But this is not
happening today, is it? There's --
MR. MICHAEL: Oh, yes. It happened in 2004.
It --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: All right, but that's an
isolated year.
MR. MICHAEL: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: In most years, are you
putting water to post-1950 use -- to post-1950 uses or
not? Have you been regularly putting water to post-1950
uses?
MR. MICHAEL: Both States, at times. Yes,
last year, all post-1950 uses got satisfied. It varies
widely. But the point is that only the appropriative
right, which is not a guarantee of a quantity of
water -- so the first clause of the compact, article
V(A), does not establish a quantity of water, and there
are many compacts that do this. They establish a
quantity of water, and they do it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't disagree.
MR. MICHAEL: -- quite simply.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: I don't disagree, but as
I read the article, it says, you put all the water
that's available to pre-1950 appropriated uses. You
then go, as I read the second part of this article, to
any water supplies that each State has until you fulfill
those 1950 appropriated uses. And then it apportions,
between the two of you, post-1950 percentages of the
excess water that you're entitled to have.
Am I correct about that structure?
MR. MICHAEL: Yes, and on an ongoing basis.
It's not a quantity. None of this is done in quantity.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Exactly.
MR. MICHAEL: It's all done in a system
that's dynamic.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But that's why -- I do
understand the remedies were deferred, but to the extent
that we were to rule that appropriated rights included
the right to change irrigation methods or crops -- we
don't have to reach crops, because that's not at issue
here -- in the end, you're only entitled to take the
appropriated uses, including irrigation rights, that
existed pre-1950. Are they entitled to get as much
water as necessary to satisfy their pre-1950 rights or
not --
MR. MICHAEL: No.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- before you can use
post-1950 water?
MR. MICHAEL: Yes. Yes, before -- on these
-- on those particular dates. On those particular
dates, if there are pre-1950 rights in Montana that are
not satisfied on that river and there's post-1950 rights
in Wyoming, the Special Master has ruled, contrary to
Wyoming's argument --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: But how -- why aren't
you taking more of the percentage that way of post-1950
waters? The compact says, post-1950, you can take
whatever percentage it was. I've forgotten what
percentage that might have been.
MR. MICHAEL: 60 percent.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Whatever it was. 60
percent --
MR. MICHAEL: This might add on that.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: They're entitled to 40.
Does that mean you can take a hundred percent, because
there happens to be more water that they can satisfy the
pre-1950s users with? Why aren't they entitled to their
percent of whatever that big basin is so they can
give more water to post-1950 users, that they can
exploit their full 40 percent?
MR. MICHAEL: Your Honor, I'm not following,
because there's a distinction between each class of
water.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Yes, I understand that.
MR. MICHAEL: And in your -- in your
question, I'm not following which class you are
referring to.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Well, I -- I'm answering
this only -- I'm asking this because I know we've
deferred decision on the remedies --
MR. MICHAEL: Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: -- but for me that is so
integral to the issue here because when they talk about
being entitled to a water flow, I see that as being
entitled to a pre-1950 satisfaction of water needs or
beneficial uses before anybody gets post-1950 water.
And so, I see the only issue before us,
because remedies have been put aside, as to whether the
beneficial use includes some percentage increase because
of irrigation demands, but so what? It just means it's
going to limit post-1950 users. It's not going to limit
the rights of the pre-1950 users.
Everybody's entitled to change their
irrigation methods. Everybody's entitled to change
their crops. They appear not to be entitled to put the
water to a new use, whatever -- however that's defined.
We don't need to get there today, but I'm not sure how
you're entitled to post-1950 uses while they're still
not satisfied in 1950 use.
MR. MICHAEL: We -- Wyoming is not entitled
on the same river to take post-1950 water when there is
a pre-1950 use in Montana that's not satisfied. The
Special Master has held that. Pre-1950s are --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: The question is what?
MR. MICHAEL: He has -- the Special -- I'm
sorry. The Special Master has recommended that, but --
and the Court actually has granted that.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Counsel, just before
you sit down, what makes you think we've deferred the
remedy question? It's presented. It's been briefed.
don't know why you think we've deferred it. Whether or
not Montana has to take care of intrastate uses --
that's what I understand the remedy question to be. You
briefed it.
MR. MICHAEL: Well, no, my understanding was
the Court had simply sent it back to the Special Master
for further consideration. That's all.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, thank you.
Thank you, counsel.
MR. MICHAEL: Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Mr. Jay, maybe you
can help clarify something. The -- the second question
presented, which involves what Montana has to do before
they -- that's still before us, right?
ORAL ARGUMENT OF WILLIAM M. JAY
ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES, AS AMICUS CURIAE,
SUPPORTING DEFENDANTS
MR. JAY: Mr. Chief Justice --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: I know you want
us -- you don't want us to reach it, but it's still
before us.
MR. JAY: Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Court entered an order stating that it
would hold oral argument only on Montana's first
exception, and that the second exception would be
recommitted to the Special Master. So for that -- for
that reason the parties have addressed only the first
exception in this argument today.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: Could you -- but your
brief, before we entered that order, said the Special
Master was right, that they have to satisfy their needs
from pre -- post-1950 users. Why? Aren't they entitled
to their 40 percent of how much excess water there may
be after their pre-1950 users have been satisfied in
full? Doesn't this compact say both of their pre-1950
users have to be satisfied first?
MR. JAY: Both of their pre-1950 users have
to be satisfied first, yes, we agree with that, so that
no one in Wyoming is supposed to be taking post-1950
water until pre-1950 users in Montana are satisfied. We
agree with that.
The -- the point on which -- that the Court
has sent back to the Special Master is what happens if
pre-1950 users in Montana are not satisfied but they
could be because Montana post-1950 users in Montana are
also diverting water. But what we think the -- the
question squarely before the Court here is whether the
right to recapture water gained from increased
efficiency is part of the pre-1950 appropriative right,
and that matters when there's not enough water in the
river for both States to satisfy their pre-1950
appropriative rights. Forget about post-1950s, there's
not enough water for --
JUSTICE BREYER: And so, on your theory in
that situation where there isn't enough for all the
pre-1950 people, it's Wyoming that gets all the water?
And on their theory, it's surprising -- surprise,
surprise -- it's Montana that gets all the water?
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER: And there's no way to read
this contract -- this compact so it's share and share
alike?
MR. JAY: Both States have affirmatively
rejected the idea of a middle ground like that, Justice
Breyer, because --
JUSTICE BREYER: There's no fair way to
decide this case?
MR. JAY: Well -- well, Justice Breyer,
we -- we submit that enforcing the compact according
what -- what the States signed up for --
JUSTICE SCALIA: It is fair.
MR. JAY: Precisely. And --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I always
thought in addition that's kind of the way appropriation
law works in the west, right? I mean, the person who
gets it, gets it.
(Laughter.)
MR. JAY: Provided that --
JUSTICE SCALIA: The person who doesn't get
it, gets it.
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Well, I mean, I
don't mean -- I mean, isn't that the difference between
eastern water law and western water law? In the east,
you try to allocate everything fairly so everyone is
treated fairly, and I thought in the west, for reasons
of efficiency, it's first come, first served.
MR. JAY: And here the States decided not to
do that on an interstate basis. They said that -- that
all pre-1950 users would be on the same footing as
between the States. So that Montana cannot complain
if -- as long as Wyoming's water users pre-1950 are not
exceeding their pre-1950 right, Montana has no remedy
and there's no breach. They concede that on page 20 of
their surreply.
JUSTICE GINSBURG: Mr. Jay, I thought that
the Special Master -- very important to him was the
meaning of "appropriative rights," and he said that the
Wyoming law is just as you've described, that is, the
farmer can use all that water; and he said Montana law
is uncertain, but Wyoming law is not out of line with
the general approach.
Suppose this had been a case -- suppose
Montana law, instead of being uncertain, was
diametrically opposite Wyoming law, then what happens
under this compact?
MR. JAY: Under this compact, Justice
Ginsburg, the appropriative rights existing in each
signatory State as of January 1st, 1950, are what are
preserved and carried forward by article V(A). Each
water user in -- in each State has exactly the same
rights that he had on January 1st, 1950. Now, in
Montana perhaps that might not include the right to
recapture efficiencies, but we know, for example, that
-- that a Montana water user could divert more water per
acre because Montana had a more generous concept of
beneficial use for irrigation per acre than Wyoming did.
The compact simply carries forward all
existing appropriative rights, and the drafters
consciously rejected the idea that they should come up
with some kind of interstate administration system
putting the two States' rights on an equal footing.
They carried forward each element in the bundle of
sticks that a rights holder had on January 1st, 1950,
subject to the single override of the definition of
"beneficial use." And I'd like to turn to that because
Justice Scalia's colloquy with Mr. Michael brought that
out.
In article II(H), there is a definition of
"beneficial use." What the compact's definition of
"beneficial use" does is specify that non-depletive uses
don't count. Hydropower is a classic example.
Hydropower in the main channel is something that one
could get an appropriative right for under some western
water law.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Could you -- and this is
II --
MR. JAY: II(H), which is on page A-4 to the
appendix of the Special Master's report. That's the
definition of "beneficial use."
What it does not do is specify that
depletion is the measure of beneficial use. It says
beneficial use is not the use to the extent that the
water supply is depleted; it's the use -- it's a use by
which the water supply is depleted. Because irrigation
means water goes out and doesn't come -- and some of it
doesn't come back, irrigation is a depletive use. It's
recognized by the compact.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, hydropower would --
would not constitute a diversion.
MR. JAY: But a mill race would, Justice
Scalia. A mill race takes water out of the river, and
you turn -- you turn the wheel of your grist mill with
it, but then -- and then the water comes back to the
river.
JUSTICE SCALIA: Well, but that -- that's a
diversion.
MR. JAY: Yes, that's a diversion, but not a
depletion.
JUSTICE SCALIA: It means the taking or
removing of water when the water so taken or removed is
not returned directly into the channel of the
Yellowstone River. So if you have a mill race, the
water comes through the mill race, goes right back; it's
-- it's not even a diversion. You don't have to qualify
as a beneficial use.
MR. JAY: But the -- the point, Justice
Scalia, article V(A) doesn't use diversion, and that --
that's precisely the point. It doesn't use "diversion";
it uses -- it uses "beneficial use." And any -- any --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Why doesn't it use
"diversion" if it means what you say?
MR. JAY: Because they -- it didn't use
"diversion" because it wasn't quantifying them. Whereas
-- what -- "diversion" is used in article V(B) because
the diversion is the --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Of course it's quantified.
I mean, the whole purpose is you can't take any more
than you were taking before. It has to be quantified
somehow.
MR. JAY: It's not quantified in the
sense -- as Justice Breyer pointed out, no one -- they
didn't write down, especially in Montana, because as the
Special Master said on page 22, Montana didn't have a
centralized system of rights; they didn't know exactly
how much was being diverted in Montana. They certainly
didn't know how much was being consumed or how much was
being returned to the river.
At Joint Appendix 585, there's a Federal
Power Commission report that says that it is almost
impossible to make an accurate determination of return
flow. So what -- what the drafters did was they -- for
the pre-1950 rights, they said we're not going to cap --
quantify them at all; we're going to grandfather them
in, freeze them in place.
JUSTICE BREYER: So your linguistic argument
is they didn't use the word "diversion" because they
didn't want to throw the mill race example into the
definition --
MR. JAY: My argument, Justice --
JUSTICE BREYER -- is that right?
MR. JAY: My argument, Justice Breyer, is
that they didn't want mill races or hydropower to count.
JUSTICE BREYER: Yes, they didn't want mill
races in the definition, so they purposely didn't use
the word "diversion"; that's why they used the word
"depletion."
MR. JAY: That's -- they used the word
"depletion," but they didn't make the amount of
depletion, the measurement of --
JUSTICE SCALIA: A mill race is not --
MR. JAY: That is the point.
JUSTICE SCALIA: A mill race is not a
diversion.
JUSTICE BREYER: Correct, and they wanted
that.
MR. JAY: A mill race is a diversion under
the common understanding of that term, Justice Scalia.
It may --
JUSTICE SCALIA: Not under the definition.
MR. JAY: Not under the special definition
used for article V(B), but --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: You keep saying
everybody gets the same beneficial use they had prior to
50, but -- even though that may mean they can't do it.
In other words, they may have a right to get 50 cubic
whatever for irrigation, but there may not be any water
there for them to use it because of the increased
efficiencies upstream.
MR. JAY: That -- that is true, Mr. Chief
Justice, but that has always been the case under western
water law that the appropriative right is a priority,
that when it's your turn and there's enough water, you
get to take the amount of water to which you have a
right. But it was clear in Wyoming on January 1st,
50, that the appropriative right -- so long as you
took the same quantity from the river, you took it from
the same point on the river, you put it to the same use,
irrigation, on the same acreage -- that you could then
change crops, for example.
JUSTICE KENNEDY: In II -- in II(H), do you
think "beneficial use is hereby defined to be that use
by which water supply is depleted" -- and we're looking
at "depleted." Do you define "depleted" as what is
taken without any reference to what is returned?
MR. JAY: I -- I think that that's right.
think I agree, Justice Kennedy, but it has to be a
depletive use in the sense that some water -- some water
has to come out that doesn't come back. So it's not --
it's not the same -- the mill -- a mill race is not a
depletion, even though some water -- some water comes
out because it then -- because it then comes back. But
what our --
JUSTICE KENNEDY: Well, I mean, that's --
that's the key to this case, I take it. Wyoming is
telling us that what goes back is irrelevant so long as
what is taken is for a recognized beneficial use.
MR. JAY: The reason it's irrelevant,
Justice Kennedy, is that -- for two reasons. Depletion
is not the measure of beneficial use. It's a -- it is a
criterion for beneficial use. The use has to be a
depletive one; but it's not the measure of the
beneficial use.
And the second point, Montana seeks to
equate consumption with depletion, and that's -- that's
not correct, either.
We urge the Court to overrule the exception.
Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, Mr. Jay.
General, you have 2 minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF STEVE BULLOCK
ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF
MR. BULLOCK: Mr. Chief Justice, members of
the Court:
Briefly, that, as Justice Scalia pointed
out, this is a compact, and it's a compact between two
different States, and Montana gave up things, a right of
priority administration across State lines as a result
of that.
Justice Breyer, as an issue of fairness, we
don't get all the water. We only get water supply under
like conditions. We are now the downstream
appropriator, so -- but one example, if half the water
is flowing now that it was, as of 1950, Montana may not
get anything at that point, because just by the virtue
of -- some say it's "highology," whoever is higher on
the river gets to take first.
So we -- we don't get to fulfill our rights.
All we get is to ensure that, given a like supply of
water, that our right shall continue to be enjoyed as it
existed as of 1950.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: How many years has there
been not enough water to fill all pre-19 -- forget about
whether there was post-1950 use. How many years are we
talking about in which there has been not enough water
to fill everybody's?
MR. BULLOCK: And -- Your Honor, we've done
no discovery at all. This is still at the motion to
dismiss complaint. And that's what the hydraulics and
the engineers will ultimately determine. We made calls
in 2004 and 2006.
We said: Wait a minute, we're not getting
enough water here, and we believe it's the -- the
pre-1950 uses that are depleting that. Will you give us
water?
Ultimately, why we're here is to sort this
out.
I guess I'd also point out that there was
some discussion about an appropriative right is the
right to use a quantity of water. That makes sense
other than if you're in a compact, and Montana gets no
water. The Solicitor General even pointed out then in
his brief at a footnote -- he said, well, what we might
do, then, is that Montana could bring an equitable
apportionment action for the pre-1950 water.
That highlights the -- I think to me, the
illogic of just focusing on the rights and not looking
at the uses and how much each State was consuming,
because at that point I'll be right back here saying we
want the same water under like conditions that we had in
50.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Thank you, General,
counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the case in the
