IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
MICHIGAN, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 14-46
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  :
AGENCY, ET AL.;  :
:
AND  :
:
UTILITY AIR REGULATORY  :
GROUP,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 14-47
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  :
AGENCY, ET AL.;  :
:
AND  :
:
NATIONAL MINING ASSOCIATION,  :
Petitioner  :  No. 14-49
v.  :
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  :
AGENCY, ET AL.;  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Wednesday, March 25, 2015
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 10:14 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
AARON D. LINDSTROM, ESQ., Solicitor General, Lansing,
Mich.; on behalf of State Petitioners.
F. WILLIAM BROWNELL, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf
of industry Petitioners and Respondents in support.
GEN. DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ., Solicitor General,
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
Federal Respondents.
PAUL M. SMITH, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on behalf of
industry Respondents.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
AARON D. LINDSTROM, ESQ.
On behalf of State Petitioners  4
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
F. WILLIAM BROWNELL, ESQ.
On behalf of industry Petitioners and
Respondents in support  28
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
GEN. DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR., ESQ.
On behalf of the Federal Respondents  41
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
PAUL M. SMITH, ESQ.
On behalf industry Respondents  70
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
AARON D. LINDSTROM, ESQ.
On behalf of State Petitioners  86
P R O C E E D I N G S
(10:14 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll hear argument
this morning in Case 14-46, Michigan v. The
Environmental Protection Agency and the consolidated
cases.
Mr. Lindstrom.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF AARON D. LINDSTROM
ON BEHALF OF STATE PETITIONERS
MR. LINDSTROM:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may
it please the Court:
EPA's view that it can decide whether to
regulate electric utilities without considering costs is
contrary to the text and structure of Section 7412.
The text sets out two distinct terms and
thus directs EPA to consider whether it is appropriate
to regulate and whether it is necessary to regulate.
EPA found that it's necessary to regulate because of the
existence of public health harms, and it found it's
appropriate to regulate for the exact same reason, the
existence of public health harms.
So its interpretation --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  General, I'm not sure that
that's quite what EPA said.  My understanding of what
EPA said is that it's necessary because of public health
harms and that it's appropriate because there are
technologies that can redress or remedy those public
health harms.  So on the one hand, it said that -- it
said that the phrase "appropriate" went to the nature of
the harms.  The phrase -- the phrase "necessary" went to
the nature of the harms.  The phrase "appropriate" went
to the existence of technologies.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Justice Kagan, when they
relied on the availability of controls, they did that
only after having already said that we must find it's
appropriate if a health hazard exists.  So they've
already determined that the health hazard is a necessary
and sufficient condition so the existence of controls is
something that's not --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Where is that?  Can you
give us a citation to their opinion?  I mean, the
language speaks for itself, I assume.  What are you
referring to?
MR. LINDSTROM:  For example, if you look --
this is in our reply brief, but if you're looking at --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  In the reply brief?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes, Your Honor.
I think the -- that points you to the actual
final rule.  That's volume 1 of the UR petition
appendix.  So the language -- let me find it in the
reply brief.  I have the UR -- I have the volume.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry, what was the
page?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Sure.  If you turn to the
UR Petition Appendix volume 1.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Good Lord.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Page 196.  This is the text
of the final rule.  Page 206A.  I misspoke the first
time.  206 says, "We must find" -- at the top of the
page -- "We must find it appropriate to regulate EGUs
under Clean Air Act Section 112 if we determine that a
single HAP emitted from EGUs poses a hazard to public
health or environment."
They said we must regulate.  And the phrase
"must regulate" means that when you get back to the
availability of controls, then there's nothing left to
be done.  You've already said that we have to do it so
the availability of controls isn't doing any additional
work.
The over --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Is the government going to
say that if the predicate for regulation exists, i.e.,
there are emissions, then it's appropriate to regulate?
That's what the government will say.  I mean, that's --
"appropriate" is a capacious term.
MR. LINDSTROM:  It absolutely is.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And it would seem to me
that the government will say, well, it's appropriate to
regulate if there's an emission, so --
MR. LINDSTROM:  It is a capacious term, but
it, in fact, cuts against the government because one of
the things that's encompassed within the term
"appropriate" is that it looks at all of the
circumstances in the context of determining whether or
not you're going to regulate costs is a relevant
circumstance.  So the very fact that it's capacious cuts
against them.
But the fact that they're -- they've said we
must find it's appropriate to regulate means that this
other control --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, I thought --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Are you saying that they
didn't -- that they didn't look at the availability of
technologies?  Is that what you're saying?  That they
thought that the availability of technologies was itself
irrelevant to the determination?  Is that your argument?
MR. LINDSTROM:  We're not saying they
thought it was irrelevant.  They thought -- well, I
guess logically irrelevant.  They thought that it's
something they did look at.  It's something that when
they did the utility study, they examined the
availability of controls, but then they said regardless
of whether or not controls are available, if a health
hazard exists, we have to regulate.  So if I can give an
example --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I -- I'm sorry.  I
thought they said only if it was necessary.  Congress
was motivated in not listing these sources because it
didn't know whether the technology that was going to be
put in place to control acid rain would reduce the HAPs
sufficiently so that regulation wasn't necessary or a
listing wasn't necessary.
I had a different understanding of
appropriate and necessary.  Appropriate if there were
HAPs, but necessary only if those HAPs were not
sufficiently controlled by the other technology.
MR. LINDSTROM:  The necessary -- both of
them looked at whether or not there was going to be an
ongoing harm because both necessary and appropriate
turned on the utility study.  The utility study was
something that examined what health hazards would remain
after all the other regulations --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The health hazard could
have been low enough so that no -- no standards were
necessary.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Well, they determined how
severe -- the severity to the health hazard.  The
severity went into determining whether or not a public
health hazard existed at all.  So they looked at the --
the effects, and the only place they looked at severity
in the final rule was determining whether or not a
public hazard existed.  Once there were enough health
effects that there was a public health hazard, then they
said we must regulate.  And the fact that they said we
must regulate, it's necessary to regulate, is exactly
the same as what they said with appropriate, that we
must regulate.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Can -- can I step back for a
minute, General Lindstrom?  Because it seems to me that
this quest for very particular meanings attached to each
one of these adjectives; "appropriate" means X and
"necessary" means Y.  If we step back a little bit, I
mean, that kind of language is used all over the U.S.
Code and, indeed, that kind of language is used in our
Constitution, the Necessary and Proper Clause.
And as I understand what courts have done
with that kind of language, that they haven't insisted
that there be separate, defined meanings for each of
those words.  When John Marshall was doing this in
McCulloch, in fact, he starts off with the word
"necessary" and then he says, no, this is a phrase and
we have to understand what the phrase as a whole means.
And why shouldn't we similarly say this idea that, you
know, you can catch them in a redundancy or a superfluity,
it's just not right because it's a complete
phrase.
MR. LINDSTROM:  I think there's two
responses to that.  First of all, under the Necessary
and Proper Clause, if you look at what this Court did in
Printz v. The United States, it recognized something
might be necessary and not necessarily proper.  The
commandeering of State legislature might be necessary
to couch what you're trying to do --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Exactly.  We -- we have
separated out the two words and -- and said something
could be necessary and not proper.  And what Marshall
said was that necessary doesn't mean absolutely
indispensable.  It just means useful.  That's quite
different from saying that proper has no -- has no role
to play.  It can be necessary; that is, useful to the
Federal government, and yet not proper.  So I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So why do you get to
pick what it means?  I mean, I thought in -- in our
agency law we repeatedly say if a term is ambiguous,
and there is no legal definition of appropriate, it's
contextual, yes.  But, by definition, if you're saying a
word that's not self-defined, you have to look at in
context, then it's ambiguous.
MR. LINDSTROM:  I don't think it's ambiguous
in context.  You can use the word "appropriate" in such
a way that everyone understands what you're meaning.  If
I said we're going to take a group of people and we're
going to go someplace and I want you to behave in an
appropriate manner, and then I told you we're going to
the library, everyone would know that that means be
quiet.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Yes.  But I look at this
statute and I see them doing the first part, the part
at issue, and the very next provision says in 4 years
instead of 3, do a mercury study that includes costs.
I'm looking at it.  I can very safely say one study
doesn't use the word "costs."  The other does.  The
first one doesn't necessarily intend the costs to be
looked at.  What is irrational or not plausible about
that reading?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Well --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Because we don't -- all
we have to find is a plausible reading to -- to uphold
the EPA's interpretation.
MR. LINDSTROM:  It's irrational because
they're taking the key statutory word and treating it as
surplusage.  The language I should have pointed you to
earlier is on page 4 of our reply brief.  So the -- by
treating them as doing the exactly the same work,
they're reading a word out of the statute.  And Chevron
deference doesn't extend so far as to say we can violate
an ordinary rule of statutory construction, which is
that independent words have --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But the word -- the word
"appropriate," often it's a signal that discretion
is what's fitting and you have an expert agency.  So the
word "appropriate," I think, is commonly used to
indicate that the expert agency will do what it finds
fit based on its expertise.  So, how you -- well, you
are saying that appropriate necessarily embodies a cost
calculation and yet this is a statute that uses cost,
directs EPA to consider costs multiple, multiple times.
Is there any case in all -- all of our
decisions where we have said even though there was no
instruction to consider costs, EPA is required to
consider costs?  Is there any such decision?
MR. LINDSTROM:  I don't think this -- no, I
don't think this issue has arisen the same way where
Congress has given broad discretion to an agency, told
them to look at all of the circumstances, and the agency
has said, we're going to ignore what is an important
part of the problem.  And that's why, in the way that
Judge Kavanaugh looked at it, this is a problem under
Chevron Step 1, 2 or under the State Farm doctrine,
because agencies are supposed to not ignore an essential
part of the problem as they engage in reasoned
decision-making.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But I think what Justice
Ginsburg is getting at, General Lindstrom, is, you know,
sometimes what we've done is we've looked at silence and
we've said given that silence, cost considerations are
precluded, right?  So that's the example in Whitman.
Sometimes we've said silence still allows agency
discretion.  They can do what they want with it.  But
it's so far from our most closely analogous case, which
is Whitman, to say not only is -- is cost
considerations, you know, not precluded, it's -- it's
required when there's silence as to that subject.
Now, if Congress wanted to require
something, and clearly, Congress required this in other
places, Congress knows how to require consideration of
costs, to get from silence to this notion of a
requirement seems to be a pretty big jump.
MR. LINDSTROM:  And Justice Kagan, I don't
think it is silent when it tells the agency to look at
all of the circumstances.  And the material circumstance
in the context of the question that the agency has to
answer is should we regulate under this section, costs
are part of the relevant materials --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I'm not even sure I agree
with the premise that when -- when Congress says nothing
about cost, the agency is entitled to disregard cost.  I
would think it's classic arbitrary and capricious agency
action for an agency to command something that is
outrageously expensive and -- and in which the expense
vastly exceeds whatever public benefit can be -- can be
achieved.  I would think that's -- that's a violation of
the Administrative Procedure Act.
MR. LINDSTROM:  And I think that's where --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Even without the word
"appropriate."
MR. LINDSTROM:  And I think that's where
there's overlap between what the State --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  The study at
issue that Congress commanded was simply a study.  "The
administrator shall perform a study of the hazards to
public health, reasonably anticipated to occur as a
result of emissions by electric utility steam-generating
units."  So the study that was directed to be made was
only of public health hazards.  And then it says, "The
administrator shall regulate these entities after" --
under this section -- "if it finds regulation is
appropriate and necessary after considering the results
of the study."
So if the study is directed only at public
health hazards, doesn't talk about -- it doesn't talk at
all about cost, just public health hazards, why in the
world would one assume that Congress was thinking about
cost?  Why didn't it do as it did with mercury?  Make
sure the study tells us how much control is going to
cost.  But it didn't do that.  It just said tell us if
they're a public health hazard.
MR. LINDSTROM:  And, Your Honor, it didn't
limit the considerations that EPA was supposed to look
at only the study.  It says to consider the study --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But it says only the
study.
MR. LINDSTROM:  It doesn't say only the
study.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  After it says -- it
says, "The administrator shall regulate if the
administrator finds such regulation is appropriate and
necessary after considering the results of the study.
After considering the results of the study."  The only
thing that the study requires is a -- an evaluation of
hazards to public health.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Well, first of all --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm not sure how you get
to -- to -- to them having to do another step, when the
only step that's a prerequisite to registration is
studying public health hazards.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Well, first of all, even EPA
doesn't think it's limited solely to the things that
were studied in that utility study.  They rely on
environmental harms to justify --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But that doesn't --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Does it say after
considering only the results of the study?
MR. LINDSTROM:  No, Your Honor.  That's --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It doesn't say that, does
it?
MR. LINDSTROM:  No, Your Honor.  That's
correct, it doesn't --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Sure.  And they have to
consider the results of the study.  It doesn't say they
can't consider everything else.  And the word
"appropriate" seems to suggest that they may consider
other stuff.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Correct.  So there's a study
they're supposed to look at, but that's not the end of
the analysis.  They're supposed to do something else.
That second step is to figure out whether it's also
appropriate and necessary to regulate.  So it didn't
stop at just the study.  And again, EPA agrees they can
look beyond the results of the study.  They look at
environmental harms, which is not particularly mentioned
here and is mentioned in (n)(1)(b).
JUSTICE ALITO:  It -- it seems to me that a
very salient feature of the statutes that we have to
interpret, maybe the most salient feature is that
Congress chose to treat power plants differently from
other sources.  It could have treated them the same way
and if it hadn't done that, then the -- the listing
decision would not have taken into account costs, it
would have been based on emissions, right?
Or if it was an area source, it would have
been based on effect of health alone.  So what, if
anything, can we infer from that, from the fact that
Congress pointedly decided to treat power plants
differently?
MR. LINDSTROM:  I think we can tell that
they're trying to create a different regime.  They're
trying to do something different here than they did
elsewhere.  And That includes --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But they were trying to
create a different regime, but the reason is pretty
clear on its face.  They were trying to create a
different regime because they thought that the Acid Rain
Program might have a real impact on what these electric
utilities were doing.  So they said, wait and see and
let's see how the Acid Rain Program works, and let's see
if we still have a problem to solve.  And that's the
reason why they put the electric utilities in a
different category, isn't it?
MR. LINDSTROM:  And that highlights why
costs are significant.  The Acid Rain Program, in
particular, was an economically-based approach that was
determined to regulate in a cost-effective manner.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But the point is that the
Acid Rain Program didn't do what they -- Congress
thought it might have done, and it was still left with
this issue of continuing harm from the electric,
utilities.  And then once that happened, it seems to me
that it's natural to take a look at the rest of the
statute and to say, let's regulate in a similar way to
the way all other industries are being regulated.
MR. LINDSTROM:  But if they had wanted to do
it in the same way, there would have been no need to use
the phrase, "necessary and appropriate."  They could
have just simply gone to the ten-ton threshold emissions
that apply to major sources and to the risk-based
analysis that goes to area sources.  So the fact that
they used different criteria here in (n)(1) as opposed
to criteria that's listed in 7412(c) --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Well, they could have, but
they might have thought, you know, let's take a look at
the Acid Rain Program.  Let's take a look at the problem
that still remains, if any, and let's give the
discretion to the agency at that point, because it will
be years down the road in a different set of
circumstances.
MR. LINDSTROM:  But the discretion includes
looking at the entire problem.  I mean, again, the
language in the circumstances requires looking at the
material circumstances, and this ties into the State
Farm test.  You have to look at all of the relevant
circumstances if you're engaged in  reasoned decision
making.  You can't ignore an important part of the
problem.  But I would like --
JUSTICE ALITO:  If the -- if the reason for
the separate treatment was the belief that the Acid Rain
Program would be sufficient at some point in time to
bring emissions from power plants below the level that
would result in their being listed if they were other
sources, why would it be necessary to enact this
separate provision asking whether it's necessary and
appropriate to regulate them?
MR. LINDSTROM:  It could have just --
JUSTICE ALITO:  I don't see how that can be
the explanation.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes, Your Honor.  They could
have just had a three-year delay if that's all they were
trying to do, as opposed to -- and then go through the
ordinary system.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  No, because they didn't
know.  They thought it might; they thought it might not.
They were going to wait and see.  It depended on how the
industry responded to the regulatory requirements of the
Acid Rain Program.
MR. LINDSTROM:  That still doesn't explain,
Your Honor, why they chose to use different criteria as
opposed to just reiterating the criteria that are under
7412(c) under the ordinary thing that applies to every
other source.  They're still trying to treat electric
utilities differently.
And I would like to return to one point
about the Acid Rain Program, which is that, again, if
you're addressing emissions from electric utilities in a
program that's specifically targeting electric utilities
as they did in the Acid Rain Program and that was
entirely based on cost effectiveness, it makes little
sense to look at what's remaining after you've already
done that and then to say in this area of diminishing
marginal utility, we're going to say costs are
irrelevant.  That's backwards.  Costs would be
especially relevant when you're in the area of what's
left over.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  When the statute refers to
the emissions standards for the 12 percent of the best
performing plants, will the government say that
implicitly is a cost consideration?
MR. LINDSTROM:  I expect --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I mean, is that their
position and if so, how do you answer?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Right.  I expect they will.
The way I would answer that is to say that that looks at
plants across the range of how old they are.  So plants
that were built in 2005, for example, might have been
built in such a way that they have technology where it
was cost effective to include certain control measures.
But if you're looking at a plant that was built in 1960,
imposing those same control measures on an older plant
is something that  would be a lot more expensive.
It's the difference between renovating your house and
building it certainly in the first place.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But that's true of
all --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Mandated -- if that's a
mandated base from which the government must operate
and --
MR. LINDSTROM:  It is.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  -- and it's -- and I -- it
seems to me like there's an implicit cost consideration
there.  You still say that's insufficient because?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes, Your Honor.  That's
insufficient because it's not -- I'm explaining why it
doesn't necessarily take costs into effect.  The fact
that -- into consideration.  The fact that some
utilities were able to impose things doesn't mean it
would be cost effective for other ones to do it.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.  But why isn't that
taken care of by -- you see, you have to take into
account cost somewhere.  And so they -- they -- the
other side says, well, there's room for that.  But
suppose that 25 percent of all electricity generators
are near waterfalls.  This is easy for them, okay?  But
75 percent, it's impossible and they'll all go out of
business and we'll have no electricity.  Imagine that
were so.
Could the EPA, under their current theory,
take account of that?  Well, I guess the answer you want
to say is no, but they say yes, they can.  What about
this 12 percent rule?  You know, how does that -- well,
a little bit earlier in the statute, it says, "The
administrator may distinguish among classes, types and
sizes of sources."  So if you really had this situation,
you could say, look 75 percent of the generators in the
United States have this really old technology and
they'll all go out of business.  And EPA could say fine.
That's a different class.  Okay.  I mean, if that were
really true.  So -- so don't they have, through that
provision and the 12 percent and the next one, the
ability to take into account at least serious cost
problems?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Well, assuming they have the
ability to take into account.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Do they?  Yes or no?  Do
they yes or no?
MR. LINDSTROM:  No.  I think --
JUSTICE BREYER:  No, they don't.  Why not?
MR. LINDSTROM:  The reason that costs are
not directly relevant to the first one is what I was
explaining about the 12 percent.  So in other words, as
you -- the example you gave shows that some might be
able to have the lower cost-effective approach just
because they're near a waterfall.  So relying on the
fact that 12 percent were able to meet  this --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Fine.  My point was -- I --
I want an answer to this.  My point was, if in the
imaginary situation that I've imagined, 20 percent of
the generators, for whatever reason, can meet this
pretty easily; the next 80 percent will require the
entire gross national product to meet.  Suppose that
were the situation.  You, I guess, could go to EPA and
say, create, of that second group, a separate class, a
separate type, for that's the reason it's so expensive.
And, therefore, the 12 percent doesn't apply to them
because they're in a separate class.
Now, my question is:  Can you legally make
that argument?  And they will take it into account.  And
that's what I want a yes or no answer to.
MR. LINDSTROM:  And I think the answer might
be yes in the future, but now we can't do it because --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Did you make the argument
here now?
MR. LINDSTROM:  My point is that --
JUSTICE BREYER:  If you're saying yes in the
future, let's now go to this case and say, did you make
this argument?
MR. LINDSTROM:  I don't believe either side
has made that argument.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Fine.  I'll -- I'll --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Has -- has the argue -- has
the agency made this obvious argument?
MR. LINDSTROM:  The agency has not --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Has the agency said, we're
going to take costs into account; we're going to use
this -- this provision that Justice Breyer discovered,
and -- and that's what we're going to do?  Is -- is that
how the agency issued its rule?
MR. LINDSTROM:  They did not.  The only
distinction --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I don't think so.  I never
heard of this argument.
MR. LINDSTROM:  It --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, wait, because I still
want to know a fact.  I want to -- the fact that I want
to know -- and you're familiar with this record -- is
did anyone on your side of the issue ask the agency to
take costs into account brutally, roughly, crudely, or
did they all say we want a cost benefit analysis?
I would like your characterization of the
record on that point, because reading what they've said,
it's about cost-benefit analysis, that paragraph.  So
that gave me the idea that maybe everyone interested in
cost asked for a cost-benefit analysis.
MR. LINDSTROM:  And I think the answer is
that we asked them to consider costs.  We thought a
cost-benefit analysis is the ordinary way that a
reasoned agency decision-making happens, not through
some vague sense of what the costs are, but by doing an
analysis.  And they have said -- their entire position
here is that we don't need to do that because costs are
irrelevant.  That's not something we have to consider
under the statute.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  As I understand --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  General --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  As I understand what
happens, listing and standards are the only things that
you can generally appeal from.  It's only a final agency
action when the -- when the standards are issued.  And I
thought it was at the issuance of the standards that the
government sometimes breaks up the sources and the
amount of emissions that each type of source that
Justice Breyer is talking about can have.
So I think the listing is just of a broad
category, because we've had plenty of cases in -- in
this Court where we've looked at the agency saying this
type of source meets these standards, that type of
source meets another standard.  Isn't that the way it
works?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Well, that highlights why
they're not treating this as separate listing versus
regulatory decision.  They did both at the exact same
time here.  Same time they made the necessary and
appropriate finding, they also promulgated the emission
standards.  And that shows this isn't simply a typical
listing standard.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Once -- once they're
listed, they are subject to minimum standards, aren't
they?
MR. LINDSTROM:  That's absolutely correct,
and must be --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And it's not up to the
agency to calibrate standards.  Once they're listed,
minimum standards apply, right?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Absolutely.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And the agency could have
discretion as to whether to lift the standards further,
but the minimums apply, right?
MR. LINDSTROM:  That's EPA's position.
You --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's theirs.
MR. LINDSTROM:  -- must regulate as soon
as -- has been made.
If I could reserve my time for rebuttal.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you,
Mr. Lindstrom.
Mr. Brownell.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF F. WILLIAM BROWNELL
ON BEHALF OF INDUSTRY PETITIONERS
AND RESPONDENTS IN SUPPORT
MR. BROWNELL:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
I would like to make three points to
supplement my colleague's argument:  First, regarding
the nature of power plant regulation under the Clean Air
Act; second, the language of Subsection (n)(1)(A); and,
third, the broader Clean Air Act context.
To begin, power plants are the most
regulated source category under the Clean Air Act both
before 1990 and after the 1990 Amendments.  The Court
has talked about some of the programs.  It's not only
Title IV Acid Deposition Program, but a visibility,
best available retrofit technology, pollution transport
programs targeted at power plants, and a variety of
other control programs, both control and air quality.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Brownell, I -- I would
think that cuts the other way, that every other
significant industry in the United States is subject to
this program except for electric power plants.
MR. BROWNELL:  Your Honor, what it shows is
that for the other industries, EPA estimated in 2010
that for all other industries, this Air Toxics Program
would impose compliance costs of about $840 million.
All of these other programs for power plants would
impose compliance costs, EPA estimated in 2011, about
10.4 billion.
This single regulation now on air toxics
imposes annual costs of 9.6 billion.  And what does one
get for it?  There are three standards at issue here,
and I think that this is important to understand some of
the questions that have been asked.  There's a regulation
for mercury, there's a regulation for nonmercury metals,
and there's a regulation for acid gases.
Most of the costs here -- the majority,
about 5 billion annually -- are associated with the acid
gas regulation which the agency has concluded presents
no public health risk, no public health concern.  The
agency said that our modeling has consistently showed
that power-plant-related exposures are at least an order
of magnitude below the conservatively determined safe
level.
Now, in the Title IV program, Congress
addressed pollution with acidification potential and
required reductions of 9 million tons a year at about a
cost of 1 to 1.4 billion.  The Acid Gas Program is
projected to result in reductions of acid gases about
40- to 50,000 tons per year at a cost of $5 billion.
What that background shows, Your Honor, is
that when -- why Congress treated power plants
differently.  It asked whether it is appropriate to
impose further regulation of a specific type, whether
it's appropriate to propose regulation under this
section on the most aggressively regulated industry
under the Clean Air Act.
Now, what the statutory --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Brownell, can I take you
back to Justice Breyer's first question?  And the first
question was about the way these categories work and how
the categories enable the EPA to mitigate certain
dramatic or onerous costs on certain segments of the
industry, because that's not an unknown provision of any
kind.  And, indeed, it seems to me that the provision
very much cuts against your argument, because EPA, in
some ways, can't even figure out the costs until it
makes those categorization decisions.  But the aggregate
costs, not just within each category, but the aggregate
costs obviously depend on how EPA categorizes and
subcategorizes.
So you would have the EPA make the cost
calculation before it really can, given the structure of
the statute.
MR. BROWNELL:  Your -- Your Honor, the cost
does factor into a variety of determinations that are
made as part of the regulatory process.  When EPA issued
its Notice of Regulatory Finding in December of 2010, it
said this is nonfinal.  EPA confirmed again -- and this
is at page 555a of the UAR Petitioner's Appendix -- that
the -- there is no final (n)(1)(A) determination or
listing, and we are going to take comment on that as
part of the rulemaking to examine Section 7412(d)
emission standards.
So as part of that, the agency addresses
issues related to level of control, subcategorization,
and at the end of the rulemaking comes out with a
regulation that has certain characteristics and
consequences.  And here this regulation -- what
(n)(1)(A) says is, in light of the study, address
whether such regulation under the section is appropriate
and necessary for power plants.
Now, it may be necessary to regulate
something like mercury if there's a public health risk,
and that's the only hazardous air pollutant for which
EPA has calculated a quantifiable public health risk,
but that may not be the appropriate regulatory regime
if, as EPA has explained here, their view of the statute
is not to focus on whether such regulation is
appropriate, but whether listing of power plants under
subsection C is appropriate just like every other
source category.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Can -- can I say -- can I
ask whether that listing is -- and -- and the minimum
standards that that imposes are subject to the
categorization device that Justice Breyer was asking
about?  Could -- could the agency say, well, you know,
we're going to divide these into categories, and since
it's too expensive for certain -- 80 percent of power
plants that -- that don't have waterfalls nearby, we're
going to exempt them from these minimum standards?
Can -- can it do that?
MR. BROWNELL:  No, Your Honor, not at the
listing stage.  But once the source category is listed
at the standard-setting stage, they could consider
subcategorization --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Reduce it below --
MR. LINDSTROM:  -- in order to --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- below the -- the
minimums?
MR. BROWNELL:  Not below the minimums.  Your
Honor is perfectly right --
JUSTICE KAGAN :  No.  But the minimums
depend --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's -- that's what I
thought.
JUSTICE KAGAN :  The minimums depend on
the categories and the subcategories.  You can
categorize in such a way that the minimums will be up
here, or you can categorize in such a way the minimums
will be down there.
MR. BROWNELL:  And during the rulemaking,
Your Honor, arguments made about subcategorization, and
EPA ultimately subcategorized the -- the power industry
with respect to one limited set of sources, lignite
sources with respect to the mercury standard.  But,
otherwise, EPA's position is once listed, it triggers an
obligation to issue emission standards under the –
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR: So your answer --
JUSTICE KAGAN :  It triggers an
obligation as to some standard, but, again, the minimum
standard can vary dramatically depending upon how the
categories and subcategories are set up.  And because
the minimum standard can vary dramatic, so, too, will
costs vary dramatically.  So you're having the EPA
consider costs before the EPA can know what the costs
are.
MR. BROWNELL:  Your -- Your Honor, if I can
respond to -- to that before the other question at the
other end of the bench.
EPA does know what the costs are through the
rulemaking process in which it undertakes notice and
comment with respect to both the (n)(1)(a) determination
and the emission standard.  Section 7607(d)(1)(c) of the
Clean Air Act lists subsection N as one of the
provisions that requires notice and comment rulemaking
under the special Clean Air Act procedures.  And this is
why the agency explained that there's no final (n)(1)(a)
until the end of the process, until notice and comment
and we've taken and determined what the costs are.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So
interestingly -- and -- and this is then confirming what
Justice Breyer said -- the point that you had an
opportunity and apparently took advantage of it to tell
the EPA that it should subcategorize this source, and it
decided to subcategorize just one piece of it.
So what you're really saying to us is it's
not the listing.  It's the way they've set up their
emissions standards that I disagree with because they
could have decided that there were subcategories that
didn't require a standard at all.  I'm presuming that
they could have said anybody by the water doesn't have
to do more because they're already 12 -- they're part of
the 12 percent.  We're going to do cost by everybody
else that's not by the water.
MR. BROWNELL:  Conceptually, Your Honor, I
imagine they could have subcategorized away the entire
industry, but that's not what they did in this
rulemaking.  And with respect to certain of the
regulations --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  No, they didn't do it.
But -- but you're asking us -- you're -- this is
almost a -- this is a challenge to a regulation that's
only piecemeal because you're -- you're arguing that
they should have considered costs, but they obviously
did before they issued the standards.  You can't look at
the standards and the emission in a  case, and -- and
the listing in a case like this in isolation.
MR. BROWNELL:  Justice Sotomayor, if I could
try the answer to the question once again.
The subsection N(1)(a) question is whether
after considering the results of the study -- and I note
that the study also looks at alternative control
strategies for any emissions that may warrant
regulation -- the agency determines such regulation is
appropriate and necessary.  So the focus of the
determination is not on -- on listing and whatever may
flow from that, but the regulation that the agency
decides to apply to address the remaining public health
hazard that is identified from this source category.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Mr. Brownell, when -- did
EPA say we are not going to take costs into account at
the listing stage because we will take costs into
account through this sub-categorization possibility
that's being discussed?
MR. BROWNELL:  No, they did not, Your Honor.
As I recall the record of the proceeding, this
discussion of sub-categorization has come up in the
briefing afterwards.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Why -- why didn't they
write -- you see what's -- try -- these questions are
difficult because they're so hypothetical.  It isn't
true that 50 percent of the industry will use up
50 -- all the domestic product, et cetera.  But they
wrote this thing in a way that sounds as if even if that
had been true, they wouldn't have taken it into account.
So -- so what they say is the EPA does not believe it is
appropriate to consider costs when determining whether
EGU is -- okay.  You see the problem?  So for me -- but
the SG is telling us, don't worry.  Maybe they should
have written, knowing what we know and what is
undisputed so far, we don't think that the cost problem
is big enough for us to warrant a cost-benefit analysis
or other consideration.  Okay?  Then they've taken it
into account.  So there's no problem if it's within,
it's reasonable.
Now, they didn't write that.  So that's why
I'm looking to see is the -- it's really the SG, but I
mean, is -- is there really a different way that they
could eliminate this horrible scenario if it existed,
which it didn't.  You understand what I'm driving at?
I'm trying to get your best answer on that.
MR. BROWNELL:  And -- and I want to
emphasize that this is not an argument about whether or
not to regulate mercury where there's been an identified
public health risk.  It's whether the regulatory regime
that has been defined here under Section 7412, which the
government says is the listing that applies to all other
source categories, and the (d)(3) minimum controls
technology standards that apply to all other source
categories is the right way to do it.  Regardless of how
you subcategorize, it's going to have tremendous impacts
as a result of acid gas regulation and for a pollutant
that presents no public health risk.  There are other
ways --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I -- I suppose we
can't -- we can't uphold an agency rule on a ground that
they didn't adopt below, right?
MR. BROWNELL:  That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Under Chenery?
MR. BROWNELL:  That's correct.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So is your
understanding correct that this is not an argument -- a
basis for decision that they adopted below?
MR. BROWNELL:  That's correct, Your Honor.
My understanding of the basis for the decision below is
that costs are irrelevant in our determination under
(n)(1)(a) whether or not -- whether to regulate the
source category under the typical Subsection 7412 regime
that applies to other source categories.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But that's exactly right,
Mr. Brownell.  I mean, the -- the agency, at that point
in time, was only answering the very first question, the
very threshold issue.  And at that point, the agency
said costs were irrelevant.  But costs become relevant
later in the analysis and in a variety of ways:  Through
the 12 and a half percent, through the 12 percent,
through the categorization and sub-categorization,
through the determination whether to raise standards
even higher.  So costs costs costs later, but as to this
particular thing, the agency said, yes, here we don't
consider costs.  We could, but we don't want to because
there's all this potential for costs to come in
afterwards.
MR. BROWNELL:  And, Your Honor, it's costs
costs costs under the statutory criteria that Congress
provided for setting (d)(3) control technology standards
and then having defined those standards at the end of
the process, the agency finalizes its (n)(1)(a)
determination in light of the costs and impacts and
other factors that are mentioned in the --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Do you think -- do you
think that whenever the term "appropriate" is used in a
regulatory context in the Clean Air Act, that it demands
a cost-benefit analysis?
MR. BROWNELL:  Your Honor, when you say in
any context, that's so broad I don't think that I can
say that it would require cost-benefit in any context.
But in a specific context here where the focus is on
whether such regulation is appropriate and necessary,
that regulation has certain characteristics and
consequences that we have talked about this morning,
including the fact that it imposes on a pollutant that
presents no public health risk, $5 billion a year.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  But, Mr. Brownell, before
you finish, because your time is out, can you clarify
for me why this is -- is at this stage something that we
should be concerned about because there is this
regulatory impact assessment and that -- that has said
that the benefits vastly exceed the costs, and
that's -- that's an impact analysis and has gone through
the OR process and OR concluded that EPA appropriately
calculated the costs.
MR. BROWNELL:  Yes, Your Honor, Mr. Chief
Justice.  The co-benefits -- all of those benefits are
co-benefits.  Only 4 to 6 million dollars are associated
with hazardous air pollutants.  Those co-benefits that
are in the regulatory impact analysis were not
considered as part of the regulatory determination for
good reason, because they're important questions
regarding their legal importance and relevance under the
proper standard.  And what I mean, Your Honor, is that
PM 2.5 is the pollutant, fine particles that is
associated with these co-benefits.  That is extensively
regulated under the National Ambient Air Quality
Standard program.  In fact, those are quality standards
were only recently revised to be tightened, and in the
context of that proceeding, the agency found that the
low levels of exposure for these co-benefits did not
produce effects or risks that were of regulatory
significance because they're too uncertain.  So there
are serious questions about legal relevance and
importance.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
MR. BROWNELL:  Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  General Verrilli.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DONALD B. VERRILLI, JR.
ON BEHALF OF FEDERAL RESPONDENTS
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Mr. Chief Justice, and
may it please the Court:
EPA's interpretation of Section
7412(n)(1)(A) should be affirmed for three basic
reasons.  First, it is the most natural and certainly a
permissible reading of the statutory text which directs
EPA to focus on health concerns and doesn't mention
costs.
Second, it harmonizes the provision with
Section 7412's structure and design, because it applies
the same regulatory logic to power plants that Congress
directed EPA to apply to regulate hazardous air
pollution from every other type of source, and that is
decide whether to list for regulation based on health
and environmental hazards alone, and consider costs in
setting the emission standards.
And third, as a matter of common sense and
sound government practice, it was certainly appropriate
for EPA to list power plants for regulation based solely
on health and environmental hazards, because that
reflects the approach Congress chose not only in 7412,
in this regulatory program, but in all of the major
regulatory programs under the Clean Air Act.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Could I go to
your -- you're now three out -- your first -- first
point.  You concede, don't you, that EPA could have
interpreted the statutory language to allow them to
consider costs?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think EPA read it as --
read the best interpretation of the statute was it
didn't provide for the consideration of costs at the
listing stage --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  But under Chevron,
if you adopted a regulation that said appropriate and
necessary allows us to consider cost, you think that
would be appropriate?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think the phrase
appropriate and necessary doesn't, by its terms,
preclude the EPA from considering cost.  But under
Chevron, what the EPA has got to do is explain the
justification for its reading of the statute, and that's
what it did.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Right.  But since
you're dealing with the term, I think this says as
capacious as appropriate, and since you could have
issued a regulation allowing the consideration of costs
as appropriate, you're saying that the agency
deliberately tied its hands and said we're not going to
consider something.  We're going to issue a rule saying
we can't consider something that we could consider
otherwise.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, I think the best way
to think about this, Mr. Chief Justice, is what the
agency did was decide that it was appropriate to
approach the question of whether to regulate power
plants in the same manner that Congress found it was not
only appropriate, but mandated to address the question.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  They could have --
I'm not -- I understand your argument that they could
have done that, but I think it's unusual for an agency
to say, when they want to do something, that that's the
only thing we could do.  Agencies usually like to
maintain for themselves as much discretion as they can.
And it strikes me as unusual, maybe the agency could go
ahead and consider -- and not consider costs, but to say
that we're prohibited from considering costs under the
phrase appropriate, it strikes me as very unusual.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, it said -- I don't
think so, Mr. Chief Justice.  It said -- it didn't say,
we're prohibited from considering costs.  It said, we
are not going to consider costs at the listing stage in
making the decision about whether power plants should be
listed for regulation under Section 7412.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I thought -- I
thought the rule was that the phrase appropriate and
necessary did not allow them to consider costs.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  And appropriate and
necessary goes to the question of whether power plants
should be listed for regulation under Section 7412,
which would then kick in the regulatory mechanism by
which standards were set and costs are considered at the
standard-setting --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  I have the same question
as the Chief Justice.  Let me ask one more time.  Could
this agency reasonably have considered costs at stage
one?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I don't think the
statutory text unambiguously forbids them from
considering costs.  But they determined that the best
reading of the statutory text is that power plants,
because after the study was conducted that Congress
required, EPA determined that power plants are no
differently situated than any other source of hazardous
air pollutants regulated under Section 7412.
And if I may Mr. Chief Justice?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Sure.
GENERAL VERRILLI: For every other source of
hazardous air pollutants, what Congress mandated as
appropriate was that you do not consider costs when you
decide whether to regulate.  You only consider health
and environmental effects, and then you do consider
costs under Section 7412(d) when you set the emissions
standards.
JUSTICE ALITO:  How is that -- how is that
consistent with this statutory scheme?  If your argument
is that EPA's only reason for doing this is that it
wants to treat power plants the same as other sources,
we know that that's what Congress didn't want or it
would have -- it would not have enacted the separate
provision for power plants.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I agree, Justice Alito,
that Congress proposed different treatment for power
plants, but that doesn't answer the question.  That just
asks the question.  The question is what different
treatment did Congress prescribe.  Now, what Petitioners
are arguing is that what Congress prescribed and mandated
was a cost-benefit analysis that does not apply to any
other source of hazardous pollutants.
But that is not what the text of the statute
says, and it's not what the history reflects.  What the
text of the statute says in (n)(1)(A) is that even
though for every other source, regulation would proceed
immediately; for power plants, there was uncertainty
about whether power plants emitted hazardous pollutants
at a level that would cause a problem, whether the acid
rain regulations would solve the problem, and whether
there were alternative control strategies available.
And so -- if I may.  I'm sorry.
EPA -- what Congress told EPA to do was to
study those three things.  Those go to health
considerations.  And then once EPA was -- made a
judgment about that, it was to decide whether to list
power plants for regulation as -- whether it was
appropriate and necessary to list them for regulation.
JUSTICE ALITO:  This is what I don't
understand about your position.  Congress's decision to
treat power plants differently, it seems to me, reflects
the fact that Congress wanted at least to hold open the
possibility that power plants would not be listed even
if their emissions exceeded the levels that would result
in listing for other sources.  I don't see another
reason why they would treat them differently.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I think --
JUSTICE ALITO:  If I can just continue.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I'm sorry.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Perhaps you may disagree
with that, but it seems to me that -- that that's a
necessary inference from this statutory scheme.
If that is the case, what factor might
Congress have thought would justify allowing power
plants to emit more than would be permitted if they were
other sources?
Now, Petitioners have an explanation which
is costs, and they say that power plants have to bear a
lot of costs that other sources don't have to bear, in
particular the Title IV program.  Their emissions might
exceed the otherwise permissible limit because they have
participated in the cap and trade program, so they have
contributed to the reduction in emissions in that way,
in a way that wouldn't be reflected in their -- in their
own emissions.
So what -- that is an explanation.  Cost is
what's missing.  I don't know what your explanation is.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So I know Your Honor
asked me to accept the premise, but I can't accept the
premise because both the text of (n)(1)(A) and the
legislative history tell you what considerations
Congress left open, and they were all related to the
possibility of health hazards.  No one -- the argument
that Your Honor just posed is not in the legislative
history, and it's not in the text.  And if Congress
really thought that, then what they would have said to
EPA is, take the -- push the pause button, take the
three years and study -- don't subject them to the same
schedule as everybody else -- and study the cost
problem.  They would have expressly told EPA to study
costs.  And they did not do that.
JUSTICE ALITO:  If all they were concerned
about was health, why wouldn't they impose on power
plants the same standard that's imposed on area sources?
Just ask EPA to determine whether there is -- I forget
the exact term -- but is there an effect on public
health, a significant effect on public health, whatever.
If so, list.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I think they came very
close to that, because what they said -- first of all,
they -- they told EPA to make its judgment after
considering the results of the  study, and they told EPA
to study things that went to health hazards.  And so that
comes very close, it seems to me, and the reason, I
think, it used the appropriate and necessary language,
rather than the language Your Honor suggests, is because
I think Congress, when it was legislating here in 1990,
understood that there might well be uncertainty at the
end of this -- of the analysis that Congress directed
the EPA to undertake.  There might be uncertainty about
the projected effects of the acid rain regulations,
because I do -- I do think it's important to clear up --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I don't -- I think
that's what the legislative history said.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right.  And I do want to
clear up a misconception about that, I think, which is
that -- that the way these acid rain regulations
unfolded, they were put in place in 1990 at the same
time as 7412, but they were to unfold over a 10-year
period; 5 years until the first stage, and then 5 more
years until second stage.  So EPA was going to have to
make a long-term projection here about which there could
be some uncertainty.
And so I think what Congress was saying to
EPA was you may need to exercise your judgment here, and
in fact, EPA did exercise its judgment because it
concluded --
JUSTICE BREYER:  There are two parts to this
argument.  One is what were they thinking of the word
appropriate if it wasn't costs?  All right, I see your
answer to that.  I'll think about that.
But the second, which I think your argument
very much depends on, in my mind anyway, is, well, don't
worry, because there is a way to take into account
costs.  So, if, in fact -- I mean, you know, it's a lot
of money, $9 billion, and if you divide it by the
population, you have $30 a person for a family of four
of $120.  That's a lot of money for people, for some
people.  And to say, gee, you couldn't take it into
account ever, suppose it would have been 500?  You know,
it begins to look a little irrational to say, I'm not
taking it into account at all.  But you say, never fear,
because they will take it into account when they set
standards.  And at that point I read the thing about the
12 percent.  I've got the word "similar source," which
then can refer me back to the categorization of two
things earlier, as they say maybe, and then I have,
aside from that, hey, here's what you do.  When you're
regulating you look at the top 12 generators and that's
the minimum standard.  So they might want to say, hey,
that's not right.  I mean, it's right, it says it.  But
if you go to the bottom 50 generators, you're going to
see it's not going to cost $120 per family, it's going
to cost $1,000 a family.  And we have the EPA saying, we
won't even look at that.
At that point I begin to say, oh, my
goodness.  Why?  Why won't you even look at it?  You
could say it isn't true, but why wouldn't you even look
at it.
And -- and now the answers seems to me to be
in that word "similar source," and the classes and the
subclasses.  Because were there such an argument, maybe
the EPA could say, don't worry.  If there is such an
argument, which there isn't, we have the power here
under the statute to take it into account.
Now, you know where that argument came from?
From discussion and thought in my chambers.  Now, maybe
it came out of the briefs, too.  But is what I say
right?  Can the EPA take that into account, or do they
have to just blindly say, if it's the top 12, that's for
everybody no matter what the cost?  In which case they
can't take it into account ever except for the word
"appropriate."  Now, that's the argument I'm putting --
you got it in my argument because that's important.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I -- I've got it.  I'm
going to make three points in response to it.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  The first one goes to the
empirical situation in this case, but then I'm going to
get to the theoretical question you asked.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  The first is this:  Nine
billion is a big number.  This is an industry with $360
billion a year in annual revenues, so you're talking
about two to two-and-a half annual revenues -- of annual
revenues.  And what Congress and what EPA concluded when
it --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Revenues doesn't talk
about profit, though.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right.  But it's -- well,
this is a cost, and the cost is about two and-a-half
percent of revenues.  And then what EPA concluded was
that this -- that about 2 percent of electrical
generating capacity could go offline as a result of it
being uneconomic.  So it's not a 50 percent or a 78, 88
percent.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Right .  And as soon as
you've said that, you've taken costs into account, which
is what they say they wouldn't do.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  And then -- but then --
now, let me talk about the way EPA under this regime
does take costs into account.  The first point I would
make is that the situation that Your Honor described in
the hypothetical is a quite unusual one.  In the normal
case, the 12 percent rule, it's a technology-forcing
rule, the kind that Your Honor discussed in -- in your
concurring opinions in Whitman and in Entergy.  It's
that kind of a rule.  And for -- and in the normal case,
it's not going to have that effect.  It means that
this -- this percentage of the industry has been able to
meet this without an operator in an economic matter and
Congress is trying to force the rest of the industry to
catch up.  And as we know from multiple experiences, as
Your Honor identified with respect to catalytic
converters and motor vehicles and with respect to acid
rain, it turned out that the cost was vastly lower on
industry than EPA anticipated it would be; that there's
a very great tendency to overestimate costs in that
situation.
But then the third point is Your Honor's
point about subcategories.  And Section 7412(c)(1),
which is the provision that governs the listing of
categories, it mentions the availability of
subcategories and, in fact, the last sentence of it says
nothing in this --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Do you have that page?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I'm sorry, I'm sorry,
Justice Kennedy.  It's 35A of the appendix to our brief.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Thank you.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  And this is (c)(1)and
it's the last sentence.  And it -- and it talks about
the EPA's authority and says, "Nothing in the preceding
sentence limits the administrator's authority to
establish subcategories under this section as
appropriate."  And in fact, that is what --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Can -- can those
subcategories apply to the minimum standards?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.  That's how it would
work, because you -- you identified the category and
then you generate the standard based on who's in the
category.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  No, but I thought the
standards are automatic.  There's certain minimums.
Once they find on the basis of -- of the study that
these things should be listed, I thought there -- there
is an automatic requirement imposed on -- on -- which is
the reason they're complaining.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, the -- the
requirement -- it depends on how you categorize.  And so
if -- if there were a situation – let me just switch --
if there were a situation in which one segment of the
industry was so vastly different from another segment of
the industry in terms of its economics, in terms of its
technology, then EPA would have the authority to break
those into two separate subcategories and then you don't
calculate the best performing 12 percent, which is what
the standard is, until you know if it's the best
performing 12 percent of the people you've put in the
category.
JUSTICE BREYER:  The language that does
that -- the language that does that is the first
sentence of three, which says, "The maximum degree that
is deemed achievable, not less stringent than the
emission control," that is achieved in practice by the
best-controlled similar source as determined by the
administrator."  That's what allows him to break it into
categories and apply the minimums to the -- to similar
source.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Right.  And --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Am I right or not?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That's correct.  And EPA
did that in this case.  It broke out power plants that
generate power burning natural gas, and it said that's a
separate subcategory.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Where in the
record -- where can you point me into the record where
this argument was made or considered by the agency?  As
opposed to Justice Breyer's chambers.  Because it's a
very important principle of administrative law that we
will only uphold a rule based on the arguments that were
considered and addressed by the agency.  So -- and I --
I -- as I said, it's not something I recall from the
briefs.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  It's, of course, true,
Mr. Chief Justice.  But -- and you're -- you're exactly
right in stating that principle.  But our argument in
this case is that this question here is -- under --
under (n)(1)(a), (n)(1)(a) says, "EPA shall regulate
under this section if it determines that such regulation
is appropriate and necessary," and therefore, that when
EPA makes a judgment to regulate under this section,
because it is appropriate and necessary, EPA is -- is
triggering all of the requirements --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you're just saying --
you're just saying that the argument is right, not that
the -- not that the agency made it, right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, it's -- I guess
what I would say about it, Your Honor, is --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's not enough that the
argument be right.  The -- the agency must have rested
its decision on the point.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  The -- I think that the
agency in the order on being challenged here did use the
approach.  But beyond that, whether or not -- it would
be one thing if this were a case in which you had a
situation in which EPA -- or EPA faced a situation in
which 50 percent or 75 percent were going to face vastly
uneconomic consequences.  But this case didn't present
that situation.  EPA made a judgment about --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  General, can I simplify
your answer for you?
(Laughter.)
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.  I'd be delighted if
you did that, Justice Sotomayor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  All right.  Basically,
you have consistently in your brief, and so has the
other Respondents, basically said at the listing stage
we don't consider costs, we consider it later.  And
everybody gave a few examples.  Whether this example was
given or not is irrelevant.  The issue here was, do you
have to do it at listing?  It's only some of my
colleagues here who are concerned that when you issue
standards, you never consider cost.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  And that's exactly right.
The question here is whether EPA's got to conduct a
cost-benefit analysis when it does the listing, and the
logic of the statute of 7412 doesn't -- it doesn't
operate --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But at that point the game
is over.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  No, I don't think it is,
Justice Kennedy, for -- for several reasons.  First,
the -- the standard under Section 7412(d) for setting
emissions -- emissions standards once you've decided to
list, that is Your Honor's question to -- to my friend
General Lindstrom pointed out, that does take costs into
account in the sense that a segment of the industry can
operate economically.  Secondly --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Excuse me.  I don't -- I
didn't understand that.  I thought that there were
automatic requirements imposed once -- once the -- the
plants are listed.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Once EPA lists --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- and defines the
category for listing, then the automatic requirement
that is applied is that everyone in the category has to
match the performance of the best 12 percent.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Where did this categories
comes from?  I -- I really don't like the fact that
your -- your friend on the other side was -- was not
permitted to mount an argument in opposition to this
categorization theory that Justice Breyer's chambers
devised.  Usually -- usually we have arguments on both
sides.  This is an argument I never heard of and I'm not
sure it's right.  But -- but I certainly didn't --
didn't know the agency to say, oh, we're just listing,
but we're -- you know, we're going to categorize the
listing.  They didn't say that.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I understand your point
about the focus or non-focus on subcategories.  But the
point that we're just listing, we say that over and over
again in our brief.  And in fact, the Petitioners
concede, and this is at page 5 and 6 of the UARG reply
brief, that if this is just about listing, then, of
course, costs are irrelevant.  But it is just about
listing.  That is the way the statute works.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You had responded to
the fairly dramatic disparity your friends on the other
say, the 6 million benefits, 9.6 million cost.  You
respond with a different calculation that looks to -- I
call them collateral --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Co-benefits.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- the ancillary --
co-benefits.  And then the -- the argument is raised
that that's -- that's not quite proper because you're
using your -- your -- the HAP regulation to get at the
criteria pollutants that you otherwise would have to go
through a much more difficult process to regulate.
In other words, you can't regulate the
criteria pollutants through the HAP program, so you get,
okay, here we've got this tiny bit of mercury, and so
we're going to regulate, and that's how we're going to
get additional regulation of the criteria pollutants.
And so it's sort of an end run around the restrictions
that would otherwise make -- give you less control over
the regulation.
What -- what's your response to that?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Let me address that.
It's -- there's several points, and I actually need to
make all of them, I think, to -- to make this clear.
The first point is that that's not an
argument that any party has raised.  One amicus brief
raised it, one -- and it was averted to a bit more oral
argument --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, my
chambers found it, but --
(Laughter.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Yes.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  And -- and here's the
problem with the argument:  The problem with the
argument is that -- it -- it has two problems.  One is
that once EPA concludes that a source emits a hazardous
pollutant, and here EPA has concluded that these sources
emit mercury at levels that are unsafe.  I don't think
Petitioners dispute that.  And by the unambiguous terms
of Section 7412(d), EPA is under an obligation to
regulate all hazardous pollutants that the source emits,
and -- and that's -- the D.C. Circuit in a case called
National Lime 15 years ago --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, no, no, no.  I
understand --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- interpreted it that
way --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- I understand how
the end run works.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, it's not --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I'm -- I'm just
questioning --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  It's not a --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  No, I'm just
questioning the legitimacy of it --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- because what they
would say, okay, you found, you know, a -- a HAP that --
that you want to list, but you ought to consider only
the benefits of regulating that.  You shouldn't consider
the -- the bootstrapped --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I guess the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- benefits -- that
should be addressed through the other --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I guess the next point I
would make, Mr. Chief Justice, is that it's not an end
run, and it's not a bootstrap.  This is a well --
regulating the surrogates, regulating the surrogates, is
a well-recognized methodology that goes back decades,
that EPA has used for decades, that the D.C. Circuit has
upheld for decades, that that is a perfectly appropriate
way to -- to deal with getting at metals and -- and
other pollutants that would be hard to get at directly.
And, in fact, the very argument that Your Honor is
positing here as a -- as an end run is one that was made
in this same National Lime case to the D.C. Circuit
15 years ago and the D.C. Circuit rejected.
So what EPA is doing here -- basically what
the D.C. Circuit said, that Section 7412(d) required
them to do with respect to regulating every hazardous
pollutant that the -- that the sources emit, and what
the EPA has said, and what the D.C. Circuit has said for
decades, EPA --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, right.  But, I
mean, the --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- is permitted to do,
and that it isn't an end run at all.  It's just a normal
way in which you regulate --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, but the issue
that I think raises the red flag, at least, is that
there's such a tiny proportion of benefit from the HAP
program and such a disproportionate amount of benefit
that would normally be addressed under the criteria --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- program.  So --
so it's not just that, yes, where you're regulating one,
if -- it's a good thing if it also has benefits with
respect to other pollutants.  But if your basis for
regulating what -- what is the benefit from the
co-pollutants that you get?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  The -- oh, it's many,
many billions of dollars.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Do you remember how
much it is?  It's sort of 30 --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  30 to $90 billion.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  30 to 90 billion.
The benefit from the mercury is, what, 4 million?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So you say, we get
to regulate this.  We get to regulate it because there's
a $4 million impact on mercury.  But when we do that, we
get to regulate 35 billion -- in a way that gives us
$35 billion in cost on the other side.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  So I understand the
idea that you can have -- you know, it's a good thing if
your regulation also benefits in other ways.  But when
it's such a disproportion, you begin to wonder whether
it's an illegitimate way of avoiding the different --
quite different limitations on EPA that apply in the
criteria program.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  So I don't -- I -- I
really don't think that.  I understand that Petitioners
have put the case that way, Mr. Chief Justice.  I don't
think that's a fair way to put it.
What EPA did with respect to mercury was
quantify one of the public health benefits.  It did not
quantify many of the other public health benefits.  If
you'll look in the Joint Appendix -- and I think this is
about page 910 to about page 940, there's page after
page of charts in which EPA has listed the other
benefits that come from regulating mercury and the
hazardous substances that it didn't try to quantify.
Part of the reason it didn't try to quantify
is because quantifying those kinds of benefits can be
very difficult and challenging.  And, frankly, that is
one of the key reasons that Congress adopted not only in
7412, but under the NAAQS Program and the Motor Vehicle
Program and the New Source Performance Standard Program,
the approach it did of not taking costs into
consideration at the listing stage, but only at the
regulatory stage --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Could you tell me
about --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- the natural gas?  You
were cut off earlier.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Sure.  EPA reached the
conclusion that they ought to have -- that natural gas
power plants ought to be a separate category and -- and
because they didn't generate public health problems at
the level that would make them comparable to the --
the -- the coal and --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So they were --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Now, on this issue of --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- part of the listing,
but not --
JUSTICE ALITO:  I'll wait.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  They were part of the
listing, but they were not regulated, because you just
sort of turn it off.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Can I ask you another
question about these subcategories?
Your -- your argument is that under the last
sentence of 7412(c)(1), the EPA can create subcategories
based, in whole or in part, on costs; is that right?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I -- I think -- I think
it's more subtle than that.  I think that if -- I
think -- and it's not just that provision.  It's --
there are numerous provisions within 7412 that allow for
subcategorization.  But I think that if there is such a
vast difference in the tech -- in the -- in the
technologies that the -- that the group of entities is
using, that there would be that vast a difference in
cost, that there might well be a basis to treat them as
a different subcategory.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, why didn't the EPA
say that?  I thought the EPA said, we are not going to
take into account costs with regard to the listing.
Now, they could have said, we're going to take into
account costs as to whether some categories should be
listed and other categories shouldn't be listed.  That's
not what they said.  They said, we will not take into
account costs with regard to listing.  We list all --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Here -- here's what --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- of -- of these --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- here's what they
said --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- utilities.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- Justice Scalia, and
I -- and here's why they said it, and I think this is
critical.
What they said was that we think it is
appropriate, with respect to power plants, not to
consider costs at listing and to consider costs --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Right.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  -- at emission standard
setting.  And the reason we think it is appropriate is
because that is the standard, that is the regulatory
logic that Congress deemed not only appropriate, but
mandatory for every other source category.  And so one
would have to conclude, then, that what Congress said
was mandatory, and therefore necessarily appropriate for
every other category, was inappropriate, and even
additionally goes so far as to say --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That -- that -- that's how
I understood their argument --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  But --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- entirely.  And I did not
understand it to say, we -- you know, we -- we can -- we
can exempt some people from these minimum standards
because we categorize them differently.  It -- it
definitely was not allowing --
GENERAL VERRILLI:  That -- that is their
main argument, but I do think the point -- what the
point of -- the point of the logic of EPA's position
here is that you make the listing decision, and then you
regulate, as (n)(1)(A) says, under Section 7412, and
these are provisions in Section 7412 that give EPA the
authority to --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And, General, as --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Are their regulations
that --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  -- as I understood it --
please.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Alito.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Are there regulations that
set out the criteria for creating these subcategories?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  I'm -- I'm not aware that
there are.  I'm not -- I just don't know the answer to
that, Your Honor.
JUSTICE ALITO:  So, well, without them, we
really don't know to what extent, if any, costs are
taken into account in creating subcategories, do we?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Well, I -- I think
that -- I -- no, I do think that if -- it's -- it's
going to be based on differences in technology and
operation, I think, from which you might be able to
infer costs.
But that's hypothetical in this case because
this is not a case in which EPA needed to confront that
question, except with respect to natural-gas-fired power
plants, which they did find to be so different that
they -- they warranted different treatment, because it
didn't have the kind of problem that Justice Breyer's
hypothetical raised.  You -- you didn't have that kind
of problem.  You didn't need to face this issue in these
cases, so the EPA didn't.
And if I could just make this point, because
I think it's quite -- I think it's quite critical.
Given that 7412's regulatory logic provides for listing
based on health, emissions standard-setting based on --
on costs, including consideration of costs, and based on
the -- and -- and given that that's exactly the same
logic under the NAAQS Program, it's exactly the same
logic under the Motor Vehicle Program, it's exactly the
same logic under the New Source Performance Standards
Program, that if Congress intended to mandate that EPA
cut so deeply against the grain and make such a
radically different approach with respect to this one
category of sources, you would expect to see very clear
legislative language to that effect.  You would expect
to see a -- a direction to EPA in 7412 to study costs
before making this judgment.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  General Verrilli, let me --
let me ask a question about costs.  There -- there are
economic costs.  There are other costs.  Is it -- is it
the Agency's position that no cost can be taken into
account?  For example, it -- it may find that -- that a
particular material has an effect on health, but it may
find that eliminating it will have other effects that
are even more deleterious to health.  Could that cost be
taken into account?
GENERAL VERRILLI:  If I may answer,
Mr. Chief Justice.  I think that cost would be taken
into account in the OIRA regulatory impact analysis.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But not for the listing.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  But -- but not for the
listing.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Not for the listing.
That's right.
GENERAL VERRILLI:  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, General.
Mr. Smith.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF PAUL M. SMITH
ON BEHALF OF INDUSTRY RESPONDENTS
MR. SMITH:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
We agree with the government that the EPA
was not required to engage in a cost-benefit analysis
before making the initial listing decision to regulate
hazardous pollutants emitted by power plants from
power -- applying the appropriate and necessary
standard.  And I -- I certainly want to acknowledge at
the beginning, clearly, Congress did think that power
plants needed to be treated differently, but what did
they give them?  They gave them a 3-year pause in which
the EPA was instructed to take account of the health
effects of the particular pollutants emitted by power
plants, and it did this under an appropriate and
necessary standard.
And if I could address the issue of what
those two words mean in the reading of the EPA, I would
refer the Court to pages 226 and 227 of the National
Mining Association cert-petition appendix.  I don't think
it's necessary to read from it, but what the EPA said
consistently throughout this record is we looked at two
things.  There was a claim made in the legislative
history that these chemicals are simply not harmful
enough to require any further regulation, that their
effects are negligible, and they looked at that issue
under the appropriateness rubric.  And they said these
are harmful chemicals, particularly mercury.
In addition, under the appropriateness
rubric, they looked at the question of whether or not
there were technologies available to regulate them.  The
necessary rubric was used to look at the post-Clean Air
Act post-acid rain health effects that would persist.
So they said, A, these are harmful chemicals -- harmful
pollutants; and B, under necessary, they will continue
to be harmful after the Acid Rain Program has kicked in.
And that's how the Court -- the EPA saw the two
different words, and it's a perfectly logical way for
them to proceed.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Who -- who would have
guessed?  I mean, that seems such an artificial division
of -- of necessary and appropriate.  Why -- describe it
again.  I really didn't -- didn't quite understand it.
Necessary means what?
MR. SMITH:  The claim -- everybody concedes
that necessary means that there will still be health
problems after the Acid Rain Program kicks in.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  All right.  And appropriate
means?
MR. SMITH:  The appropriate was intended to
meet the claim made by the -- the industry that these
chemicals already are sufficiently harm-free that we
don't need to regulate here regardless of the effects.
first one?
that way.
read them.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Why isn't that part of the
I mean --
MR. SMITH:  Well, it could have been done
They read them separately --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I see.
MR. SMITH:  -- Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Okay.
MR. SMITH:  That's the way the government
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It's a silly way to read
them, I think.
MR. SMITH:  Perhaps so, Your Honor.  But the
key thing is, the issues that they were directed to
study, the issues that were then supposed to control the
listing decision were the health effects of the
pollutants that come out of these power plants.  And
they then deferred the issue of considering a cost to
the second stage just as occurs with every single other
source of the same 189 hazardous pollutants that they
were dealing with.
And if I could pause here and just clarify
one thing about what happened at that listing stage.
Natural gas-fired plants were not turned into a
category.  They looked at the health effects of natural
gas-fired plants and said we are exempting them entirely
from regulation under this section, under the
appropriate and necessary standard because they simply
don't emit these chemicals in more than trace amounts,
and there's simply nothing for us to regulate.  So
natural gas plants get taken out at the listing stage.
We then have coal-fired and oil-fired plants
as to which they begin to apply the subsection (d)
standards, standards which were designed by Congress to
limit the emission regulation to reasonable amounts,
designed because the floors are, in fact, limited to
what has already been achieved by comparable plants in
the same category.
Now, there was some question raised about
whether or not this categorization was something that
EPA recognized it could use to effect the emissions
standards and make them reasonable.  In fact, as
Mr. Brownell acknowledged, they did use -- create a
category -- a separate category of coal-burning plants
that burned Lignite, because it turns out that none of
the Lignite plants could meet the -- the standards that
would otherwise have -- have applied with respect to
mercury if they were in the category with the other
coal-fired plants.
They then through this whole process looked
at the issue of categorization.  They started out with
two coal-fired categories.  They ended up with -- and as
far as that, with one oil-fired category.  In the final
rule, there are four separate categories of oil-fired
plants, depending on what they burn and how they
operate.  So this whole process of separating out these
categories to produce emissions standards that make
sense and are practicable was built into that process
under subsection (d) --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Smith, could -- could
you just clarify for me that the -- the categorization
happens after the listing; is that correct?
MR. SMITH:  Yes, Your Honor.  What they
listed was all coal-fired plants and all oil-fired
plants, but no natural gas plants.  They then go to the
question of what emissions standards should occur.  And
with respect to other sources, that's sometimes years
after the listing decision is made.  But they then have
a process of saying, what are our categories going to
be?  We have to put out -- we have to get information at
that point.  What of the top 12 percent of the category
would, in fact, are there emissions?  You have to --
they have to report in.  They make a calculation about
that.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Aren't -- aren't these just
requirements above the minimums that automatically
apply?
MR. SMITH:  No, Your Honor.  The -- the
minimums are established by what the top 12 percent in
the category that the EPA has --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes.  But I'm -- I'm saying
the categorization that allows you to -- you know, to
reduce some people and -- and not to reduce others, that
applies to requirements above the minimums.  No?
MR. SMITH:  Your Honor, the -- the minimums
are the things that are set by mathematical calculation
from the categories.  Everything else above the minimums
is done taking cost into account under (d)(2) expressly.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Yes.
MR. SMITH:  So the only thing that is done
using not express consideration of cost, but
consideration of cost indirectly basing the regulations
on what the top 12 percent are doing is the minimums.
And the minimums are then altered, depending on what
categories you establish.  That is the way that the
regulation has worked for all of the sources that they
regulated.  That is the -- the practical mechanism --
JUSTICE KAGAN:  So just to clarify that just
for -- for my own purpose, Mr. Smith.  It's just you
categorize one way, the minimums are down here.  You
categorize another way, the minimums are up there.
MR. SMITH:  That's correct, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  It can make a huge
difference in terms of what the minimums are.
MR. SMITH:  Right.  And there's a notice and
comment process.  They put out proposed categories.
They tell them what we -- empirically what we found
about what the top 10 -- 12 percent are doing.  They
then get comments in and they -- as they happened
here -- they make different categories in the final rule
adjusting.
JUSTICE ALITO:  How can we -- how can we
tell the degree to which costs are taken into account,
if they are at all, without knowing what the criteria
are for creating these subcategories?
MR. SMITH:  Well, Your Honor, it's in the
statute that they create the categories in applying this
12 percent.  I don't --
JUSTICE ALITO:  No, no.  The 12 percent -- I
thought the 12 percent came into play after you've
created the category -- the subcategory.
MR. SMITH:  Right, as part of the process.
It's part of the process.
JUSTICE ALITO:  But how do I know how they
create the subcategories?
MR. SMITH:  Well, it's -- you can see it in
the notice of proposed rulemaking.  They say here are
our proposed categories:  Two coal categories, one oil
category.  Then they get comment about how -- we are
not -- what happens, then, is the people that comment
say we're so different from that category.  We have
these special problems.  We need our own separate
category.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  And it's a rulemaking after
the rulemaking that applies to the listing; is that
right?
MR. SMITH:  It's totally after that, Your
Honor.  It's a second phase.  It -- it happened here
that they announced it all at the same time, but only
because there had been an 11-year delay.
JUSTICE BREYER:  You -- you confirm it was
not made up in my chambers.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER:  The fact -- the fact is --
MR. SMITH:  Although they did a wonderful
job figuring it out again, Your Honor.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER:  You're right.  The -- the
brief said Congress -- the SG's brief -- unambiguously
required EPA to consider costs at the second stage of
the regulatory process.  That's what it said.  A few
pages later, they have the statute.  So not
surprisingly, I read the statute.  And -- and reading
the statute leads me to think it works along the lines
you just said.
MR. SMITH:  That's correct your honor.
JUSTICE BREYER:  But if you did have the
most expensive set of generators in the world, you would
ask EPA to create a separate category for them in which
case the top 12 percent would no longer be in your
category and you wouldn't have to do it.
MR. SMITH:  And that's what happened with --
JUSTICE BREYER:  Now, what I'm asking is if
that you think it's the system, that's what I read in
the statute.  The SG thinks that's the system, but is
there a treatise?  Is there a -- an explanation that EPA
has put out so that it is clear that it was not made up,
that it's clear that this is the system that they
follow?  Would you refer me to a source?
MR. SMITH:  Your Honor, the only source that
I can refer you to -- and perhaps the government can
supply something after -- is -- is the notice of
proposed rulemaking in the final rule in which all of
this categorization process is laid out in -- in
exquisite detail.  And -- and you can see the comments
that come in and say the categories don't work, we need
different categories, and they then produce different
categories.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I think that Justice
Alito --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Is there something
in the -- excuse me.  Is there something in the
administrative record where EPA adopts that?  When
somebody says you're not considering cost.  It's a bad
thing.  We're going to go to the Supreme Court if you
don't consider cost, and EPA says, oh, no we're going to
consider cost.  We're going to consider cost when we
categorize the power plants.  Is there a reference to
the administrative record where there's something like
that?
MR. SMITH:  Well, they certainly said, Your
Honor, in the notice of proposed rulemaking, that we
interpret the listing decision as being something that
is based solely on health and not on cost.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  The listing decision
is not based on cost.
MR. SMITH:  Right.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I want to know if
there's anything there that says, but don't worry
because we're going to consider cost through the
categorization process.
MR. SMITH:  I don't know whether they said
that explicitly.  That was so implicit in the whole
system.  This is a system that's been in operation for
other sources for -- since 1990.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, implicit
usually doesn't work when you're talking about an
administrative record.
MR. SMITH:  Your Honor, they gave everybody
the opportunity to attack the categories that they, in
fact, proposed, based on the argument that they were
impractical for them.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But I thought your
position was that you didn't need to consider costs at
the first step, and that that would include your initial
category.
MR. SMITH:  No, Your Honor, the categories
are at the second step.  The categories have -- the only
thing that they did at the first step is say --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But you didn't take that
second step.
MR. SMITH:  They did, Your Honor.  They
categorized oil-fired plants into four categories.  They
categorized coal-fired plants into various categories.
And that was all done through a notice and comment
process which led, then, to different emission
standards.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  And are you saying that
was done based on cost?
MR. SMITH:  Yes, Your Honor, it was done --
what -- what was feasible for these different
technologies.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I see.  How much money did
that save?  I mean, do we know how much of the $9.6
billion cost would be reduced by this categorization?
MR. SMITH:  Well, Your Honor --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I mean, that's the problem
here, isn't it?
MR. SMITH:  I don't have that calculus, but
I would point out that it's important to recognize that
something like 90 percent of that 9.6 billion -- 90
percent of the capital cost, which is most of that 9.6
billion, has now already been spent.  And the industry
has not experienced the kinds of upheavals that are
being described.  The rule takes effect in the middle of
April, and so the idea that the result here was somehow
ludicrous or outlandishly expensive is belied by the
fact that the industry is bringing itself into full
compliance.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Instead of going to jail?
Is that it?
MR. SMITH:  Complying with Federal law --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I mean, it might still be
ludicrous, but it had to be done.
MR. SMITH:  Well, the other thing I would
say is the idea that the $4.6 million benefit is the
proper comparator is wrong on so many different levels.
First of all, that was a single -- one single health
benefit related to mercury.  They didn't think --
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  Is the $9 billion a year
recurring annually, or are you saying that most of this
is capital investment one time?
MR. SMITH:  Most of it is amortization of
the capital expenditures that have already been made.
That's in all the briefs from the Petitioners.  There
will be something like 40 percent will be operating
costs and 60 percent is amortized capital costs, Your
Honor.
The industry has been able to do this, and
the situation now is we're ready to finally have
national standards, which means it's not -- the States
that have been regulating in this area very strenuously
won't continue to have mercury flowing across state
lines as they have.  And we have this national, highly
competitive electricity market, where some companies
have marginal costs that reflect that they're in
compliance, and some don't.  And that is a problem that
really needs to be solved.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Mr. Smith, I just want
you to finish your thought.  The four million -- the
four billion that they are referring to is only mercury.
The agency did not quantify all of the other costs for
the other HAPs, correct?
MR. SMITH:  Actually, it didn't quantity
many, if not most, of the costs for mercury, because
mercury causes developmental delays, attention deficit
disorder --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, let's put that
aside.
MR. SMITH:  -- all these other things that
are not quantified in the rule.  It causes
cardiovascular problems that are not -- a lot of things
mercury does, it's an extremely poisonous neurotoxin.
The other thing about the 30 billion to 90
billion, that is particulate reduction, and some of the
particulate that is reduced is, in fact, HAPs.  It is
nonmercury metals that go out in the form of particles.
It is mercury that sometimes goes out in the form of
particles.  It is the acid gases, which when they get
out into the atmosphere turn into particles because they
become aerosolized, they go into your lungs as tiny
droplets.
So all of those are, in fact, being taken
care of in the controls of particulate.  It is true that
in controlling those HAPs, you use the same technology
and you end up controlling a lot of other kinds of
particulate, primarily sulfur dioxide, which causes
premature deaths.  And so when they did the calculation,
they said we put these particulate controls in to
control HAPs.  It happens to also save a lot of lives,
because of sulfur dioxide that's not otherwise being
controlled.  And so we'll tell you all the lives we're
saving, not just some of those lives.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Was this the basis for the
EPA's decision?  I thought the EPA -- I thought the
EPA's position was, it doesn't matter how much the
benefit -- how much the costs exceed the benefits, we
just will not take costs into account at the listing
stage.
MR. SMITH:  That is correct, Your Honor.
They did not consider the cost-benefit analysis at the
listing stage.  That's based on their reasonable --
quite reasonable, I think, interpretation of the
statute.  The statute, which with respect to every other
source, it's conceded you don't do the cost-benefit
analysis upfront.  This statute came out of a period of
regulatory paralysis of 20 years, where the EPA just
wasn't regulating effectively.
And Congress came in and said we're going to
force regulation of these chemicals that are being
spewed into the environment and causing all these health
effects.  It gave one benefit to the power plant
industry and said you have three years.  You can prove
that there wasn't -- there aren't really health effects
that are serious.  But it didn't give them the benefit
of having a cost-benefit analysis done upfront, or
create all the discretion in the world on the part of
EPA simply to say, we don't think you should regulate
this particular category.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you,
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Lindstrom, you have four minutes
remaining.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF AARON D. LINDSTROM
ON BEHALF OF STATE PETITIONERS
MR. LINDSTROM:  Thank you, Mr. Chief
Justice.
Any subcategorization that was going to
happen has already occurred, because we're talking about
the rule that's been promulgated, and despite any
subcategorization that happened, there's still $9.6
billion in costs that are being imposed on an annual
basis --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You're asking us -- it
wasn't the question presented.  Is the question
presented that -- not that you have to take that into
account at listing, but that somehow that ratio makes
any emissions standards wrong --
MR. LINDSTROM:  The question is whether --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- even if, for some
people, it's really not back-breaking to do it?
MR. LINDSTROM:  The question is whether
costs have to be considered under (n)(1) when you're
regulating electric utilities.  And there's one thing
I'd like to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  They do say it does when
you’re regulating at the emission standard.
MR. LINDSTROM:  They say that it's being
done -- I guess if you think about this, what happens
under 7412(c) is you've got a listing decision, first
stage.  Then you've got a floor standard.  And then
you've got an above-the-floor standard.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That's not what --
MR. LINDSTROM:  In their approach --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You're taking out the
categorization.  They don't establish the floor until
they categorize, correct?
MR. LINDSTROM:  So categorization could
happen here, but my point is, what happens under (n)(1)
is these first two steps are merged.  You're making the
necessary and appropriate determination, when you're
looking not to list, but whether such regulation is
appropriate and necessary.  That's the language in the
statute.  It says, is such regulation appropriate and
necessary.
So it's not just whether it's going to be
listed.  It's looking at what's actually going to
happen, so that's why it's -- that's why they did both
at the same time.  Why they made the appropriate and
necessary finding at the same time they published the
emissions standards.  They were looking at the costs
ahead because they didn't know what the costs were going
to be to figure out if such regulation --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Are you saying that they
purported to make the categorization decision without
taking into account costs?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes, any categorization
they've done has already been done, and they didn't
consider costs.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  And didn't consider cost.
MR. LINDSTROM:  That's correct.  And again,
I'd like to return to one of the big picture principles,
which is, this is an administrative law case, so it does
-- this turns or falls on what the agency actually did
below.  So they've already actually made determinations.
They've said costs are not relevant.  They've ignored an
important part of the regulatory problem, and adopted --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  They
proposed categories, and everybody had the opportunity
to say it's the wrong category, correct?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And argue why it's the
wrong category.
MR. LINDSTROM:  And the categories have been
adopted
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  And some people
submitted complaints about costs relative to their
technology and their kinds of plants, correct?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So, it's not true that
-- they proposed them, but everybody gets a chance to
tell them, these are -- this technology is different
from the others, or this kind of plant is different from
the others, and it imposes a cost much greater than you
are anticipating.
MR. LINDSTROM:  I'm saying we're already
past that phase.  They've already -- any categorization
they were going to do has already been done.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  No, what you're saying,
it's already past.  It's past because that's been -- the
final rule has been issued.
MR. LINDSTROM:  Correct.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm talking during the
rulemaking process.  The rulemaking process does permit
the agency to consider the cost of technology in setting
up categorizations.
MR. LINDSTROM:  They've adopted the exact
opposite position, which is that costs do not matter.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Well, I thought we just
heard -- I thought we just heard that say the Lignite
people, I can't remember if that's the right name, but
they said, look, we have special ways of producing
this -- our stuff, and they are much more expensive, so
please don't put us in the same category as you put the
other people in.  Okay?  For the purposes of figuring
the best 12 percent, and the agency said, right, okay,
separate.  Now, did that happen?
MR. LINDSTROM:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  All right.  Then how would
you do that without considering cost?  Because their
basis was the Lignite people were saying our costs are
more expensive?
MR. LINDSTROM:  We don't know how they -- I
don't know how they did it, but they've said throughout
that we're not considering costs.
Thank you, Your Honor.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
The case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 11:46 a.m., the case in the
