IN THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
JAMES OBERGEFELL, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 14-556
v.  :
RICHARD HODGES, DIRECTOR,  :
OHIO DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,  :
ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
and
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
VALERIA TANCO, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 14-562
v.  :
BILL HASLAM, GOVERNOR OF  :
TENNESSEE, ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
and
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
APRIL DEBOER, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 14-571
v.  :
RICK SNYDER, GOVERNOR OF  :
MICHIGAN, ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
and
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
GREGORY BOURKE, ET AL.,  :
Petitioners  :  No. 14-574
v.  :
STEVE BESHEAR, GOVERNOR  :
OF KENTUCKY, ET AL.  :
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - x
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 28, 2015
The above-entitled matter came on for oral
argument before the Supreme Court of the United States
at 11:39 a.m.
APPEARANCES:
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ., Washington, D.C.; on
behalf of Petitioners on Question 2.
JOSEPH F. WHALEN, Associate Solicitor General,
Nashville, Tenn.; on behalf of Respondents on
Question 2.
C O N T E N T S
ORAL ARGUMENT OF  PAGE
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ.
4On behalf of the Petitioners on Question 2
ORAL ARGUMENT OF
JOSEPH F. WHALEN, ESQ.
On behalf of the Respondents on Question 2  26
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF
DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER, ESQ.
On behalf of the Petitioners on Question 2  45
P R O C E E D I N G S
(11:39 a.m.)
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  We'll now hear our
argument on the second question presented in this case.
Mr. Hallward-Driemeier.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS ON QUESTION 2
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Mr. Chief Justice,
and may it please the Court:
The Question 2 Petitioners are already
married.  They have established those enduring
relationships, and they have a liberty interest that is
of fundamental importance to these couples and their
children.
A State should not be allowed to effectively
dissolve that marriage without a sufficiently important
justification to do so.
These Petitioners have built their lives
around their marriages, including bringing children into
their families, just as opposite-sex couples have done.
But the non-recognition laws undermine the stability of
these families, though the States purport to support
just such stability.
JUSTICE ALITO:  I was somewhat surprised by
the arguments you made in your brief because they are
largely a repetition of the arguments that we just heard
with respect to Question 1.
I thought the point of Question 2 was
whether there would be a -- an obligation to recognize a
same-sex marriage entered into in another State where
that is lawful even if the State itself,
constitutionally, does not recognize same-sex marriage.
I thought that's the question in Question 2.  Is -- am I
wrong?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  It is the question
in Question 2, and this Court's decisions establish that
there is not only a right to be married, but a right to
remain married; that there is a protected liberty
interest in the status of one's marriage once it has
been established under law.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Even -- even if that
marriage is -- is not lawful under -- under the
receiving State's law; right?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  That's right.
There is definitely --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Is that right?  No
matter -- I mean, suppose -- well, let's say someone
gets married in a -- in a country that permits polygamy.
Does a State have to acknowledge that marriage?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, of course,
the State could assert justifications for not doing so,
and I think there would be justifications --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Okay.  So --
MR. HALLWARD-DREIMEIER:  -- for not
recognizing such --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  -- what would the
justification be?  That it's contrary to the State's
public policy, I assume; right?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, no, Your
Honor.  I think that the justification would be that the
State doesn't have such an institution.  The -- a
polygamous relationship would raise all kinds of
questions that the State's marriage laws don't address.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, it would be the same
argument.  We don't have such an institution.  Our
marriage in this State, which we constitutionally can
have because the second question assumes that the first
question comes out the way the United States does not
want it to come out, the State says we only have the
institution of heterosexual marriage.  We don't have the
institution of same-sex marriage.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  No.  The
institution is the institution of marriage, and the
experience of those States --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, you're saying that,
but the State doesn't.  The State says the only
institution we have is heterosexual marriage.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  The -- the point
I'm making, Your Honor, I think is demonstrated by what
has happened in those States where, by court order,
States have had to permit same-sex couples to marry.
All that has happened under their laws is
that they have had to remove gender-specific language
and substitute it with gender-neutral language.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Now, could I -- could
I -- because I don't -- if you want to finish answering
Justice Scalia's --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  I was going to say
that -- that plural relationships raise all manner of
questions that are not addressed by this State's current
marriage laws.
JUSTICE ALITO:  What if it's not a plural
relationship?  What if one State says that individuals
can marry at the age of puberty?  So a 12-year-old
female can marry.  Would a State -- would another State
be obligated to recognize that marriage?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  I -- I think
probably not.  But the State would have, in that
instance, a sufficiently important interest in
protecting the true consent of the married person.
And -- and most States don't recognize minors' ability
to consent, certainly not to something that is as
important as marriage.
But what we see, in fact, is that, quite in
contrast to the non-recognition laws at issue here, the
States do recognize the marriages of person who, by age,
would not have been able to marry within their own
States.
That is the long-standing practice of all of
the States, precisely because of the abomination, as it
was referred to in the old treatises, of the notion that
a -- persons could have a different marital state in
some jurisdictions than others.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Sir, how about the
consanguinity situation?  Virtually all states would
recognize cousins through marriage getting married, but
there's at least one State that doesn't; right?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Are you saying that that
State is --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  I think that
the -- that the constitutional test is the one that the
Court set forth in the Zablocki, which is does the State
have a sufficiently important interest not to recognize
it?  And certainly in the case of incest, the State does
have a sufficiently important interest.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  This is not incest.
They're not biologically tied.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, the States
that I'm aware of that have the rules against cousin
marriage do so under their incest statutes, and they
simply define incest in a broad way that would encompass
cousins to marry.
At some point, certainly the familial
relationship is too extenuated that I don't think the
State would have a sufficiently important justification.
JUSTICE KENNEDY:  But Justice Alito's
question points out, the assumption of his hypothetical
is -- and -- and of the way these cases are presented,
is that the State does have a sufficient interest so
that you need not allow the marriages in those -- in
that State.
So there is a sufficient interest, under our
arguendo assumption here, to -- to say that this is not
a fundamental right.  But then suddenly, if you're out
of State it's different.  Why -- why should the State
have to yield?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, at the very
least, you would have to analyze differently the
interest that the State might assert for not allowing
couples to enter marriage versus the -- the interest
that they assert as related to a couple who is already
married.
For example, Kentucky has asserted that its
interest in only permitting opposite-sex couples to
marry is to increase the birthrate.  Well, now apply
that theory to same-sex couples who are already married.
They are already married in the States where they were
married.  They are already married in half the States in
the country.
Kentucky would have the Court believe that
it is a sufficiently important interest to have that
couple disregard their existing marriage vows and
obligations to each other to marry someone else in
Kentucky in order to procreate biologically even though
the couple may already have children together.  That, I
would dare say, is not a rational justification, much
less a sufficiently important one.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Well, I think -- I think
what Kentucky is saying is that the long-term effects of
having same-sex couples in Kentucky will be, which
you -- you didn't agree with, but what -- what counsel
for Respondent argued in the prior case, will be a -- a
reduction in -- in -- in heterosexual marriages and a --
a reduction in the number of children born to those
marriages.  I mean, that --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Your Honor, this
Court has rejected that type of speculation as a basis
for drawing these distinctions before as it did in
Loving.
The State in Loving argued that it was too
soon to know what the effect of interracial marriages
would be and what the stigma would be on their children
if not the biological --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But we will not have
rejected it if we come out the way this question
presented assumes we have come out.
MR. HALLWARD-DREIMEIER:  Well, the State --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Mainly, saying that it's
okay for a State not to permit same-sex marriage.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  The State asserts
that it has an interest in the -- the stability that
marriage provides for children.  That interest does not
justify extinguishing marriages that already exist.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  May we clear this one
thing.  If the Petitioner prevails in the first case,
then the argument is moot; right?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  That's -- that's
absolutely right, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  So you are supposing a
situation where the Plaintiffs do not prevail, and so a
State can retain its ban on same-sex marriage.
The question is has -- does it have to
recognize marriage from out of State?  Would it make any
difference if the couple came from the State where there
is a ban on same-sex marriage, goes to a neighboring
State that allows it, and then comes right back home
again?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  No, Your Honor.  I
don't think that there would be such a distinction.
And, in fact, none of these four States draws that kind
of line that Your Honor presupposes.  And that's one of
the points that's so important here, is that as the
Court observed with respect to DOMA in Windsor, the
nonrecognition laws here are a stark departure from the
State's traditional practice of recognizing out-of-state
marriages even though they could not have been
celebrated within the State.  It's precisely that
circumstance where the laws diverge that the issue
arises.
And the -- the three States that have this
issue, Tennessee, Ohio, and Kentucky, are, between them,
able to identify only 5 instances in which they did not
recognize a marriage that was valid outside the State,
even though it could not have been celebrated inside.
And those instances are incest, which we think the State
would have sufficiently important justification not to
recognize, miscegenation laws, not a precedent on which
I think the Court would want to rely in this instance,
or other interests that I think probably would not
survive today, such as the -- the rule against allowing
a divorced person to remarry.
So they're -- and -- and more importantly,
the most recent of those cases is from 1970.  So the
rule that the States cite about their ability to
disregard, to effectively dissolve marriages that
already exist, around which people have already begun to
build their lives, is less applied than the Federal
government's own authority to define the --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Yes.  But, again, I
think you're avoiding the presumption on which we're
starting, on the assumption, which is that the State's
policy for same -- supporting same-sex marriage is
sufficiently strong, that they are -- they can, as a
matter of public policy, prohibit that in their own
State.  And yet you're saying it's somehow so much
weaker when you're talking about marriages from other
States.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  I -- I think there
are a couple of points that I'd like to make in order to
distinguish this situation from the -- the question in
the first case.
In the first case, it was very significant
that Respondents' counsel was emphasizing that he
thought it was merely rational basis scrutiny that would
apply.  But that was to the question of whether people
should be allowed to marry in the first instance.
Our Petitioners on Question 2 are already
married.  We know from Windsor, because the Court held,
that once married, a couple has a constitutionally
protected liberty interest in their marriage.
We also know from Windsor that where a -- a
sovereign disregards that marriage in a way that would
be extraordinary and out of character with tradition,
that that requires, at the very least, careful
consideration.  And that's --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  It certainly --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  -- what we have
here.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  It certainly
undermines the State interest that we would, assuming
arguendo, have recognized in the first case, to say that
they must welcome in their borders people who have been
married elsewhere.  It'd simply be a matter of time
until they would, in effect, be recognizing that within
the State.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Because we live in a
very mobile society, and people move all the time.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  And -- and --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  In other words, it
would kind of -- it -- one State would basically set the
policy for the entire nation.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, of course,
there would be many fewer such couples raising children
within their borders than heterosexual couples who are
raising children who are not biologically linked to
them.
I have to say that I think that the
arguments that the State has made are so over and
underinclusive at the same time, that they leave the --
the feeling that it can only be pretext.  And we know
that that's true, because the State not only can't draw
the lines that they are purporting to, they don't draw
the lines that they're -- would suggest, and they would
never draw the lines that they afford to --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Wait.  I -- I've
lost you there.  What -- what lines are you talking
about?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  A line, for
example, that limits marriage to those couples who are
able to procreate biologically without any assistance.
The States don't draw those lines.  The States have laws
that treat adoptive relationships with the same legal
effect as biological ones.  They actually have laws that
further support and -- and give greater stability --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I thought your --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  -- to marriages
that use --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- your argument --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  -- assisted
reproduction.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- would be different.
I thought that the States had never categorically passed
a law declaring that a particular kind of marriage was
against public policy.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  That -- that is
certainly another way in which --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  No one of the four
States had ever done that?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  They -- they have
never done that.  They've never --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Until the DOMA issue
came up.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  That -- that --
these laws are -- are out of character, unprecedented in
the language of Romer in many respects.
JUSTICE ALITO:  You're saying that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, they --
JUSTICE ALITO:  You're saying that the laws
in some States, the States that you're referring to that
recognize only opposite-sex marriage are pretextual?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  The -- the -- their
-- their nonrecognition laws are pretextual, yes,
because the longstanding practice of these States is to
recognize marriages that are validly celebrated
elsewhere precisely because of --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  -- the
fundamental --
JUSTICE ALITO:  -- other than the
distinction -- we have the distinction between same-sex
marriage and opposite-sex marriage.  What is the next
most dramatic variation that exists in the marriage laws
of the States?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, at the time,
certainly interracial marriage when --
JUSTICE ALITO:  At the present time, what
is --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well --
JUSTICE ALITO:  -- most -- the next most
dramatic difference?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, I -- I think
that, if I could, the -- the anti-miscegenation laws
actually are the closest analogy, but what's different
between them, if I could -- because it goes to Justice
Sotomayor's question, and then I'll try to answer
yours -- is --
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well -- well, I had asked a
simple question.  At the present time, what is the next
most dramatic variation in the marriage laws of the
States?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  It probably is age.
JUSTICE ALITO:  And what is the -- what --
what's the range?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  The -- the -- I
think it goes from 13 to 18.  And -- but -- but as I
said before, the tradition of the States -- the issue
does not come up that much, but the tradition of the
States is to recognize a marriage that was entered into
by someone of an age that could not have been entered
within the State, because of the nature of the marriage
once it's established, recognizing that the fundamental
nature of that relationship is not one that the State
should put asunder.
JUSTICE ALITO:  Well, I thought you answered
me earlier that a State could refuse to recognize a
marriage in -- contracted in another State where the
minimum age was puberty.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, they -- they
could, and I do believe that if, in the individual case,
it was shown that it was because of lack of consent,
the -- the State could decide not to recognize the
marriage.  But with respect to the categorical nature --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  It would have to be
shown, I think, the presumption would be in such a
State that someone age 13 can't consent.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  The age 13, I think
probably you're right, but if it is a matter of 15
instead of 16, that the courts probably would recognize
it, especially if, in reliance on their marriage, the --
the couple had already conceived of a child, it would do
no one any good to destroy that marriage and the stable
environment that it might provide for the children, just
as it does no one any good -- it certainly doesn't
advance the interests of the children of opposite-sex
couples to destroy the marriages that provide stability
to the children of same-sex couples who are already
married under the laws of other States.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  I think your -- your
argument is pretty much the exact opposite of the
argument of the Petitioners in the prior case.  The
argument that was presented against them is, you can't
do this, we've never done this before, recognized
same-sex marriage.
And now you're saying, well, they can't not
recognize same-sex marriages because they've never not
recognized marriages before that were lawfully performed
in other States.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, what --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  You've got to decide
one or the other if you win.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  No, I don't think
so at -- at all, Your Honor.  And -- and I think that
what's -- what's essential and common between us is that
we recognize that the marriage that our Petitioners have
entered into is a marriage.  It is that same
institution, that same most important relationship of
one's life that this Court has held out as
fundamental --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  And maybe --
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  -- in other cases.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  -- I'm just
repeating myself, but we only get to the second question
if you've lost on that point already, if we've said
States do not have to recognize same-sex marriage as a
marriage.
So assuming you've lost on that, I don't see
how your argument gets -- you can't say that they are
not treating the marriage as a marriage when they don't
have to do that in the first place.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, I -- I think
that that actually highlights one of the problems of
trying to decide the -- the two cases differently,
because, of course, deciding against Petitioners on
Question 1, even if the Court decides in favor of
Petitioners on Question 2, would forever relegate those
marriages to second class status and would raise all
kinds of questions whether those marriages could be
subjected to laws that are not quite so favorable as
opposite --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  You're rearguing Question 1
now?  Is that -- is that what you're doing?
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  No.  No.  I'm
suggesting, though --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  I thought you were.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  -- that even a win
on Question 2 does not fully validate our Petitioners'
marriages, but certainly we think that the State cannot
disregard them -- cannot effectively dissolve existing
marriages without a sufficiently important reason for
doing so.
This Court recognized in the Lawrence case
that marriage, procreation, family relationships,
child rearing are fundamental aspects of autonomy that
same-sex couples can enter into, can choose for purposes
of autonomy to the same extent as opposite-sex couples,
especially when those couples have done so, have
established a marriage, have brought children into --
I'd like to give an example, if I could, because I think
that it sort of brings home what's really happening.
Matthew Mansell and Johno Espejo married in
California in 2008.  In 2009, they adopted two children.
Now, in reliance on the protection that is afforded by
marriage, Mr. Espejo was willing to give up his job to
become the primary caregiver of their children.
Mr. Mansell is the primary breadwinner.  His job in an
international law firm was transferred from California
to Tennessee, and the cost of that transfer for that job
for them was the destruction of their family
relationships, all that they had relied on in building
their lives together.
And in support of that, the States offer
exactly nothing.  There is no reason that the State
needs to disregard that marriage.  No reason the State
needs to destroy the reliance that Mr. Espejo has had in
giving up his career to look after their children.  They
are doing everything --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  It would have been -- it
would have been the argument made with respect to the
first question; namely, that the existence of same-sex
marriages erodes, erodes the -- the feeling of society
regarding heterosexual marriages.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  As I say -- as I
say before, Your Honor, I -- I don't think that that
holds up because opposite-sex couples who have no
children, who may be beyond childbearing years, when
they move into these States, their marriages are
entitled to respect, and yet they are situated precisely
as our Petitioners are.  Our couples, likewise, have
marriages.  They may not be able to procreate
biologically together, but they are able to procreate
through assisted means, through adoption.  They bring
children into their families just as opposite-sex
couples do.  And when, in reliance on their own State
where they live, they move into these States, that
marriage is destroyed.
This Court relied on Federalism, the
vertical kind, in Windsor to identify something that was
highly unusual.  In this case, it's horizontal
Federalism, I think, that identifies something that's
highly unusual.  As part of a Federal form of government
in which the States are equal, the States have ceded
some form of their authority.  And one is to -- to
recognize that when another State creates an enduring
relationship, encourages people to, in reliance on the
protections the law affords, to establish families, that
it is not that other States are simply free to disregard
that which those States have created.
In the corporate context, once a corporation
is established under the laws of one State, that
corporation exists in all other States.  Certainly, the
families that our Petitioners have established are
entitled to at least that same respect.
I think that, Your Honor, it is quite
interesting to note that in the first argument, Michigan
was forced to argue some positions that I think are
quite astonishing, that the State could limit marriage
to couples who are capable of procreation without
assistance or indeed, that it could abolish marriage
altogether.
It's our clients who take marriage
seriously.  They took vows to each other and bought into
an institution that, indeed, as this Court has said,
predates the Bill of Rights, that is the most important
and fundamental in their lives, and the State should
offer something more than mere pretext as ground to
destroy it.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  The State's rationale is
we -- we treat outsiders the same way we treat insiders.
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Well, thank you,
Your Honor.  They -- they certainly have offered that,
but what the State ignores is that these so-called
outsiders are already married.  The State, it's true,
says, well, we have same-sex couples in our State, and
we don't allow them to marry, so we're going to -- to
treat you the same way.
Well, they ignore that our clients have
already formed those relationships, and I think that it
would be, in terms of the interests that distinguish
between the two questions, it's -- it's helpful to think
again, perhaps, about heterosexual couples.  We don't
think that a State could limit marriage to only those
couples who are capable of procreation.  We don't think
it could preclude marriage by women who are 55, but it
would be quite a different and distinct constitutional
violation for the State to dissolve the marriages of
opposite-sex couples when the woman reaches 55.
I don't think that that's constitutionally
permissible.  The States don't do that and, of course,
they never would do that, because the essential
protection against arbitrary laws is that the majority
has to live under the same laws that they would subject
the minority to.  And there is no chance that the
majority would subject themselves to such a law as that.
I'd like to reserve the remainder of my
time.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Mr. Whalen.
ORAL ARGUMENT OF JOSEPH F. WHALEN
ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS ON QUESTION 2
MR. WHALEN:  Mr. Chief Justice, and may it
please the Court:
The Fourteenth Amendment does not require
States with traditional marriage laws to recognize
marriages from other States between two persons of the
same sex.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  What about Article IV?  I'm
so glad to be able to quote a portion of the
Constitution that actually seems to be relevant.  "Full
faith and credit shall be given in each State to the
public acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every
other State."  Now, why doesn't that apply?
MR. WHALEN:  Your Honor, this Court's cases
have made clear that the Court draws a distinction
between judgments between States and the laws of each
State.  And the reason in part that the Court's
decisions have said that is that otherwise, each State
would be able to essentially legislate for every other
State.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Public acts?  It would
include the act of marrying people, I assume.
MR. WHALEN:  My understanding of this
Court's decisions as the reference in the Constitution
to public acts is that each State's laws.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  So there -- there's nothing
in the Constitution that requires a State to acknowledge
even those marriages in other States that -- that are
the same.
MR. WHALEN:  That's essentially correct,
Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Really?
MR. WHALEN:  Under this Court's decisions,
that's -- that's essentially right.  There has been
under the jurisprudence with regard to Allstate
Insurance and Alaska Packers and so forth that
there's -- there's a minimal due process requirement to
decline to apply another State's substantive law.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  We -- we can say the only
marriages we acknowledge in -- in New York are marriages
concluded in New York; is that possible?
MR. WHALEN:  I'm sorry?  I don't --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  New York can say the only
marriages we acknowledge in New York are those marriages
that have been made under the laws of New York.
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  Really?
MR. WHALEN:  If I'm understanding your -- if
I'm understanding your question correctly.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  What case is that?
What case would you cite to support that proposition?
MR. WHALEN:  I'm not sure if I understood
the question correctly, Your Honor.
JUSTICE BREYER:  He said -- I mean, I
already have several cases to read.  I might as well get
another one.
(Laughter.)
JUSTICE BREYER:  What -- what is the case
that holds that the State of New York has the right to
recognize only marriages made in New York?  And when --
if you’re married in Virginia, New York has the
constitutional right to say, we treat you as if you
weren't married, whoever you are.
MR. WHALEN:  I didn’t -- I did misunderstand
the question.  My understanding of the question was
whether New York could decline to recognize an
out-of-state marriage that did not comport with New
York's law.
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's not what I said.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Because it is clear that
if the law of the two States is the same, that was used
against Fedder, that the State cannot say we won't apply
the other State's law, even though it's the same as our
own.
MR. WHALEN:  Even though it's the same as
ours?
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  Yes.
JUSTICE BREYER:  Like New York.  For
example, I happen to know has a law that a Federal judge
from Washington couldn't marry someone.  I mean, you can
get married to your own wife, et cetera, but you can't
marry two other people, but the District of Columbia has
the opposite law.  So if I marry two people in
Washington D.C. and they happen to move to New York, you
are saying that New York doesn't have to recognize that
marriage because it doesn't comport with the marriage of
New York; is that your point?
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.  I think
that's --
JUSTICE BREYER:  And then what case says
that?  I think there are a few people going to get
nervous about this.
(Laughter.)
MR. WHALEN:  My -- my answer is based on
essentially this Court's decision in Nevada v. Hall,
because the State's own law sets its own policy and the
other State's law would be in conflict with that State's
policy.
JUSTICE BREYER:  But here the policy would
be we distrust Federal judges from outside the State.
And even that, they would get away with, in your view,
because I'm next going to ask, and what is the
difference between that kind of policy and the policy
that says, well, we don't recognize the gay couple's
marriage for the reason that we fear that if gay couples
get married, even if they have children and adopt them,
and even if we allow people who are not gay to get
married and they don't have children, despite all that,
this policy, which I've had a little trouble
understanding, warrants not recognizing it?  Did you
follow that question?  It was a little complicated.
MR. WHALEN:  I -- I probably did not, but
I'm going to try to answer.  I -- I think the underlying
focus is not just that there's a policy, but that
there's a legitimate policy.  And as this Court's
questions earlier indicated, I proceed now on the
assumption that the Court has decided the first question
in the State's favor, and is determined that, indeed,
the State's policy to maintain a traditional man-woman
definition of marriage is, indeed, legitimate, and we
obviously agree that it is, and the Court should so
decide.  So --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So you don't see --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  But none of this has
anything to do with Article IV, right?  None of this has
anything to do with Article IV?  Full faith and credit,
right?
MR. WHALEN:  It -- full faith and credit
provides the background for the -- for the States to be
able to assert that, indeed, we have the right to
decline to recognize the out-of-state marriage based on
the out-of-state --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You're --
MR. WHALEN:  -- law --
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  You're making a
distinction between judgments -- full faith and credit
applies to judgments.  You can't reject a judgment from
a sister State because you find it offensive to your
policy, but --
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  -- full faith and credit
has never been interpreted to apply to choice of law.
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  That -- that's the
distinction.
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.  And -- and
so, in -- in essence, by deciding whether or not to
recognize another State's marriage, the -- the State is
deciding whether or not to recognize the other State's
law under which that marriage was performed.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I'm sorry.  You don't
see a fundamental difference between creating a marriage
and recognizing a marriage?  You don't think there's any
difference in terms of the rights of people?  If States
regularly don't say that the prerequisites to marriage
in our State are not necessarily against public
policy -- and they have said it for age differences,
they have said it for a lot of things, why -- why would
the gay marriage issue be so fundamental that that can
lead them to exclude a whole category of people from
recognition?
MR. WHALEN:  It goes, Your Honor, to the
essence of what I think, in fact, both -- both questions
before the Court today get at.  And that is that -- the
fundamental notion of what marriage is.  And -- and let
me answer the question, if I could, in this way.  The --
the comparison between how States have operated with
regard to recognizing or not recognizing marriages
before, in other words, before there was any idea of
same-sex marriage, can't be compared at all to how
States are responding across the board with regard to
the phenomenon of same-sex marriage.
And here's the reason:  commentators have
observed that when all States are on the same page about
what marriage is, that's where the place of celebration
rule evolved from, that every State had the same
definition.  Every State shared the same interest, and
so there was a liberal policy of recognizing marriages
from one State to the other because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You think marriage --
JUSTICE SCALIA:  That's just not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- decrees are closer to
laws?
MR. WHALEN:  I'm sorry?
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  You think marriage
decrees are closer to laws than they are to judgments?
MR. WHALEN:  I do --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I mean, you need to get
a judgment to divorce.  And I think that, in my mind,
that makes the decree much closer to a judgment than it
does to a law.
MR. WHALEN:  I -- I think that the -- the
performing of a marriage is closer to law is because, in
essence, when the marriage is performed, all the rights
that flow from that State's laws evolve to that couple.
And it's different than judgments and so does not
deserve the same kind of treatment that judgments would,
under the full faith and credit jurisprudence, because
of the reason that this Court has drawn that distinction.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So what is an order
under the Constitution, or --
MR. WHALEN:  I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- act under the
Constitution that's not a judgment?
MR. WHALEN:  I didn't catch the first part
of your question, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  How do you separate out
the terms that Justice Scalia gave you?  They're not all
judgments.
MR. WHALEN:  No.  I -- I --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Three different terms
were used, or four different terms were used.
MR. WHALEN:  Acts, records, and judicial
proceedings is what I understand --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Acts --
MR. WHALEN:  -- what I recall and that --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  -- records --
MR. WHALEN:  And my understanding of the
Court's jurisprudence has been that that refers to laws
and records and judgments of another State.  And
marriages have always been treated as a conflict of law
matter throughout all the years -- in fact, it -- it
gives rise to the entire conflict of law doctrine on --
on which Petitioners rely here, which is Joseph Story's
Commentaries -- Commentaries on the Conflict of Laws.
JUSTICE ALITO:  This second --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS: Outside of the present
controversy, when was the last time Tennessee declined to
recognize a marriage from out of state?
MR. WHALEN:  Any marriage, Your Honor?
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Any marriage.
MR. WHALEN:  1970 is the last one that I
could point to.  That involved a stepfather and
stepdaughter.
I would -- I would hasten to add, though,
because of where -- what I was starting to describe with
regard to how we got to this point, while -- while
States were all playing along under the same definition
of marriage, what they confronted in an unprecedented
fashion was some States changing the rules of the game,
if I can extend the metaphor, and so --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, but they
weren't playing along with the same definition.  There
have always been distinctions based on age and family
relationship.  So they weren't playing along under the
same definition.  And still, despite that, it apparently
is quite rare for a State not to recognize an
out-of-state marriage.
MR. WHALEN:  It -- it was and is quite rare,
so long as we're talking about what marriage is, so long
as we're talking about the fundamental man and woman
marriage.  And that -- and that's my point, is that as
soon as States were confronted with the reality that
some States were going to redefine marriage or expand
the definition of marriage to include same-sex couples
for the first time, then it's unsurprising that they
would determine, in keeping with their own laws, that
they would not recognize those other States' marriages
in -- in Tennessee.
JUSTICE ALITO:  This second question puts
both you and Mr. Hallward-Driemeier in a very unusual
situation, because, first of all, we have to assume that
this first question has been decided against the
Petitioner, or we wouldn't get to the second question.
So we have to assume that we would hold that
a State has a sufficient reason for limiting marriage to
opposite-sex couples.  And Mr. Hallward-Driemeier
acknowledged that a State could refuse to recognize an
out-of-state marriage if it has a very strong public
policy against that marriage, if it's a polygamous
marriage, if it's a -- a marriage of very young
individuals.
So the question is whether there could be
something in between.  So there -- there's a -- a
sufficient reason to -- for the State to say, we're not
going to grant these licenses ourselves, but not a
strong enough reason for us not to recognize a marriage
performed out of state.  I suppose that's possible,
isn't it?
MR. WHALEN:  Well, let me answer it this
way, and hopefully I'll -- I'm answering your question
in doing so.  Let me be clear.  The -- the
justifications that have grown over time and the
requirement for a strong public policy reason to decline
to recognize a marriage have grown up around the
man-woman definition.
Our position is that so long as we're
talking about a marriage from another State that is not
the man-woman definition, that it is simply the State's
interest in maintaining a cohesive and a coherent
internal State policy with regard to marriage that
justifies not recognizing those marriages.
Otherwise, as -- as the question that was
put earlier indicated, any resident of the State could
go to another State, get married, come back and demand
to have their -- their marriage recognized.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  That happens already.
People who are not permitted to be married in a lot of
States go and do that, and they come back to their home
States, and the home States follow the rule of marriage
celebration.
MR. WHALEN:  And -- and, again, we're
talking about the fundamental distinction between
marriage as the States see it, the traditional
definition, and the same-sex marriages that other
States have --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Well, they have --
MR. WHALEN:  -- have adopted.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  The prerequisites are
always a State's judgment about marriage, about what
should be a recognized marriage.
MR. WHALEN:  But, Your Honor, the -- the --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  They make exceptions.
MR. WHALEN:  -- the difference here, I
think, is -- is the -- the landscape that we find
ourselves in.  Tennessee, Ohio, Kentucky, and other
States with a traditional definition of marriage have
done nothing here but stand pat.  They have maintained
the status quo.  And yet other States have made the
decision, and it certainly is their right and
prerogative to do so, to expand the definition, to
redefine the definition, and then to suggest that other
States that have done nothing but stand pat now must
recognize those marriages imposes a substantial burden
on the State's ability to self-govern.
JUSTICE GINSBURG:  It is -- it is odd, isn't
it, that a divorce does become the decree for the
nation?  A divorce with proper jurisdiction in one State
must be recognized by every other State, but not the act
of marriage.
MR. WHALEN:  I -- I understand the point,
Your Honor, and, again, I think it falls within the
Court's recognition of a distinction between judgments
and laws.  And here I think we're dealing only with
laws, and, again, it would allow one State initially --
literally one State, and now, a minority of States to
legislate fundamental State concern about marriage for
every other State quite literally.  That's -- that's an
enormous imposition and an intrusion upon the State's
ability to decide for itself important public policy
questions and to maintain -- particularly when you're
talking about recognition.  There -- there is an impact
that occurs when one State is asked to recognize another
State's same-sex marriage because of the fact that its
entire domestic relations policy has been built around
the expectation and the presumption that there is a
man-woman relationship.  That -- in Windsor, this Court
recognized and observed that marriage is the foundation
of the State's ability to regulate domestic relations.
And to give you one concrete example that
is -- that it comes up in this case itself.  One of the
incidents of marriage is the child -- the presumption of
parentage that comes with a marriage.  And for the State
to be required to recognize another State's marriage
where there is a child of that marriage in a same-sex
situation would fundamentally alter the State's
definition of parentage, which I can tell you --
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Well, I don't
understand your argument.  I understand your argument
that it's a fundamental public policy question about
whether you're going to recognize same-sex marriage or
not.  But I don't see the difficulty in following the
consequences of that under domestic relations law as
treating a couple as married.  And it -- and so the
first question is a big step, but after that, it seems
to me that the question of how you apply the domestic
relations law is pretty straightforward.
MR. WHALEN:  Well, it -- that's part of the
reason why I wanted to mention this in particular
because a large part of the Petitioners' focus has been
on the impact on the children that are involved.
And -- and I think it's important for the Court to
recognize that in many States -- and I can tell you in
Tennessee that the definition of parent has always been
biologically-based.  That marital presumption of
parentage has its foundation in biology.  It has its
foundation in the man-woman relationship.
So when and if a State were required to
recognize a same-sex marriage and so therefore, change
the pronouns and change the terminology to apply --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Oh, but you do that for
adoptions.  What's -- what's the problem?
MR. WHALEN:  Because --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  This -- this is a really
big deal?
MR. WHALEN:  It -- it is a big deal, Your
Honor, because you are changing the way the State
defines a parent.  And in the adoption context, you have
to understand adoption and the traditional definition
of -- of marriage, they work in tandem.  They work
together.  And as Mr. Bursch described, the objective
with regard to marriage is to link children with their
biological parents.  When that breaks down, then there's
adoption.  And so yes, there's an effort to --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Do you think that a
State can fail to recognize the birth certificate of a
particular -- another State?
MR. WHALEN:  I'm not --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Just that.  Do you think
the word "records" in the Constitution includes birth
certificates?
MR. WHALEN:  Yes.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  So California without
any reason, no suspicion of fraud, no anything, could it
refuse to recognize another State's birth certificate?
MR. WHALEN:  I -- I have to admit, Your
Honor, I -- I can't speak to that intelligently.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  Records to me has to
have a meaning.
MR. WHALEN:  Record has a meaning.  It does,
Your Honor.  The reason that I'm hesitant is that I know
that there -- there is disagreement in the -- in the
cases about exactly what the impact of that is between
whether that just means we have to acknowledge the
existence of the record for the evidentiary purposes, or
whether the effect of the record has to be acknowledged.
And as I stand here I can't speak to it.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  I recognize that that's
an issue.
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  But if a birth
certificate were to be a record, don't you think a
marriage certificate -- it's an official act of a State.
MR. WHALEN:  Well, the -- the marriage
certificate --
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR:  As a record.
MR. WHALEN:  -- certifies -- and I guess it
goes exactly to the point.  It certifies the fact that
there was a marriage.  I think that the laws that
allowed that marriage to occur, when they are different
fundamentally with the laws of a State like Tennessee,
preclude the application of that same principle from one
State to the other.
With regard to the effect of requiring
recognition on a State, I think it's important also to
consider the fact that the Petitioners have complained
about the impact that it has when they move from one
State to the next with regard to the rights that they
enjoyed under the marriage as it was defined in New
York, for example, or California.
Federalism accommodates this situation.  It
is the strength of our Federal structure to accommodate
the very difference of viewpoint and the very difference
in approach that this fundamental debate that we're
having about same-sex marriage generates.  And so it
makes all the sense in the world, with respect to that,
to allow the Federal structure to do what it was
designed to do and to accommodate those different points
of view.  And that is why we asked the Court to
determine that the Fourteenth Amendment does not come in
and then disrupt that balance and impose a duty on one
State to recognize the laws and recognize the marriage
of a different State because of the intrusion that it
would have on that State's public policy.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Mr. Whalen, just a quick
question.
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  You -- you acknowledge that
if the State loses on the first question, then the State
also loses on the second question?  It's a fortiori?
That's --
MR. WHALEN:  I do, Your Honor.
JUSTICE KAGAN:  Okay.
MR. WHALEN:  Yes, Your Honor.  If there are
no further questions, we ask you to affirm.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
MR. WHALEN:  Thank you.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:
Mr. Hallward-Driemeier, you have five minutes left.
REBUTTAL ARGUMENT OF DOUGLAS HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER
ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS ON QUESTION 2
MR. HALLWARD-DRIEMEIER:  Thank you, Your
Honor.
If I may start with the assertion that
Tennessee law has always rooted parental relations in
biology, that is not so.  Tennessee law -- and I'm going
to quote from chapter 361.1. -- I mean -- sorry.  It's
68.3.306 referred to on page 15 of our reply.  It
provides that a child born to a married woman as a
result of an artificial insemination with consent of the
married woman's husband, the father is deemed the
legitimate child of the husband and wife, though the
husband has no biological relationship with the child.
Tennessee, in other words, just as it does
with adoption, reinforces the bonds of parent and child
irregardless of biology, as long as the -- a
parent -- or as long as the couple is of opposite sexes.
The import of that for real people, like
Drs. Tanco and Jesty, is that they, who fell in love and
married while in graduate school in New York, as many
academic couples, were only able to find a position at a
same university in Tennessee.  They moved there, and
Dr. Tanco has given birth to their daughter in
Tennessee.
Now, as a result of the nonrecognition laws,
when, as occurred last week, their daughter is
hospitalized, Tennessee would treat Dr. Jesty not as
mom, but as a legal stranger with no right to visit her
child, no right to make medical decisions for her.
These laws have real import for real people.
And although, I think that counsel was suggesting that
Federalism and allowing States to make different laws,
if you choose to get married in your State, just don't
move to ours.  That's the cost of Federalism.
Well, Sergeant Dekoe and his husband,
Mr. Kostura, didn't have a choice.  The United States
Army moved them to Tennessee, and given the location of
Army bases in this country, it's almost a certainty that
anyone serving in the Army for any length of time will
be stationed at some point in a State that would
dissolve their marriage as a matter of State law.
I want to get back, Justice Sotomayor, to
your comment about categorical and how unprecedented it
is, because even in the age of anti-miscegenation laws,
the States would give effect, for some purposes,
interracial marriages such as for purposes of estate,
giving out the -- the proceeds after a death or -- or
otherwise.
Here, however, the State statutes provide
that a marriage shall be given no effect for any reason.
Even Jim Obergefell's husband's death certificate will
not reflect the fact that he was married or the name of
his husband.  The State has no legitimate interest for
denying them the dignity of that last fact regarding his
life.
The real import of the State's argument is,
I believe, this:  That even when same-sex couples are
married, they are not, in their view, married for
constitutional purposes; that the States can
discriminate against these marriages even in ways that
the Constitution would not permit the States to
disregard the marriages of opposite-sex couples.
I urge the Court not to enshrine in our
Constitution a second-class status of these Petitioners'
marriages.
Thank you very much.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS:  Thank you, counsel.
Case is submitted.
(Whereupon, at 12:29 p.m., the case in the
